

Wednesday, 17 March 2021

Parliament met at 2.15 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I would like to place on record our proposals from the Business Committee for the schedule for the approval of the budget estimates for Financial Year 2021/2022. 

As you are aware, we are in transition from the 10th to the 11th Parliament; so, we are proposing the following adjusted timelines: 

We expect that the minister, on behalf of the President, will present to Parliament the proposed annual Budget of the proceeding financial year and all papers necessary for the operationalisation of the proposed annual Budget by 1 April 2021. That will be fulfilling Section 13(3) of the Public Finance Management Act. 

We expect the House to go on Easter recess from Friday, 2 April 2021 to Tuesday, 6 April 2021. 

The members of the public shall electronically submit their views on the tax Bills by Wednesday, 7 April 2021 to the Clerk to Parliament on the following address: clerk@parliament.go.ug. 

The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development will meet the Minister of Finance to consider the tax Bills on Thursday, 8 April 2021. 

The Committee on Finance will meet on 12th and 13th April to consider the tax Bills. 

The House will consider the tax Bills by 14 April 2021. It may become necessary to suspend rule 129(5) to enable this to be handled immediately. 

The sectoral committees, which will have been working already – they should have started work today – will lay on the Table their reports on the policy statements on Tuesday, 20 April 2021. Again, if it becomes necessary, we may suspend Rule 148(2) so that the reports are sent directly to the Budget Committee where, in any event, all the chairpersons of sectoral committees sit. 

We expect the Budget Committee to present its report on the Budget to the House on 25 April 2021. The House will, thereafter, proceed to the Committee of Supply and complete by 27 April 2021. 

We expect that on 29 April 2021, we may consider the Appropriation Bill. We expect that we might use Rule 152 (h) to expedite this process. 

I would like the chairpersons and members of the sectoral committees to take note of this arrangement so that we can complete the Budget process at the end of April. Thank you. 

There are just three matters of national importance. 

2.20
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, a strong storm destroyed a three classroom block at Wiggins Secondary School in Kumi Municipality. 

My prayer is for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, and generally the Office of the Prime Minister to act to our rescue. 
This is the school I went to for my O’ Level and it would be embarrassing if Government delayed to act on it. 

Secondly, some time back, our Government was meant to benefit from over US$ 300 million. The Government has not actualised the commitment to ensure that social protection interventions are fully funded as provided for in the 2020 COVID-19 economic crisis and recovery development policy financing. 

This money was supposed to help in social protection but up to now, Government is silent about the utilisation of this fund. We do not know what is happening. We do not know when the beneficiaries are going to see action from Government. It was supposed to come from the World Bank.

May I get to know whether this money was actually got from World Bank and what the status is now? That is my prayer. Maybe the Minister of Finance could say something about this because he is around. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Aogon. We request the Prime Minister’s Office to visit Wiggins Secondary School in Kumi Municipality and facilitate the repairs to enable the children to continue in school, and to give us an update in a fortnight’s time. 

Secondly, we are very interested, Minister of Finance, in the whereabouts of this money; US$ 300 million grant by the World Bank to support our sustenance during the COVID-19 era. We do not seem to know where this money is. We hope you can tell us where it is. Even the people who have wanted to get loans cannot access it from the UDB. Where is this money? Who is entitled? How can it be accessed? 

2.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I would like to request for five minutes and then I will be able to inform the House on the progress. Thank you. 

2.24
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. 

The issue I would like to raise is about the Kibwetere massacre and today, we are marking 21 years since it happened. I have been raising the issue concerning the orphans and relatives of the victims. It is unfortunate that our Government has not responded to the plea and rescue these orphans and families.

It is the duty of Government to take very good security and care of the citizens. It is also prudent, very right and necessary that whenever such matters happen in our country, Government comes in to do something.

I am happy that Government has responded in many cases like Bududa and others but I do not know why it never came in to compensate these children who lost their parents, relatives who went there after selling all the property they had. Why hasn’t Government taken any interest?

My prayer is that the Government takes keen interest to compensate these children. They lost their parents and cannot afford school fees, majority are now very old people who have no basis, and they need some help so that they can live like other Ugandans.

Secondly, allow me to mention this. I was surprised to hear and watch on the news about the roof, which collapsed at Fido Fido on Kampala Road. That made me afraid that the more old structures we have in Kampala City, the higher the chances of us having problems. I have many offices at Farmers House. When I think of the state of that house, it reminds me of what happened at Fido Fido the other day. 

I pray that the ministry in charge takes care. By the time that building collapsed on Kampala Road - maybe the ministry does not do the usual inspection of these old buildings in the city.

It is very important that the ministry takes care because we may lose many people. I heard that we lost one person and maybe others died because of the incident but we do not know this.

I implore the ministry to do due diligence to make sure that old structures in the city do not continue killing our people. The responsible ministry should check the standard of the city and not like what I saw, which is not fit for the city.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable Member. The issue of the Kibwetere massacre has been on this Floor many times and the last time the Prime Minister had undertaken to brief Parliament and the country about what Government is doing on this issue. The matter is back on the Floor. Can we ask the Prime Minister to come and brief us about this, especially since many of our Members will not be here in the next Parliament? 

On the second one concerning the building that collapsed, we urge the Minister for Kampala City and Metropolitan Affairs to ensure that the relevant agencies of the Kampala Capital City Authority and the buildings in the other parts of the country are well maintained and habitable.

2.30
DR MICHAEL BUKENYA (NRM, Bukuya County, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the absence of road equipment in 14 districts in Uganda. For purposes of the House, I will list the districts as Kassanda, Rwampara, Bugweri, Nabilatuk, Kikuube, Kwania, Karenga, Kapelebyong, Kazo, Kitagwenda, Kalaki, Terego, Obongi and Madi-Okollo.

While processing the budget of this running financial year, Government presented an envelope of Shs 45 trillion and through the Committee on Budget, Parliament appropriated Shs 47 billion for the procurement of equipment for these districts that were created three years ago.

The Ministry of Works and Transport signed contracts for procurement based on the indicative planning figures but Government, through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not been able to release this money to the Ministry of Works and Transport. These districts are suffering and it is affecting service delivery, peasants and the utilisation of the road fund to those districts. 

Madam Speaker, I pray that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development releases the Shs 47 billion that was appropriated by Parliament to the Ministry of Works and Transport to procure-(Interruption)

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Funny enough, even for some districts which have that road equipment, the quality of their roads is wanting. I have been to Nakasekke and I asked what the purpose of the road equipment, which Government bought, was yet all roads are in a sorry state.

I would like to remind Dr Bukenya that Government should also find ways of monitoring the districts in Uganda. Why is it that they bought the road equipment and yet, the roads are in a sorry state? Thank you.

DR BUKENYA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, from the corridors, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is going to bring a supplementary budget. Let it capture the Shs 47 billion for districts to be able to get the road equipment and improve service delivery for the people.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it was the plan of Government that every district must have equipment to maintain the roads. We had a set from China and another set from Japan.

These districts are created but they do not have equipment. This is a negation from the notion of service delivery. Can we know from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development what happened to the money that was appropriated for equipment for the new districts? Are you in position or you need time?

2.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, with your permission, the first question which Hon. Aogon raised about the Shs 300 million grant from the World Bank, the one we know for the World Bank is meant to do roads. The Shs 130 million is meant for the Koboko-Yumbe Road; the Universal Secondary Education will receive Shs 50 million; the energy expansion project will get Shs 54 million; Uganda Inter-Governmental Fiscal Transfer Project (UIGFT) will take Shs 60 million and digital expansion, Shs 40 million.

The fund we are expecting from the Government of Ireland for SAGE is Shs 12 million and we are concluding the MOU in three weeks from now. So, that is the status on the two grants that you wanted to know about.

On the issue of appropriation for the road equipment, I need to know something about the money that we appropriated. We shall crosscheck, Madam Speaker, with the Minister of Works and Transport because to the best of my knowledge, we do not have any problem. We have not received any complaint from the Ministry of Works and Transport about failure to release the money. The issue is maybe to do with the procurement process or something but I will crosscheck and inform the House tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Please, let us know so that we can assuage the fears of the people in those areas.

2.35
MR EDWARD MAKMOT OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance.

We have been dealing with what I term as commercial, illegal charcoal burning and logging for which Agago is considered as the epicentre in the entire Acholi sub-region. This is a very organised trade Wwhere members come from across the border in an isolated village in Adilang Subcounty.

This area needs intervention because the level of environmental degradation in this area – if you see the pictures, Madam Speaker – is despicable. We have tried but there is need for the relevant ministry to intervene, with a view of stopping this illegal trade and seeking other means of intervention for example, promoting tree planting, among other things, to compensate for what has been cut down. Otherwise, it is grossly alarming and has raised a lot of concerns.

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister of Water and Environment here but the issue of environmental degradation is a serious one. Can we ask the Minister of Water and Environment to establish the situation in Adilang Subcounty, in relation to the illegal logging of trees and give us a report within a fort night. Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REQUEST TO BORROW UP TO USD 130 MILLION (APPROXIMATELY SHS 487 BILLION) FROM THE DOMESTIC MARKET TO FINANCE THE INITIAL EQUITY PORTION AND HISTORICAL COSTS FOR THE EAST AFRICAN CRUDE OIL PIPELINE (EACOP)

2.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, this is a proposal by Government to mobilise approximately $130 million from the domestic market to finance the initial equity portion and historical costs for the East African Crude Oil Pipeline. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.

LAYING OF PAPERS

PARLIAMENTARY PENSION SCHEME ANNUAL REPORT FOR THE YEAR
ENDED 30TH JUNE 2020

2.39
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is the annual report for the Parliamentary Pension Scheme annual year ended 30 June 2020. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Public Accounts Committee and the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises for perusal and report back.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ADMINISTRATION OF ESTATES (SMALL ESTATES) (SPECIAL PROVISIONS) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

2.40
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded. 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: Can you justify your motion?

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, as you will recall, I introduced in this House, on the 12th day of September 2019, the Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) (Amendment) Bill, 2019, when it was read for the first time.

The objects of the Bill are:

a)	To revise the monetary jurisdiction of the magistrates’ court to conform to the Magistrate Courts Act; and
b)	To provide for the revocation of a grant of probate or letters of administration for want of jurisdiction.

The salient features or provisions in the Bill are as follows:

1.	The Bill makes provision for increasing the monetary jurisdiction of a Magistrate’s Court Grade One from the maximum value of Shs 50,000, to the maximum value of Shs 20 million;

2.	The Bill makes provisions for increasing the monetary jurisdiction of the Chief Magistrate’s Court, from a maximum value of Shs 100,000 to the maximum value of Shs 50 million; and

3.	The Bill also seeks to amend the principal Act to provide that probate or letters of administration may be revoked or annulled for want of jurisdiction.

We have interacted with the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and shared comments from interested parties, as well as our own views. The committee also made comments and proposed amendments to the Bill, to which we shall respond. The Government is also receptive to proposals intended to further improve the Bill.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read for a second time.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, minister. Can we now invite the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs? Where is the chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs or the vice chairperson? Hon. Rwakoojo?

2.43
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Ms Robinah Rwakoojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This was supposed to be presented by hon. Monica Amoding. However, I do not see her here. So, I propose that we go on to the next item; the Administrator-General’s (Amendment) Bill, which I am supposed to present.

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report is of a committee. Any member of the committee should be in position to present this report. Were they chaired by different members?

MS RWAKOOJO: The responsibilities were assigned to different members, each of whom took up their responsibilities, like you saw Hon. Veronica Eragu and Hon. Jovah Kamateeka presenting theirs yesterday. I cannot tell – maybe Hon. Basalirwa has a solution.

2.44
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, as Hon. Rwakoojo has observed, these are succession-related Bills and they were four. At the level of the committee, the chairperson assigned different responsibilities to different members and I am aware that this responsibility was given to Hon. Amoding.

However, that should not in any way impede the work of this House. I have the report on my iPad and if it pleases you, I can proceed to read the report.

THE SPEAKER: Please, present the report because it is a report of the committee.

MR BASALIRWA: Yes, it is.

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) (Amendment) Bill, 2019.

Madam Speaker, I will not go into the introduction and methodology. However, I will briefly read the object of the Bill. The object is to amend the Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) Act to revise the monetary jurisdiction of magistrates courts, to conform to the Magistrate Courts Act and to provide for the revocation of probate or letters of administration for want of jurisdiction.


Madam Speaker, the administration of small estates is governed under the Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special provisions) Act, Cap. 156; the Administrator General’s Act, Cap. 157; and the Succession Act, Cap 162. A small estate is an estate of a value prescribed in section 2 of the Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) Act. Section 2 limits a small estate to an estate whose value does not exceed Shs 100,000.

The jurisdiction of grant of letters of administration or probate in small estates is the preserve of magistrate courts wherein-

    a)  a magistrate Grade II has jurisdiction over a small estate whose total value does not exceed Shs 10,000; 

    b) a magistrate Grade I has jurisdiction over a small estate whose total value does not exceed Shs 50,000;

    c) a chief magistrate has jurisdiction over a small estate whose total value does not exceed Shs 100,000.

The Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) Act is, therefore, intended to ensure the just administration of all estates in Uganda, irrespective of their size. The Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) Act and the rules made thereunder ensure that small estates are administered with little modalities in order to reduce the cost of administering such estates, as well as ensuring that the beneficial interest in the estate is maintained.

The processes of applying for probate or letters over a small estate is simple, based on standardised forms prescribed in the Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) Act and the rules made thereunder and can be undertaken without the need for a lawyer or any form of legal training. Priority for grant of letters or probate is given to the children of the deceased, the surviving spouse, the father or mother of the deceased and other persons related to the deceased by full or half blood.

The Administrator-General may also be granted letters of administration over a small estate in two instances. The first instance is where the people to whom priority is granted do not apply for the grant. The other instance is where the Administrator-General or an agent of the Administrator-General, pursuant to section 2(5) and section 4(5) of the Administrator-General’s Act, takes over and administers the estate with or without grant made by court.

Need for the Bill

Madam Speaker, the Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) Act, Cap. 156 is the law that governs the administration and execution of small estates in Uganda. This Act commenced on 6 June 1972 and due to passage of time, some aspects of it have become out-dated, especially in light of the Constitution, Government policies, emerging international best practices and the legal environment.

The committee notes that the object of the Bill is to amend the Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) Act to revise the monetary jurisdiction of magistrates courts to conform to the Magistrate Courts Act and to provide for the revocation of probate or letters of administration for want of jurisdiction.

The committee notes that the amendment is premised on the need to expand the pecuniary jurisdiction of the magistrate courts, in granting or revoking letters and probate in small estates to align the jurisdiction with that granted to such courts under the Magistrate Court Act, Cap. 16.

Furthermore, the committee observes that the values prescribed in section 2 of the Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) Act are too low to be effectively administered in the current economic situation. The committee observes that under the law, a small estate is one that has a value of not more than Shs 100,000. This value was significant at the time the law was enacted but has, with the passage of time, been eroded by inflation, making the provisions redundant and ineffective since the cost of obtaining probate or letters exceeds the value of estate as well as the beneficial interest in the estate.

The committee further observes that since the provisions of section 2 have been made redundant by passage of time, many estates have been wasted or un-administered owing to the cost of obtaining letters of administration or probate from the High Court being higher than the value or the beneficial interest of the estate.

The committee takes cognisance of the Administrator-General's Cause No. 493 of 2003, wherein the deceased maintained Shs 200,000 as her bank balance with Bank of Baroda. When the Administrator-General requested the bank to send the funds to him for transmission to the beneficiaries, the bank replied that letters of administration had to be obtained before the funds could be sent. 

Since it was Shs 200,000, the application had to be made to the High Court and the Administrator-General charges Shs 200,000 to make the application. Given that all the funds were going to be consumed in the process, the beneficiaries abandoned the money in the bank.

Therefore, the proposal to expand the values of small estates under the Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) Act is intended to bring services closer to the people, reduce the cost of obtaining letters or probate in estates whose values fall within their jurisdiction, ensure that the beneficiaries draw as much value from estate and allow for the just and effective administration of estates of deceased persons, irrespective of their value.

General analysis, observation, findings and recommendations

Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: I don’t think we need to -

MR BASALIRWA: Should I go straight to the recommendations?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, go to the recommendations.

MR BASALIRWA: Okay. It is the considered view of the committee, Madam Speaker, that Clause 1 be deleted with the jurisdiction that is redundant, in light of sections 14 and 15 of the Acts of Parliament Act, Cap 2.

The second recommendation is that Clause 2 be adopted, the value of the estate should be expressed in currency points and the currency points should be defined. This is intended to shield the value from being eroded by inflation.

The committee also recommends that Section 7(2) be deleted and Section 10 be amended to allow the application of the Succession Act to applications under the Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) Act. 

In light of the above, the committee proposes that the Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) Act is due for amendment as explained above. 

It is, therefore, the committee’s recommendation that the Bill is read for the second time and do pass with the following amendments. We beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Basalirwa and the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, for another piece of work to improve the legislation in this area.

Honourable members, the report has been signed by the necessary minimum number. You are free to make your comments. Is no one interested in saying anything?

2.55
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, this Bill has a minimal difference with the one of yesterday. Yesterday, someone was jumping up and down to think he should not continue hearing my opinion.

Let me ask a question - and the committee needs to support me. We are using currency points to shield the shilling against inflation. What happens to the monetary value attached to the currency point?  Otherwise, it is also exposed to inflation. That is my concern.

Secondly, how often do we revise the value of a currency point? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Aogon, as you said, we talked about this matter but this one is self-explanatory because the limit of the jurisdiction of a Magistrate Grade II is Shs 10,000. How much will be required to file a case for that amount? Will you need a lawyer? How much will you pay a lawyer in the case of Shs 10,000?

That is the reason the Government thinks we should do this in currency points because the idea is to change. You have just seen an example; the bank account has Shs 200,000 and the cost of the application by the Administrator-General is Shs 200,000 and so, everything goes; the whole estate is gone. Perhaps the mover can explain the other part, which Hon. Aogon wants to know.

2.57
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, I would like to explain to Hon. Aogon that under the Law Revision (Fines and Other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters) Act, 2009, Section 7 grants powers to the minister by a statutory instrument to review the currency points as and when deemed necessary.

Secondly, for further clarity, this Bill is brought in order to bring the law in line with the Magistrates’ Courts Act. The pecuniary jurisdiction or the money set in the old law is Shs 110,000, yet a Grade I Magistrate’s pecuniary jurisdiction is Shs 20 million and Shs 50 million for a chief magistrate. 

Therefore, we needed to amend this law in order to bring it in line with the law setting the financial jurisdiction for the magistrates’ courts. That is all.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the absence of any other comment, I put the question that the Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) Bill, 2019 be read for the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ADMINISTRATION OF ESTATES (SMALL ESTATES) (SPECIAL PROVISIONS) BILL, 2019

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 1 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, deleted.

Clause 2

2.58
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Madam Chairperson, there is a proposal to insert a new clause immediately after clause 1.

Amendment of Section 1 of the principal Act 

The Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) Act, in this Act referred to as the “principal Act” is amended in Section 1, by inserting the following definition immediately before paragraph (a):

“A currency point has value assigned to it in the schedule to this Act.”

The justification is:
  
    1. To insert a schedule on currency points.
    2. To express all values in the currency points as is adopted in all other laws.
    3. To shield the values prescribed in the Act from inflation.
   
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a new clause be inserted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause inserted.

Clause 2

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Chairperson, we propose an amendment to clause 2, to read as follows:

Amendment to section 2 of the Principal Act

1)	In paragraph (b) by substituting for the words, “twenty million shillings” with, “one thousand currency points.

2)	In paragraph (c), by substituting the words, “fifteen million” with, “two thousand five hundred currency points.”

The justification is: 

    i.  To shield the values in Clause 2 from being eroded by inflation, they should be expressed in currency points.

    ii. Expressing them in currency points makes their upward or downward amendments easy since the minister usually has power to amend clauses of the Act. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that Clause 2 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

MR BASALIRWA: Chairperson, we propose to insert a new clause in the Bill after Clause 2 which should read as follows: 

“Insertion of Section 5(a) in the principal Act.” 

We propose that the principal Act is amended by inserting immediately after Section 5 the following;

“5(a) grant of certificate for micro-estates 

Where it appears to the court that the gross value of the assets or property of a deceased person is in the form of cash, cash in the bank, death gratuity, household assets, vehicles or any other movable property and does not exceed 1000 currency points, court may, on the application of a surviving spouse or lineal descendant, grant that person a certificate, entitling him or her to administer the estate of the deceased person and to pay out of it any debts or charges and to pay, remit, deliver any surplus to any person entitled to it, according to law, as may be directed by court.” 

Section 4 shall apply to all applications made under this section – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think I am lost a bit. Honourable Chairperson, can you repeat the new clause? 

MR BASALIRWA: Chairperson, we propose to insert a new clause in the Bill, immediately after Clause 2.

We also propose to amend the principal Act by inserting immediately after section 5 the following;

“Where it appears to the court that the gross value of the assets or property of a deceased person is in the form of cash, cash in the bank, death gratuity, household assets, vehicles or any other movable property and does not exceed 1000 currency points, the court may, on the application of a surviving spouse or lineal descendant, grant that person a certificate entitling him or her to administer the estate of the deceased person, and to pay out of it any debts or charges and to pay, remit or deliver any surplus to any person entitled to it, according to law, or as may be directed by court.” 

Section 3, with the necessary modifications, shall apply to an application made to court under this section.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, the proposed clause is rejected. There are two types of grants under the existing law; a grant of probate and a grant of letters of administration. The proposed amendment is introducing a grant outside the known grants of letters of administration and letters of probate that are referred to in Cap 156 of the Succession Act. 

The proposed amendment, while introducing a third type of grant, does not set out the procedure for applying for the grant and it creates a third type of grant that is not necessary. 

The proposed grant for micro-estates means that the property in issue, for example household property; vehicles among others will have to be valued first in order for one to determine whether they are not an estate that falls within the ambit of the micro-estate. This will bring an added expense to the estate and make the process of applying for administration of a micro-estate more expensive and complex. 

The proposed third grant would be a superficial appendage that is not necessary because the two known grants - letters of administration and letters of probate - would still cater for the estate they intend to cure.  I beg to submit. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, what is the rationale for your proposal? 

MR BASALIRWA: Chairperson, we do not have a very strong opinion on that. We were trying to cater for micro-estates but we concede on that.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal to insert a new clause has been abandoned. We had already dealt with the amendment in Clause 2. What about the schedule? 

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Chairperson, we propose to insert a new schedule in the principal Act in light of our earlier proposal of introducing currency points. The schedule is pursuant to section 1, where we said that the currency point is equivalent to Shs 20,000. 

Justification 

The insertion of Section 5(a) is to allow easy administration of an estate of a deceased person, where it does not exceed Shs 20 – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Chairperson, you cannot refer to Section 5(a) because we have abandoned it. 

MR BASALIRWA: It is actually a consequential amendment arising from amendment of section 2. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, the question is that the schedule be inserted as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

New schedule agreed to.

New schedule 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the new schedule be part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

New schedule, agreed to.

The title 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the title do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.13
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Chairperson, I move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House do report thereto. 

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.14
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) Bill, 2019” and passed it as follows: Clause 1 – deleted, Clause 2 – amended, insertion of a new clause immediately after clause 1, and insertion of a new schedule on currency points. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.14
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House is adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE ADMINISTRATION OF ESTATES (SMALL ESTATES) (SPECIAL PROVISIONS) BILL, 2019

3.15
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) Bill, 2019” be read a third time and do pass. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) Bill, 2019 be read a third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE ADMINISTRATION OF ESTATES (SMALL ESTATES) (SPECIAL PROVISIONS) ACT, 2021”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes. 

3.16
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, we thank you for providing us the opportunity to accomplish one of the laws under our succession laws which has been long overdue. 

We thank the chairperson and the members of the committee and the learned Attorney-General for the co-operation we received throughout this process. 

More importantly, for the Members of Parliament who have been with us, especially at this time when attendance is a challenge. We would like to thank you, and we hope that you will be available for the other Bills that are coming. 

Succession is a very critical issue in this country and you can only confront it when you get there. 

These are Bills where all of us should take very keen interest and they should not be left to a few or to the lawyers. We shall all die someday and we shall be succeeded. Therefore, it is important that we take interest in this matter. 

I would like to call upon our colleagues to be around and we take interest in these Bills. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the guidance and the time you have accorded us, as a committee. Thank you. 

3.17
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your tireless efforts. Some people consider these Bills insignificant. They may see them as small but they do not know the kind of impact they have. 

It is our duty to review all laws and to look at the recommendations. With your sitting in that chair, you guide so that we produce a law for posterity; for the future of Uganda. 

Just as Hon. Basalirwa has said, these laws are very important. We should not consider them insignificant. They have come with recommendations right from the Law Reform Commission. It is our duty to bring them in tandem with our current situation. With your good guidance, we have been able to do that. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, minister and the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and the honourable members of the House for the work done. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ADMINISTRATOR-GENERAL’S (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

3.18
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Administrator-General’s (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be read a second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by several members. Please proceed.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, as you will recall, I introduced in this House on the 12th day of December 2019, the Administrator-General’s (Amendment) Bill, 2019 when it was read for the first time. 

The objects of the Bill are as follows:

1.	To align the Administrator-General’s Act to Article 32 (Affirmative action in favour of marginalised groups) and Article 33 (The rights of women) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

2.	To increase the jurisdiction of the Administrator-General from Shs 20,000 to Shs 50 million.

3.	To provide for the requirement for notice of application for letters of administration by widowers and widows to be given to the Administrator-General before applying to the High Court to administer their deceased spouse’s estates. 

4.	To provide a penalty for intermeddling in estates of deceased persons, and 

5.	To exempt the bank accounts of the Administrator-General from being attached in proceedings – that is a garnishee.  

The salient provisions of the Bill are as follows: 

    1. The Bill makes provision for increasing the value of the estate over which the Administrator-General and agents appointed under the delegated powers of the Administrator-General may administer an estate in form of cash, cash in the bank or death gratuity, estates with only household assets, vehicles or other movable property summarily without letters of administration from Shs 20,000 to Shs 50 million.

    2. Requirement of widows and widowers and their attorneys to give notice of application for letters of administration to the Administrator-General before applying to the High Court for letters of administration. 

    3. To give the Administrator-General power to assume the administration of those estates where it is urgently necessary for the preservation of estates where intermeddling is reported.

    4. Exempt the bank accounts of the Administrator-General from being attached in proceedings. 

We have interacted with the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs with whom we have shared comments from interested parties as well as our own views. 

The committee also made comments and proposed amendments to the Bill which shall be responded to.

Government is also receptive of proposals intended to further improve this Bill. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Administrator-General’s (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be now read for a second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I now invite the chair of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to present the committee report. 

3.23
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Madam Speaker, I rise to present the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Administrator-General’s (Amendment) Bill, 2019. I beg to lay the report of the committee on the Table.

I further request to read an abridged version of the report since it was uploaded on the iPads and I believe Members have looked at it.

THE SPEAKER: Please, proceed.

MS RWAKOOJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 12 August 2019, Government introduced in Parliament the Administrator-General’s (Amendment) Bill, 2019. The Bill was accordingly referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs pursuant to rule 128 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

The Bill mainly seeks to amend the Administrator-General’s Act Cap. 157 to;

a) 	Revise mandate of the Administrator-General’s office by prescribing the estates that can be administered by the Administrator-General without recourse to courts of law.

b)	Scale upwards the penalties for offences committed under the Act.

c)	Align the Administrator-General’s Act to Article 32 on affirmative action in favour of marginalised groups and Article 33 on rights of women of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

d)	To increase the jurisdiction of the Administrator-General from Shs 20,000 to Shs 15 million.

e)	Provide for the requirement for notice of application for letters of administration by widowers or widows to be given to the Administrator-General before applying to the high court for grant to administer their deceased spouses’ estates.

f)	Provide a penalty for intermeddling in estate of the deceased persons.

g)	Exempt the bank account of Administrator-General from attachment proceedings.

The office of the Administrator-General is established under the Administrator-General’s Act, Cap. 157 as a corporation with perpetual succession.

The Administrator-General oversees administration of estates of deceased persons, declared persons and in some situations, administer estates of deceased persons through the public trustees Act of a public trustee.

The Administrator-General’s Act grants the Administrator-General the right to apply to court to administer the estate of a deceased person where;

a) 	A deceased person appoints the Administrator-General as a sole probate.

b)	The deceased did not appoint an administrator or probate.

c)	A person appointed in the will of the deceased person predeceased the deceased or renounces probate of the will.

d)	Letters or probate have not been obtained within two months from the death of the deceased person or

e)	Where the deceased person died without leaving a valid will.

Owing to the broad functions, the Administrator-General, section 4 of the Administrator-General’s Act empowers an Administrator-General to be notified of the death of the deceased person and may apply for letters or probate. 

The Administrator-General is also granted priority to the grant of letters of administration of a creditor, legatee other than a universal legatee and a friend of the deceased person.

The committee notes that the Administrator-General’s Act is in need of amendment to bring it to line with the Constitution, changes to Government policy and to deal with inflation that has eroded the Administrator-General’s jurisdiction.

The committee notes that the Administrator-General’s Act was commenced on the 15th August 1933 and has not been amended to bring it in line with the Constitution, changes to Government policy and to deal with inflation that has eroded the Administrator-General’s jurisdiction.

For instance, the Administrator-general can administer estates ranking from a value of Shs 20,000 to a value of Shs 15 million in form of cash, cash in bank or death gratuity or estates with only household assets, vehicles and other movable property with a court order.
These are small estates for which the cost of obtaining letters of administration or probate might exhaust the estate making the administration of no value to the beneficiaries.

Further, the committee notes that the Administrator-General is empowered to delegate to an agent the administration of estates of a value not exceeding Shs 2,000.

The committee finds that these estates do not reflect the current economic situation unreasonably burden the Administrator-General with the administration of micro-estates where the cost of administration exceeds the value of the estate.

Similarly, the penalties prescribed in the Administrator-General’s Act are not deterrent enough and have affected the administration of estates by the Administrator-General. 

For instance, section 12 of the Succession Act prescribes a penalty of Shs 200 for intermeddling in the estates of a deceased, a matter that affects the effectiveness of the provision. This clearly shows that the Act is due for amendment. 

Allow me to comment of some salient areas the Bill proposes to amend. 

The first is a short title and commencement 

1)	The Bill proposes in clause 1 to provide for the short title and commencement of the Bill once enacted into law. 

As it has been in the other laws, it is evident that clause 1 is redundant because when we look at the Acts of Parliament Act there are requirements like we have been doing in the Bills that have come before this.


2)	It provides for the citation of the Act, which is already provided for in section 15 of the Acts Parliament Act as well as prescribing the commencement of the Act on publication and yet the same is already prescribed in section 14 of the Acts of Parliament Act.

The committee, therefore, recommends that clause 1 is deleted with the justification that it is redundant in light of sections 14 and 15 of the Acts of Parliament Act, Cap. 2.

Interpretation

The Bill proposes to amend section 1 of the principal Act by making changes to the definition of the words “assets or property” by inserting a new paragraph defining currency points and repealing the definition of the words “next of kin”.

The committee is in support of this proposal since it is intended to not only modernise the principal Act but also to bring it in line with the Succession Act.

For example, the committee notes that the deletion of the words “next of kin,” is intended to specifically align the terminology used in the principal Act with the Succession Act, wherein, the persons who may benefit from the estates of the deceased persons are not referred to as next of kin but as persons who are entitled to share in the estate of a deceased person.

In light of the above, the committee recommends for the adoption of Clause 2 of the Bill.


3)	Power to administer estates by agents appointed by the Administrator-General or the minister. Clause 3 of the Bill proposes to amend Section 2(v) by changing the value for which an agent of the Administrator-General can exercise some powers of the Administrator-General from Shs 2,000 to Shs 15 million where property is in cash, cash in bank or death gratuity or where the property is in form of household assets, vehicles or any other movable property.

Section 2(v) of the Administrator-General’s Act is to the effect that the Administrator-General may at his or her discretion delegate to an agent any or all of the powers duties conferred or imposed upon him or her by this Act.

In default of any directions by the Administrator-General to the contrary, every agent appointed by the minister may in the administration of estates of persons dying intestate and leaving property within his or her area, which does not appear to exceed Shs 2,000 in gross value, exercise powers of the administrator-General under this Act.

The above provision empowers an agent appointed by the minister or delegated powers by the Administrator-General to exercise the summary powers of the Administrator-General over estates of a value not exceeding Shs 2,000.

The committee notes that the effect of the amendment proposed in clause 3 is to expand the jurisdiction of agents appointed by the minister to summarily exercise the powers of the Administrator-General and administer estates of a value of Shs 15 million if property is in the form of cash, cash in bank or death gratuity or where property is in the form of household assets, vehicles or any other movable property. 

The committee notes that whereas there is need to amend this provision in light of inflationary pressures, that has affected the monitory jurisdiction of the agents appointed by the minister, which has rendered this provision redundant.

The provision is ambiguous and may have the effect of granting the agents unlimited jurisdiction over estates that would ordinarily be the preserve of the Administrator-General.

We should be concerned that the failure to specify the maximum limit of the estate that can be administered by agents will mean that the Administrator-General will have delegated all the powers granted to it by Parliament, contrary to one of the pivotal principles of administrative law, which states that a delegate cannot delegate.

This might create confusion as to which estates are to be administered by agents and those to be administered by the Administrator-General, thereby creating forum shopping and perpetuating corruption, abuse of power and conflict between the agents, the Administrator-General and the beneficiaries in those estates.

In light of the above, the committee recommends that Clause 3 is amended by:

    i. Limiting the jurisdiction of agents appointed by the minister to only small estates, being estates in form of property in form of cash, cash in the bank, death gratuity, household assets, vehicles or any other movable property not exceeding Shs 50 million;

    ii. Expressing the maximum value in currency points in order to cater for inflationary pressures that will erode the pecuniary jurisdiction of the agents appointed by the minister, if the same is expressed in Uganda shillings;

    iii. Granting agents appointed by the minister or the Administrator-General jurisdiction over small estates since this will bring services closer to the people, reduce the cost of obtaining letters of probate in estates whose values fall within their jurisdiction, ensure that the beneficiaries draw as much value from the estate and allow for the just and effective administration of estates of deceased persons, irrespective of their value without eroding the beneficial interest of the estates.

The fourth point is power to administer estates by the Administrator-General.

Madam Speaker, the Bill proposes, in Clause 4, to amend section 4 of the principal Act by expanding the pecuniary jurisdiction of the Administrator-General from Shs 20,000 to Shs 15 million.

The committee observes that Section 4(5) of the principal Act empowers the Administrator-General to, without any letters of administration or other formal proceedings or notice, take possession of the estate of a value not exceeding Shs 20,000 and realise the same by sale or otherwise and pay there out any debts or charges and pay, remit or deliver any surplus to such person as may appear to him or her to be entitled to it.

We note that Section 4(5) of the Administrator-General’s Act has, with passage of time, become ineffective due to the effect of inflation on the pecuniary jurisdiction prescribed in the Act and is therefore in need of amendment.

The absurdity of this provision is reflected in the Administrator-General’s Cause No. 493 of 2003. This is the one Hon. Basalirwa was reading, where the deceased had Shs 200,000 in the bank and the costs of administration also came to Shs 200,000. Since all the funds were going to be consumed, the beneficiaries just abandoned the money in the bank.

Therefore, the provision is ambiguous and may have the effect of granting agents unlimited jurisdiction over all estates in Uganda. Further, in granting the Administrator-General jurisdiction over property, which is in the form of household assets, vehicles or any other movable property without prescribing a maximum value of the estate for which the Administrator-General may exercise summary powers granted under the Act, it will cause confusion since a person will not know the estates for which the Administrator-General may administer without recourse of going to court.

The committee is also further concerned that the provision is not shielded from inflationary pressures and changes in the value of the Uganda shilling. It observes that the proposal to express that value of the estate, for which the agent can administer in Uganda shillings, exposes the jurisdiction of agents to changes in the value of the Uganda Shilling, which is affected by inflation and loses value over time. 

The committee prefers that in order to shield the jurisdiction of agents from inflation, the value should be expressed in currency points, since currency points are not affected by changes in the value of the Uganda shilling or inflation.

The committee is also further concerned that there appears to be a disconnect between the Bill and the amendments proposed in the Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) Act. The committee, therefore, does not understand how the value of Shs 15 million was arrived at yet the smallest estate in Uganda is between Shs 10,000 to Shs 50 million.

The committee notes that since the intention of the amendment to Section 2(5) of the Administrator-General’s Act is to ensure that estates of a lower value are administered directly by the Administrator-General in order to reduce the cost of administration, reduce wastage and diminishing of value of those estates and to bring services closer to the people; the estates that may be administered directly by the Administrator-General should be small estates, as prescribed in the Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) Act.

In that regard, therefore, the committee is of the considered opinion that since this provision grants the Administrator-General the right to take over and administer estates without recourse to court, this should be limited to small estates, whose value does not justify recourse to court.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Clause 4 is amended by:

    (a) Limiting the jurisdiction of the Administrator-General to summary administration of an estate without recourse to court to small estates, being estates whose value is in form of property in form of cash, cash in the bank, death gratuity, household assets, vehicles and any other movable property not exceeding Shs 50 million; 

    (b) Expressing the maximum value in currency points in order to cater for inflationary pressures that will erode the pecuniary jurisdiction of the agents appointed by the minister, if the same is expressed in Uganda shillings.

Obligation of the surviving spouse to inform Administrator-General

Madam Speaker, Clause 5 proposes to amend section 5 of the principal Act by deleting the words, “or the widower or widow of the deceased or his or her attorney duly authorised in writing, authorising that person to administer the estate of a deceased person”.

The proposed amendment will have the effect of excluding the surviving spouse and his or her attorney from the categories of people who do not have to inform the Administrator-General before applying for letters of administration. 

This would mean that a surviving spouse would have to obtain a certificate of no objection from the Administrator-General before administering or executing the estate of his or her deceased spouse. 

The committee rejects this proposal since it does not consider the proprietary rights of the surviving spouse who is entitled to share in the property of the deceased spouse. The committee notes that during marriage, a spouse acquires a right to share in the property that constitutes matrimonial property and spouses are entitled to share, bar anything to the contrary, equally in the property.

The proposal in the Bill reverses that right upon the death of a spouse by subjecting the surviving spouse’s property rights to the whims of the Administrator-General. Since the surviving spouse has proprietary rights in the estate of his or her deceased spouse, it would be unfair for the surviving spouse to seek the authorisation of the Administrator-General to administer his or her own property.

The committee, therefore, rejects the amendment proposed in clause 5 and recommends for the deletion of the words, “widows or widowers” in Section 5(1) of the Administrator General’s Act and replaces them with “surviving spouse”.

Intermeddling in the estate of a deceased person

Madam Speaker, the Bill proposes, in Clause 7, to amend Section 11 of the principal Act to allow the Administrator-General to, in so far as may be urgently necessary for the preservation of the property of a deceased person who dies intestate or who leaves a will, or where a person causes to be moved or otherwise intermeddles with the property of a deceased person, administer the estate of the deceased person until court grants letters of probate.

The Bill also proposes to expand the penalty for intermeddling in the estate of the deceased person from imprisonment for three months to imprisonment for three years. The committee has examined the amendment proposed to section 11 of the principal Act and is in support of the amendment. 

The committee notes that incidents of intermeddling in estates of deceased persons have been increasing over time and have been a source of wastage of estate and the depleting of the beneficial interest in the estates.

The committee notes that whereas intermeddling in the estate of deceased persons is prohibited under the Succession Act and the Administrator-General’s Act, there are no mechanisms that can immediately assist an estate or beneficiary free itself from intermeddling by a person. 

The proposal by the Bill is intended to provide a mechanism through which an estate or beneficiary can free itself from the act of intermeddling by allowing the Administrator-General the right to take over and preserve the estate until letters of probate are granted.

Currently, the penalty prescribed for intermeddling in an estate is so low, at Shs 200 or imprisonment for a period of three months. This penalty is not deterrent enough and this explains why the incidents of intermeddling in the estate of deceased persons are on the rise.

However, the committee is concerned that the provision might not achieve the intended effect. For instance, the committee notes that intermeddling is not defined in the Administrator-General’s Act. 

The committee notes that the failure to define what amounts to intermeddling is a big drawback that will affect effectiveness of the provision.

The committee notes that since intermeddling provisions are intended to protect the estate of a deceased from unlawful interference, abuse or waste by persons without lawful authority, the actions of the Administrator-General need to be limited in scope and time and restricted to actions that are essential for the preservation of the estate of the deceased person and not to allow the Administrator-General the right to administer the estate of a deceased person without lawful authority.

In light of the above, the committee recommends – 

    a)  that the powers of the Administrator-General should be limited to only preserving the estate rather than administering the estate of the deceased without lawful authority;
    b) that there should be a specific definition of what amounts to intermeddling;
    c) that apart from the Administrator-General, a person should be empowered to apply to court to stop the intermeddling of any individual in the estate of the deceased person;
    d) that a person who intermeddles in the estate of a deceased person to make good the loss caused to the estate; 
    e) that for uniformity, the provisions on intermeddling in the estate of a deceased person should be harmonized with those in the Succession Act.

The seventh is the sale and disposal of property by the Administrator-General. Clause 10 of the Bill proposes to amend section 16 of the principal Act by substituting for the words "next of kin” the words “spouse, lineal descendants and dependent relative.”

Section 16 of the Administrator-General's Act is to the effect that the Administrator-General may, subject to any wishes which may be expressed by the next of kin of the deceased, dispose of the property of an estate under his or her administration either wholly or in part and either by public auction or private treaty as he or she in his or her discretion may deem to be in the best interests of the estate. The Bill proposes to amend the provision to require the consultation of the spouse or lineal descendant rather than the next of kin.

The committee examined the provision and considered the opinion that the amendment should be supported since it recognizes that essential people should be consulted by the Administrator -General. 

Therefore, the committee recommends that Clause 10 is adopted albeit with the following amendments:

    a) The disposal should be beneficial to the estate and the beneficiaries.
    b) The consent should be written. 
    c) The disposal should be necessary to cater for the basic needs of the persons entitled to benefit under the estate.
    d) The disposal should recognize the property rights of the surviving spouse.
    e) The Administrator-General should account for the proceeds of sale. 
    f) The sale is subject to sections 26 and 36(6) of the Succession Act, which exempts the residential holding from the same. 
    g) The sale is on market value terms. 
    h) The disposal to be null and void if not carried out in a transparent manner.

The committee also recommends that for completeness, the Administrator-General or an employee of the Administrator- General should not sell to him or herself property belonging to an estate he or she is executing or administering.

Notification by Gazette and newspaper of wide circulation

Clause 12 and 13 of the Bill seeks to amend sections 18 and 19 of the principal Act by removing the Gazette as one of the media through which the Administrator-General may notify, the creditors and others having claims against the estate to file and prove their claims against the estate.

The Administrator-General may now publish the notice in at least one newspaper of wide circulation in the area where the estate is situated as well as using any other means of communication as may be appropriate. This provision should be supported since the Gazette is not easily accessible to the general public compared to newspapers. 

Furthermore, it allows the Administrator-General to utilise any other means of communication, including digital platforms as well as other electronic media to make the notice. These modern forms of communication are easier, reach more masses than traditional media and are accessible.

The committee recommends that clauses 12 and 13 are adopted albeit with amendment to ensure that the notices are made in a newspaper of wide national circulation in order to notify as many people as possible.

Court to appoint persons to receive minor's share

Madam Speaker, the Bill, in Clause 15, proposes to amend Section 27 of the principal Act by expressing the value of the share of a minor which the Administrator-General may, at his or her discretion, pay or transfer to the father or mother of the minor or some other suitable person or the public trustee on behalf of the minor, in currency points rather than in shillings.

The committee has examined the proposal and is in support of the proposal since it shields the value from inflation. However, the amendment to Section 27 does not go far enough since it maintains a provision that is no longer good law in light of the amendments to the Children Act and the proposals made to the Succession Act as far as the holding of a child's share is concerned.

The committee notes that Section 27 of the Administrator- General's Act empowers the appointment of a child’s father, mother or any other person to receive the child’s share under the estate.

The committee recommends for the adoption of the amendments in clause 15. The committee further recommends that section 27 of the Administrator-General’s Act is amended to comply with the provisions of the Children Act and the amendments made to the Succession Act in this regard.

Attachment of Administrator -General’s bank accounts

Clause 17 of the Bill proposes to amend Section 35 by inserting a new sub-section (2) requiring that the costs, damage, interest and related litigation expenses in any suit against the Administrator-General are charged on the Consolidated Fund as well as exempting from attachment and bank accounts of the Administrator-General.

The committee examined the proposal made in the Bill and is of the considered opinion that this provision may be challenged for infringing on Article 21 of the Constitution. The committee notes that Section 22 of the Administrator-General's Act allows the taking of action against the Administrator-General and upon such action, the court has issued orders for the attachment of the accounts of the Administrator-General. 

In light of the above, the committee recommends that the proposal to exempt the accounts of the Administrator-General from attachment is rejected since it will be challenged for infringing Article 21(1) on equality for all before the law. Further that the Administrator-General considers opening individual accounts for individual estates he or she is administering so that all the funds relating to an individual estate can be deposited thereon, and in case of attachment it is only the relevant account that is affected and not the entire accounts of the Administrator-General.

Disposal of insignificant balances

The Bill proposes to delete Section 37 of the Administrator -General's Act, which relates to disposal of insignificant balances. That section is to the effect that after completion of administration of an estate by the Administrator-General or his or her agents, if the net balance for distribution among heirs abroad is less than five hundred shillings the Administrator-General may distribute the balance among such persons as appear to be entitled to it and remit the amount so due by bank draft, registered money order or postal order.

The committee examined the proposed amendment and it finds the amendment to be misconceived and will create a lacuna in the law since the Administrator-General will not be guided on how to transmit a person’s share in the estate. Furthermore, the proposal will also create a lacuna in the law in so far as removing the distribution of the estate to persons who are outside the territorial jurisdiction of Uganda.

In light of the above, the committee recommends that Section 37 should be retained in the principal Act albeit with amendments to enhance the threshold prescribed thereunder, to express the threshold if any, in currency points and to allow the transfer of such property to any person who is entitled to share in the estate.

Harmonisation with the Succession Act

The committee has examined the Administrator-General's Act and found that it is not in harmony with the Succession Act in some instances. The committee notes, for example, that Section 20 of the Administrator-General’s Act is in conflict with the Succession Act especially sections 280, 281, 282 and 283 of the Succession Act.

Section 20(4) provides that the fees, charges and reimbursements due to the Administrator-General are to be the first charge on the estate, after payment of funeral expenses, and may be deducted from any monies received by the Administrator-General in the course of the administration. The above provision gives fees, charges and reimbursements of the Administrator-General first priority over all other expenses and fees incurred by the estate.

The committee notes that sections 280, 281, 282 and 283 of the Succession Act guide on the priority of paying fees and charges and disbursement and requires that funeral expenses have priority, followed by the expenses of obtaining probate or letters of administration, followed by wages due for services rendered to the deceased within three months preceding his or her death by any labourer, artisan or domestic servant and thereafter, the creditor are paid.


Section 20 appears to be in conflict with the provisions of the Succession Act in so far as giving priority to expenses, fees, charges and reimbursements due to the Administrator-General over all other expenses and fees incurred by the estate. This disharmony needs to be remedied and rectified.

The committee recommends that the Administrator-General’s Act should be harmonised with the Succession Act. In light of the above, the committee proposes that the Administrator-General’s Act was due for an amendment and should be amended as proposed in the Administrator-General’s (Amendment) Bill, 2019.

Conclusively, the committee recommends that the Administrator-General’s (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be read the second time and do pass with amendments.


THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and the members.

Honourable members, the report, as you heard, is quite interesting. It has been signed by the necessary minimum members. You are free to make comments.

3.54
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the chairperson of the committee for the report.

I have a point to which I seek clarification where Government proposes that the accounts of the Administrator-General should not be subject to attachment. This is discriminatory and preferential treatment of an entity of Government, which can even encourage laziness and carelessness of a Government body.

When you look at cases involving the Administrator-General, you find that there are other parties, which are in the weaker position that should be protected and not the Administrator-General.

I would like to know the justification. Why would you think that these accounts should be immune from being attached?

As the committee has proposed, in Article 21 for instance, if you are saying that the Administrator-General’s accounts should not be subjected to attachment, what about a situation where the Administrator-General him or herself is the one to attach the accounts of another? Are you saying that the Administrator-General should not be allowed to recover by way of attaching accounts of another?

I think this should not be acceptable. In order to allow for prudence and being diligent workers of Government, these accounts must be attached. It is only then that the Administrator-General can be forced to do the work with extreme care and diligence. Thank you.
 
THE SPEAKER: On that same area, I have been thinking about what the sources of income of the Administrator-General are. My thinking is that the money they have is that of the estates of the people of Uganda. 

Therefore, if it is my father’s or grandmother’s money, why should it be attached to the debts of the Administrator-General?

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (LANDS) (Ms Persis Namuganza): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the committee for the good work they have done. I support it, especially, where it comes to the powers of the Administrator-General being trimmed.

As a person who works in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, I can confirm that there are very many cases where the Administrator-General has meddled into the estates of the late to the extent that sometimes property is even sold without the knowledge of the beneficiary because of the gaps in the current laws. I consider it to be too much power, which were given to this particular office.

Therefore, being that we have the Succession Act, which is very clear, I feel that the Administrator-General should be left with very limited powers; in fact, not even beyond meetings. All the problems we have as a ministry, especially on property of the deceased, come from the Administrator-General’s office to the extent that they can give letters of administration to several people.

We have always written to them and said, “We issued this and discovered the other one is the right person.” That is something that should not be allowed. When it comes to withdrawing them, they do not support it; even courts of law call them and they deny.

Therefore, this office was given too much power. In fact, we have acted too late. It would have been handled much earlier than yesterday, to trim their power. The committee is still leaving them with a lot of powers. I think the powers beyond chairing meetings are too much for them. Thank you.

3.59
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Independent, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think that due to the environment today, all institutions need transparency and accountability. All resources, which go to these Government agencies, must be audited. The Auditor-General must give an opinion. 

Therefore, there is no way you can exempt the Administrator - General when other agencies are audited. For instance, we passed the Audit Act in 2008, that where the Government has an interest, it must be audited. When you pass such a law, which is not consistent with the other, it becomes very contradictory.

I would think it is very necessary, within this law, which the Auditor-General has to audit all money for the purpose of transparency and accountability. The Administrator-General should not be exempted. I beg to submit.

4.00
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, this law is for the majority but not the minority because we are dealing with small estates. It is a law that needs very serious attention of this House.

The rich in Uganda are very few. However, those we are talking about, who are concerned with small estates, constitute the majority in the country.


I would like to appreciate the fact that we are aligning these laws to the demands and commands of the Constitution specifically Article 32, which deals with marginalised groups and Article 33 on rights of women. Without this alignment it would be so invalid. Therefore, I would like to appreciate the committee for its observations and recommendations.

I would like to comment on the issue of attaching accounts of the Administrator-General. Just like you asked, where does the Administrator-General get the income from? Is this personal money or for the poor people? That is a question for everybody to answer. If it is for the people, why do you want them to attach it? It is for the deceased but somebody is queuing up for that money. In the end, it will end up in somebody’s hands. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, this law should as much possible look at reducing the level of bureaucracy so that somebody can be able to attain the letters of administration easily without all the cumbersome processes. 

How I wish it were possible for us to even bring some of these jurisdictions to the LC 1s – maybe our legal brains will think about that. Is it possible? We have given everything to the courts of law and the Administrator-General. These are people who are mostly seated in Kampala. 

There is no High Court in my district. My people have to travel to Kampala. How much money do you have to pay under COVID-19? It is Shs 80,000. You will come once, twice or thrice and you will not get what you want. 

I would also like to agree with Hon. Namuganza. When we leave too much power with the Administrator-General to decide the fate of the people, this can be a problem. The people we are talking about are the majority; the poor of the poorest across the country. I wish we could agree and trim the powers of the Administrator-General and make this work as simple as possible, through this law. 

I would like to say that intermeddling is something beyond witchcraft in this country. There must be stricter penalties. As we prescribe these penalties, I will not be happy to get only one side of them, for example, saying imprisonment for one year. Let us also provide for monetary penalties or both so that the presiding officer has the discretion to decide whether to prescribe one or the other or both. If we did that, things would be okay. 

This law is a matter of urgent public concern, Madam Speaker. Therefore, we should not delay it but we need to handle it with utmost care because it handles the majority, not the minority. I beg to submit. 

4.06
MS NOELINE KISEMBO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for processing this very important Bill. Thank you for the good work done. 

I would like to seek clarification on the office of the Administrator-General. I wonder whether it is not possible for this office to be decentralised so that the people with these small estates – who are the majority like my brother, hon. Silas, has said – are able to easily access this office. This is because when, for example, the surviving spouses need to fight for the estates of the deceased spouses, they have to move all the way to Kampala before they can access the letters of administration. 

Isn’t it possible that there can be decentralisation for easy accessibility of such services? I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, just for the record, the issue of decentralising this office is one of the things I spoke about when I first came to Parliament in 1989. Are there any more comments? 

4.08 
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the proposal to amend the Administrator-General’s Act. 

This is a 1933 law and that means the amendments are coming 88 years down the road. Like the chairperson of the committee said, this has been a very long a time. A lot has changed in terms of the economy and the laws pertaining to property and acquisition. Due to the time lag, it is indeed the right time for us to amend this law and cater for the changing economic times. 

On the issue of the penalties, I agree with the committee’s recommendation that they be strengthened. Three months of imprisonment or payment of Shs 200,000 is not deterrent enough.  

Madam Speaker, we should adopt the currency points because they are not affected by inflation. If you are to maintain the penalties in shillings, it means that with time, we will need to revise them. I think that from the amendments of the laws, currency points are trendier and it is the global dynamic that we should follow. Those will be more deterrent and we will not have to revisit them time after time. 

We also need to harmonise with other laws. We talked about the Succession Act, for instance – sections 26 and 27 – where property such as the matrimonial home is protected. This is in line with Article 33, where women and the vulnerable groups are protected. People like the orphans who are left behind or the children who are left with one parent are the categories of persons we want to protect by amending the law or harmonising it with other laws like the Succession Act. 

On the cost of administration, the chairperson gave an example where someone had Shs 200,000 on the account and the cost of administration is Shs 200,000 or even more. That means the vulnerable people who are supposed to benefit from that estate cannot benefit because of such costs. I also agree that the costs for the smaller estates be done away with so that the vulnerable people, who are our target, can benefit without inconveniences. Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think there are no more contributions. Attorney-General, please, I would really like to understand: which account of the Administrator-General is subject to attachment? I do not want to be told that the money in your estate is less because there was a garnishee order. 

4.10 
THE DEPUTY-ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, you made an earlier observation and it was spot on. The accounts for the Administrator-General are the accounts on which they hold proceeds of the beneficiaries – proceeds of the estates they are administering. If you attach the court order, then the beneficiaries will not have access to those accounts. They will not receive their proceeds, as required by the law. 

We are not talking of any separate administrative account. We are talking of accounts on which the Administrator-General’s office puts money, which are the proceeds of estates that are intended to benefit particular beneficiaries at a point.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, my attention has been drawn to a decided case of the Supreme Court: Administrator General v. Kakooza and another (Miscellaneous Application No. 11 of 2017).  In that case, it was held that the accounts of the Administrator-General cannot be attached since the funds contained there are for the estates which the Administrator-General is administering. That is the legal position. Are there any more comments? 

I now put the question that the Administrator-General’s (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be read for the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ADMINISTRATOR-GENERAL’S (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

Clause 1

MS RWAKOOJO: Madam Chairperson, clause 1 is on the short title and commencement. We would like to delete clause 1. 

Our justification is that clause 1 is redundant in light of sections 14 and 15 of the Acts of Parliament Act Cap 2.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 1 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, deleted.


Clause 2
MS RWAKOOJO: Clause 2 is on the amendment of Section 1 of the administrator’s Act. In the proposed amendment to Section 1 of the principal Act, we would like to insert the following new paragraph immediately after paragraph (a) and we renumber the clause accordingly. 
(b) Inserting the following definition after paragraph (c) as follows: ”’Child’ means a person below the age of 18 years, including an adopted child’.”

Our justification is to define “a child.” 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, we had time to harmonise with our colleagues. Our harmonised position says that we reject the proposal of the committee to insert a new definition on a child since it is redundant and not used in the principal Act.

Our original position, before harmonisation was still a rejection of the proposed amendment. We are saying there is no need to define the term “child” under the Administrator-General’s Act because it is not used under the Administrator-General’s Act. 

In matters of succession, the term “child” is applied in respect of all children of a deceased person, regardless of whether the child is a minor or a major. If the definition is carried, there will be confusion in the usage of this term. I beg to submit. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do we have the principal Act here? 

MS RWAKOOJO: We would like to concede on clause 2. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But there is no definition of child here. 

MS RWAKOOJO: No, there is no definition of child.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I do not know whether we are allowed to make any other definition of a child beyond the definition in the Constitution. To me, even if we had no definition, it is clearly stipulated under the Constitution. It is amongst the most common definitions. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Since the mover has withdrawn the proposal, I put the question that clause 2, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3

MS RWAKOOJO: It is on amendment of Section 2 of the principal Act. In clause 3, substitute for the proposed amendment to Section 2(5) with the following: Section 2(5) of the principal Act is amended by substituting for the words, “which does not appear to exceed Shs 2,000 in gross value”, the words, “where the property is in the form of cash, cash in the bank, death gratuity, household assets, vehicles or any other movable property and does not exceed 2500 currency points.”

The justification:

    1. To cap the jurisdiction of the agents of the Administrator-General to estates over, which such agents can exercise summary powers of the Administrator-General without express authorisation of the Administrator-General or court to only small estates of a total value of Shs 50 million, being the maximum value of a small estate, as prescribed in the Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) (Amendment) Bill.

    2. To clearly state the jurisdiction of the agent to whom an aggregate property value rather than a proposal in the Bill, which had no such limit and be open to abuse. 

    3. To express the values of the estate in currency points in order to shield the provision from inflation.

Granting agents appointed by the minister or the Administrator- General jurisdiction over small estates will bring services closer to the people; reduce the cost of obtaining letters or probate in estates whose values fall within their jurisdiction.

Ensure that the beneficiaries draw as much value from the estate and allow for the just and effective administration of estates of deceased persons irrespective of their values without eroding the beneficial interests of the estate. 

MR KAFUUZI: This is our harmonised response to clause 3. In clause 3, substitute the proposed amendment to section 2(5) with the following: Section 2 sub-section (5) of the principal Act is amended by substituting for the following words, “which does not appear to exceed Shs 2,000 in gross value”, the words, “where the property in the form of cash, cash in the bank, both gratuity, household assets, vehicles or any other movable property does not exceed 750 currency points.”

That appears to be our harmonised position. I do not know if the chair is departing from it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What would be the equivalent of 2,500 currency points in shillings? 

MS RWAKOOJO: Madam Speaker, it would be Shs 50 million. I do concede on the harmonised position for 750 currency points, which would translate into Shs 15 million. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. That means that instead of Shs 3 million, we say 750 currency points. 

MS RWAKOOJO: Yes. 

MR AOGON: Madam Chair, I would like to get support from the committee and the minister. If we are going to give out work to agents of the Administrator-General, are we prescribing any penalties against misbehaviour? Is there anything for one who puts their fingers, where they should not be touching? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us first deal with the amendment. I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed by the Attorney-General.

(Question out and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MS RWAKOOJO: In clause 4, amendment of section 4 of the principal Act; in clause 4, substitute for the proposed amendment Section 4(5)(b) with the following: “the principal Act is amended by substituting for the words ‘does not exceed Shs 20,000’ the words ‘where the property is in form of cash, cash in bank, death gratuity, household assets, vehicles or any movable property, and does not exceed Shs 2,500 currency points.’”

Justification: 

    1. To curb the jurisdiction of the Administrator-General to estates over which the Administrator-General can administer without Letters of Administration, or other formal proceedings of notice.

    2. Take possession and administer to the largest of a small estate, which is of a total aggregate value of Shs 50 million, as prescribed in the administration of estates, small estates, special provisions Act, clearly states the jurisdiction of the Administrator-General and limit it to a defined aggregate property value, rather than the proposal in the Bill.

    3. Since the failure to expressly state the total value of the estate over which the Administrator-General may have jurisdiction, may lead to abuse of such powers.

    4. To express the value of the estate in currency points in order to shield the provision from inflation, granting the Administrator-General jurisdiction of small estates, which will bring services closer to the people, reduce the cost of obtaining letters of probate in estates, whose values fall within their jurisdiction.

    5. Ensure that the beneficiaries draw as much value from the estate and allow for just and effective administration of estates of deceased persons irrespective of their value without eroding the beneficial interest of the estates. 

Consequential amendment arising from the amendment of clause 3 of the Bill.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, our harmonised position to that in clause 4 is, substitute for the proposed amendment to Section 4(5)(b) with the following;

“Section 4(5)(b) of the principal Act is amended by substituting for the words ‘does not exceed Shs 20,000’ the words ‘where the property is in the form of cash in the bank, death gratuity, household assets, vehicles or any other movable property, does not exceed 750 currency points.’”

THE CHAIRPERSON: You said we harmonise but you have got different things and the chairperson also has got different things. I do not know what you are harmonising.

MR RWAKOOJO: Madam Chairperson, I concede on the 750 currency points, bringing it to an equivalent of Shs 15 million. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 4 be amended as proposed by the Attorney-General.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MS RWAKOOJO: Amendment of Clause 5 of the principal Act. We propose to delete Clause 5. 

The justification is that the proposal will impose an unreasonable requirement on the widow or widower, to obtain a letter of no objection from the Administrator-General, in total disregard of the fact that a widow or widower obtains during the subsistence of marriage interests in the property that constitutes matrimonial property, and therefore, cannot be regarded as any other person. 

The provision will subject the widow or widower’s proprietary rights to the desires or whims of the Administrator-General, a matter that is contrary to the proprietary rights of such a person as guaranteed in the Constitution.

The provision will also have the effect of curtailing the enjoyment and exercise of property belonging to the widow or widower, since he or she will lose the rights to administer his or her property and bestows the same to the administrator.

Lastly, the proposal is contrary to the amendment proposed in the Succession Amendment Bill, 2018, where the committee recommended the adoption of a proposal to grant unfettered right to the surviving spouse, to apply for and be granted letters of administration over any person, including the Administrator-General.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, our harmonised position in section 5 of the principal Act is amended by;

a)	Repealing the words “or widower or widow of the deceased” “his or her attorney duly authorised in writing” “authorising that person to administer the estate of the deceased.”

b)	Inserting immediately after subsection 3 the following; “the surviving spouse shall have preference over any other person in the administration of the estate of the deceased spouse.” Delete “spouse” and replace with “intestate”, because surviving spouse cannot have preference over an executor.

This would clarify the position of the law.

Furthermore, the reference to the surviving spouse under subsection 4 may be disregarded by the Administrator-General where;

a)	A surviving spouse is not a fit and proper person to administer the estate of the deceased spouse or

b)	The Administrator-General finds it necessary in the circumstances of the estate to grant the administration of the estate to another person. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Deleting that clause would mean retaining the original text in the law.

MS BABADIRI: Thank you very much for giving me time. I thought these people agreed and harmonised the positions in the committee but the committee is bringing a different report and the Attorney-General another position.

May I know with whom the Attorney-General harmonised this position? The report he is giving us is different from what he is telling me and I feel that maybe the Attorney-General is just sneaking things, which were never discussed with the committee. The report is different from what he is reading on the Floor.

Is it procedurally right for the Attorney-General to come around with a harmonised position? I do not know with whom he harmonised his positions because he is continuing. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it seems the Attorney-General is smuggling amendments because the committee continues to bring a different position. What did you harmonise and with who?

MS KISEMBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the position of the committee on this provision. The committee is making effort to cater for the rights of the surviving spouse. When the honourable minister says, “Circumstances where the surviving spouse may be unfit to administer,” what are such circumstances? If the spouse is surviving, that alone is enough to enable the spouse take over the estate of the deceased spouse.

Therefore, I want to reject the proposal from the honourable minister.

MS NAMUGANZA: Madam Chairperson, to add on to what my honourable colleague has just mentioned; from my colleague, the Attorney-General, he is saying “where the Administrator-General finds the spouse unfit” and I had talked about the same.

In the eyes of the Administrator-General- what makes him or her think that you are unfit to inherit? Madam Chairperson, even where you find there is a surviving spouse, sometimes they do not know how to read or write; still, they have the right to give responsibility either to a child or another person they feel, as long as he is in the lineage. It is within their powers.

However, what he is suggesting deprives the surviving spouse of such powers and they remain there at the mercy of the so-called Administrator-General to decide whether you are fit or unfit. What do you mean? When I got married to the late, why was I not unfit? (Laughter) 

The one who appreciated me has gone and you are leaving me at the mercy of the so-called Administrator-General to find me unfit or fit. No! We reject that, Madam Chairperson.

MR MULINDWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The justification given by the committee is maybe what the Attorney-General missed to read. Let me read it verbatim for the House to decide:

“The reason was to codify a practice developed by courts to wherein widows and widowers are no longer given priority over the administration of estates of the deceased partners, due to the reality of our families.

Judges today are uncomfortable with such applications, where a deceased person is survived by children from different women or in polygamous families, since court is not sure of the number of partners or children the deceased had at the time of death. 

In order to protect the interests of all the beneficiaries of such estates, there are instances where it may be preferred that the administration is granted, not to the surviving spouse alone but to any other person or a group of people with or without the surviving spouse.”

That was the justification, Madam Chairperson. With the nature of our families today, if you say to the surviving spouse alone, it is not that the surviving spouse is unfit but to create room to cater for all the other beneficiaries who may be neglected by the surviving spouse. I beg to submit.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, we are already attempting to amend the Succession Act before its time. That is where the challenge is. We should have actually started with the other Bill before this one. We are trying to take time on this but we must really work on that Bill.

Firstly, if we are talking about preference and you are giving preference to the Will and ignore a surviving spouse, we must be able to go back to the Constitution. Remember that our Constitution speaks to rights that people have. Are you going to deny them the rights?

So, I do not know on this clause. We might take one full year to agree on it because there is already a problem. I know for sure, Madam Chairperson, that if you allow – on the other side – spouses all the powers to inherit, a woman can rise up and kill a man –(Interjection)– I am just giving information; you will speak – because she knows tomorrow, the law is protecting her and she can be able to take over property in full swing because it is saying, “surviving spouse”.

On the other hand, a man can also do the same. However, for now, this is what I was trying to suggest, Madam Chairperson. We provide for an exception.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this Bill belongs to the Attorney-General but he is now bringing other amendments to his Bill here on the Floor. You are smuggling and I do not understand what you harmonised. I do not see any harmony in this.

MS RWAKOOJO: Madam Chairperson, what the Attorney-General is referring to as “harmonised” are his proposals, to which I accepted but –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which you accepted?

MS RWAKOOJO: Yes. He came up with certain proposals about the law and they seemed to make sense but for those which do not, we continue with our position. I am reading the committee position because that is what we have here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, you cannot say that there are those he made which make sense and others do not. You have said that let us delete clause 5. Now, he is amending even his clause 5.

MS RWAKOOJO: Our position, Madam Chairperson, is the deletion of clause 5.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General, you cannot smuggle amendments here and this is your own Bill. 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, there was an attempt by our drafts team to have a discussion with the chairperson. Certain positions were arrived at. Be that as it may, as a ministry, we have our own responses which I had omitted to put on record, in favour of those that I believed had been agreed upon.

In the event that you find it unpalatable to carry what I considered “harmonised”, I want you to allow me put on record our responses as a ministry.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No; honourable minister, this is your Bill. Any proposals for amendment should have gone to the committee and they appear in the report. However, we have committee amendments, we have yours and we have the text of the Bill. You are not being fair to us. You cannot amend on the Floor of this House.

Did you actually hold a meeting to harmonise this? Did you actually hold a meeting with the committee?

MR KAFUUZI: The chairperson attended the harmonisation meeting.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable minister, the Bill is a Bill in the House. Harmonisation must take place in Parliament. It must take place before the committee, not with one member of the committee.

MS ERAGU: Madam Chairperson, we have a committee position which was brought to this House and it is what we are processing. There has been no harmonisation that the committee knows about. We sat yesterday and we sat today but nothing was ever brought before the committee.

We cannot now have positions on new things while on the Floor, Madam Chairperson. We stick to our position. 

MS BETTY AOL: Madam Chairperson, this is not the first time that the learned Attorney-General is smuggling their views -

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chair, I do not take kindly the words of my senior colleague. I have the documents with me and I know of a meeting that the Speaker called for us to harmonise on the Succession (Amendment) Bill. It is during that same meeting that we decided to discuss the Administrator-General’s Bill.

What is being presented here is not a smuggled position. It may not have been presented to the members of the committee. Like the Speaker said, it should have gone back to the committee. And because of the Speaker’s observation, I concede, but it is not a smuggled position.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us be clear. We cannot have amendments made on the Floor of this House which have not been considered by the committee. If you went beyond succession and moved to another Bill, which we had not instructed you, you are going beyond our instruction yet the succession report is not yet here.

MS BETTY AOL: Madam Chair, let me complete what I had started because I even do not see the point of order that he gave me. One, I saw in the report where the Attorney-General and the mover of the Bill interface with the committee. If you could not finish at that time, at the tail end you should have harmonised this. Yet you keep on saying harmonised position. Harmonisation with who? You are supposed to have this harmonised position in the committee.

Now, I would like to propose a motion that we stand over everything in this report so that these people go and harmonise their clauses before - that harmonised position should be done out of this House. I beg to propose.

Madam Chair, I said that I would like to propose that-

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much. Madam Chair, as a committee, our views are contained in the report. If the learned Attorney-General and my classmate Hon. Jackson Kafuuzi wanted to have these matters harmonised, he should have come back to the committee.

Madam Chair, I propose that since the report is here and that report is already a property of this House, we proceed to consider what is on the Floor of the House to save time. I beg to submit.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA:  Madam Chair, you had already ruled; but once a committee report is a property of the House, the minister is called in the meetings and he attends to give his position. This is a Bill of Government, which deals with the Attorney-General, therefore, we are discussing the report. If there is anything else apart from that, I do not think that it can be entertained. 

Therefore, the way forward is that we deal with the report and what is in the Bill. If it is not accepted, then we amend it as the whole House, but no further amendments apart from those in the report prepared by the committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed by deletion?
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, deleted.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7

MS RWAKOOJA: Clause 7 is an amendment of section 11 of the principal Act. For Clause 7, they substituted the following; replacement of section 11 of the principal Act. For section 11, they substituted the following:  
“
    (1) When a person dies whether within or out of Uganda leaving no property within Uganda, a person who without being duly authorized by law or with the authority of the Administrator-General or agent, takes possession or causes to be moved any property of a deceased person, unlawfully refuses or neglects to deliver any such property to the Administrator-General or his or her agent or any other person when called upon to do so, or intermeddles with the estate of a deceased person, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 1,000 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding 10 years or both.

    (2) A person is taken to intermeddle in the estate of a deceased person where that person while not being the Administrator-General and agent of the Administrator-General or a person to whom probate or letters of administration have been granted by court takes possession or disposes of a deceased person’s property or be does any other act which belongs to the office of executor or administrator.

    (3) Subject to section 268 of the Succession Act, the Administrator-General may intermeddle in the estate of a deceased person where it is urgently necessary for the purposes of-

    a) preserving the estate from abuse;
    b) providing for the deceased’s funeral; 
    c) providing immediate necessities of the deceased’s family;
    d) preserving and prudent management of the deceased person’s business including preserving the deceased person’s goods of trade; or
    e) receiving money or other funds belonging to the deceased person.

    (4) The duration for which the Administrator-General may intermeddle in the estate of the deceased person pursuant to sub-section (3) is six months from the date of the deceased person’s death or until the grant of letters of administration or probate, whichever first occurs.

    (5) For the purpose of this section, the Administrator-General or its agent may at any time before grant letters of administration or probate take any action that is necessary for the preservation of the estate of the deceased person.
    (6) A person aggrieved by the decision of the Administrator-General or its agent may apply to the High Court for redress. 

    (7) A person who- 
    (a) refuses or neglects to deliver any property to the Administrator-General or her agent when called upon to do so lawfully intermeddles in the estate of the deceased person and fails or neglects to report to the Administrator-General or its agents the particulars of the property and of the steps taken to preserve such property, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to imprisonment for three years or to a fine not exceeding 72 currency points or to both fine and imprisonment.” 

The justification: 

    1. To align the provision with section 268 of the Succession Act to cap the duration the Administrator-General may intermeddle in the estate of the deceased person to six months or upon grant of letters or probate whichever first occurs. 

    2. To ensure compliance by creating offences against persons who neglect orders from the Administrator-General.

    3. Limit the powers that can be exercised by the Administrator-General to only preserving the estate rather than administering the estate of the deceased without lawful authority.

MS NAMUGANZA: Madam Chair, I would like to seek clarification and probably guidance from you. Hon. Aogon talked about it, who is defined as the agent of the Administrator-General? As we speak, every person who works in the Administrator-General’s office has become agents. They do the same work the Administrator-General would do. If we leave the word “agents” like that, we continue getting more confusion. All personnel think they have the same powers.

If we say, “The agent would be someone who has been assigned in writing?” who is the agent? Hon. Aogon talked about it. I seek your guidance, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, under the interpretation section of this law, it is stated as follows:
“’An agent’ means an agent of the Administrator-General duly appointed under Section 2(4).”

Section (2) states: 

“The minister may appoint any person in the public service or any chief of the rank of Gombolola chief or an equivalent or a higher rank to be the agent of the Administrator-General in any area of Uganda. The Administrator-General may appoint any person, whether eligible to be appointed by the minister under this sub section or not, as the Administrator-General shall think fit to be his or her agent in respect of any particular estate in respect of any matter arising out of…” 

Therefore, you have to be appointed formally by the Administrator-General.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, for purposes of clarity, it is the town clerk, sub-county chief and chief administrative officers who we use as agents of the Administrator-General.


MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, if there is a definition already, it is okay. My issue also, in addition to the concern from the minister, is that in Uganda now, there are brokers in every business we conduct. They purport to be agents or the Administrator-General himself. 

Are there any penalties prescribed under this Bill to deter such people from acting the way they do? I believe they are the ones surrounding the ministry and they dress very smartly.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What are the sanctions to the imposters who do not have the Administrator-General’s official authority?

MR KAFUUZI: Those are impersonators and they can be charged for impersonation or obtaining money by false pretense because they are not legal employees of the Administrator-General. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We had received a proposal under Clause 7. Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 7 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, I think you have a new clause.

MS RWAKOOJO: Insertion of a new clause in the Bill

The Bill is amended by inserting the following new clause immediately after Clause 9:

Insertion of Section 9(a) in the Principal Act 

The Principal Act is amended by inserting, immediately after Section 9, the following:

“Section (9)(a): Duration of administration or execution

(1) 	Where the Administrator-General or an agent of the Administrator-General takes over and administers an estate with or without an order of court under this Act, the Administrator-General or an agent of the Administrator-General shall carry out the duties and functions authorised by this Act or by the grant of probate or letters of administration for a period not exceeding three years.

(2) 	Notwithstanding sub-section (2), court may, on application, extend the duration prescribed in sub-section (1) for a further period of three years if it is satisfied that-

(a) 	It is in the best interest of the beneficiaries to extend the period; and
(b) 	The Administrator-General or the agent of the Administrator-General has-
(i) 	Complied with the provisions of this Act or any condition of grant of probate or letters of administration; and
(ii) 	Obtained the consent of all the beneficiaries in the estate for which the grant was made.”

The justification is:

    i. The imposition of a duration for administering an estate by the agent or Administrator-General is to ensure that the Administrator-General or an agent of the administrator does carry out the functions of that office within the shortest time possible, in this case three years; and to ensure that the Administrator-General does not unreasonably hold on to the estate indefinitely.

    ii. To harmonise the Administrator-General’s Act with the amendments made to the Succession Act.

MR AOGON: I would love to obtain clarity from the chairperson as to which Succession Act she is referring to. Is it the one in force or the one we are trying to amend and is not yet here?

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, our proposal is that instead of three years, we talk of two. It states, “shall carry out duties and functions authorised by the Act or by the grant of probate or letters of administration for a period not exceeding two years.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Rwakoojo, what do you say about that?

MS RWAKOOJO: Madam Chairperson, I do not have a problem with it because they are reducing the duration during which they will administer the estate of the deceased person. They are not holding on to the administration of the estate. It is beneficial to the estate.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the proposal be further amended by substituting two for three years. I now put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10

MS RWAKOOJO: This is an amendment of Section 16 of the principal Act. For clause 10, they substituted the following: “Replacement of Section 16 of the principal Act.”

For section 16 of the principal Act, they substituted the following-

“(16) Powers to dispose of property

l) 	Subject to sections 27 and 36 of the Succession Act, the Administrator-General may, with the written consent of the surviving spouse, lineal descendants and dependant relatives, dispose of the property of an estate under his or her administration either wholly or in part and either by public auction or private treaty as he or she, in his or her discretion, may deem to be in the best interests of the estate.

2) 	Where a beneficiary of the estate is a minor, the consent required in sub section (1) shall be given by the guardian of the minor and where the guardian of the minor is the executor or administrator, the consent shall be granted by court.

3) 	Notwithstanding sub-section (1), the Administrator-General shall dispose of the property of an estate under his or her administration only where-

a) 	The disposal is beneficial to the estate;
b) 	The disposal is beneficial to the beneficiaries in the estate;
c) 	The sale is necessary to cater for the basic needs of the surviving spouse and lineal descendants or any other person entitled to benefit under the estate; or
d) 	The disposal is necessary for settlement of the deceased person’s debts, including settlement of the deceased person’s tax obligations.

(4) 	The Administrator-General shall account to the estate the proceeds arising from the sale or disposal of any property that belongs to the estate. 

(5) 	In disposing off property under this section, the Administrator-General shall give first option to a beneficiary of the estate to purchase the property. 

(6) 	The Administrator-General, the agent of the Administrator-General or any other officers of the Administrator-General’s office shall not be eligible to purchase property of the estate.
 
(7) 	Any disposal of the property belonging to the estate of a deceased person in contravention of this section shall be void. 

The justification 

    1. To exempt the disposal of matrimonial property and other property, as prescribed in Sections 27 and 30 of the Succession Act. 

    2. To impose restrictions on the sale of property of the deceased person for transparency in order to obtain value for money to bar the Administrator-General, the Administrator-General’s agent or any other officers of the Administrator-General from purchasing the property belonging to the estate under his or her management. 

    3. To enhance accountability by imposing an obligation on the Administrator-General to account to the estate for the proceeds arising from the sale of property. 

    4. To grant preemption rights to a beneficiary of the estate to purchase the property before it is offered through a third party. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposals for amendment of clause 10. I now put the question that clause 10 be amended as proposed - 

MS OGWAL: Chairperson, I am interested in knowing whether there is any penalty because the proposal given here by the committee is quite good; that the Attorney-General’s agents or any other person associated with that office should purchase the property. 

Nonetheless, you know how Ugandans do things. The property could be purchased in the name of a niece or nephew or something like that. Could there be any penalty attached to this, should it be discovered later that the administrator or his agents purchased the property? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, can you respond to that? 

MS RWAKOOJO: Madam Chairperson, No.7 clearly says, “Any disposal of the property belonging to the estate of a deceased person in contravention of this section shall be void.” It will, therefore, be an empty transfer. It does not hold. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 10 be amended as proposed. 
  
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11

MS RWAKOOJO: Insertion of a new clause immediately after clause 10. The Bill is amended by inserting immediately after Clause 10 the following: 

“Insertion of Section 16(a) in the principal Act
 
The principal Act is amended by inserting immediately after Section 16 the following;

‘16(a) power to open and operate bank accounts 

    1. The Administrator-General shall, with the authority of the Accountant-General, open and maintain such accounts, as necessary, for the performance of the actions of the Administrator-General or an agent of the Administrator-General. 

    2. The Administrator-General and agent of the Administrator-General shall deposit all funds received on behalf of an estate of the Administrator-General or an agent of the Administrator-General is administering under this Act onto the account.’” 

Justification 

    1. The power to open bank accounts will enhance transparency and accountability by ensuring that each estate has an account opened for it by the Administrator General or his or her agent onto which funds received for the estate are deposited thereon.
 
    2. The provision will ensure that funds for individual estate are not deposited onto the Consolidated Fund considering that these funds do not belong to Government and also to ease access to such funds by the beneficiaries. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You have heard the proposal for the new clause. I put the question that the new clause be inserted as proposed. 

MR AOGON: I do not know whether it is not necessary for these accounts to be published so that the concerned people have information; so that the transparency is seen. I do not know whether it is necessary that we provide that after opening these accounts, they should be published immediately. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Isn’t that a breach of privacy by the banks? 

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I think that we are not mentioning the amounts in the account but just to publish and say that this account has been opened for this estate. I do not know whether it is necessary. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, they do not open accounts for each estate. There is an account on which they put all the money; the estates of Gulu, Kitgum and so on. It is not for every estate. 

MR AOGON: I concede. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 11 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12 

MS RWAKOOJO: Amendment of Section 18 of the principal Act. In Clause 12, in the proposed amendment to Section 18(1), substitute for the words, “the gazette” and also in “one or more local newspapers” appearing in sub-section (1) the words, “in at least one newspaper of wide national circulation and using any other means of communication as maybe appropriate for the particular estate.” 

Justification 

    1. To make the notification to be made in a newspaper of wide national circulation 
    2. To ensure that the notification is received in areas beyond where the estate is situated. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that Clause 12 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13 

MS RWAKOOJO: Amendment of section 19 of the principal Act. In Clause 13, in the proposed amendment to Section 19(1), substitute for all the words appearing after the words “the gazette” appearing in sub-section (1) with the words “at least one newspaper of wide national circulation and using any other means of communication as may be appropriate for the particular estate.” 

Justification 

    1. To make the notification to be made in the newspaper of wide national circulation. 

    2. To ensure that the notification is received in areas beyond where the estate is situated. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 13 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

New clause 

MS RWAKOOJO: Insertion of new clause. The Bill is amended by inserting immediately after Clause 13 the following; 

“Amendment of section 20 of the principal Act 

Section 20 of the principal act is amended 
    (a) By substituting for subsection (4) the following; 

	(4) the fees, charges and reimbursements authorised by this act shall be charged on then estate and paid after payment of funeral expenses and wedges due for services rendered to the deceased within three months preceding his or her death by any labourer, artisan or domestic servant.

b. 	By inserting, immediately after subsection (4) the following:

	“4(a) The fees, charges and reimbursements referred to in subsection (4) shall be deducted from any monies received by the Administrator-General in the course of the administration.” 

The justification is to align the Administrator-General’s Act to the provisions of the Succession Act especially sections 280, 281, 282 and 283, which set out the priority for the payment of fees, charges and disbursements out of the estate. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposal for a new clause. I put the question that new clause be inserted – okay, clarification from Hon. Basemera.

MS BASEMERA:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The clarification I am seeking is on how we control the powers of the Administrator- General. What if the costs are exaggerated? How do we control this? Otherwise, we seem to be putting so much power here. I am afraid it can be abused. 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, if a beneficiary to an estate is not satisfied with the handling of that estate by the Administrator-General, they can cause an inquiry. They can even sue the Administrator-General and the Administrator-General will be called to account. That way, one is able to ascertain.

THE CHAIRPERSON: In addition, the official charges are issued by the Judiciary in an instrument and so, one might have an idea on how much it costs to file, or how much it costs to swear an affidavit, how much to advertise in the Uganda Gazette or the newspaper. I think the charges are fairly standard. 

Honourable members, you have heard the proposal for a new clause. I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause created.

Clause 14

MS RWAKOOJO: In Clause 14, we propose that an amendment in Section 24 of the principal Act by substituting for the words, “outside Uganda” with the words, “in a country other than Uganda.”

The justification is for consistency with the nomenclature used in such circumstances.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 14 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15

MS RWAKOOJO: In Clause 15 the committee proposes an amendment to Section 27 of the principal Act by substituting the following: “27(1) Guardian to receive minor’s share. Where a person entitled to share under the will of the deceased person or in the distribution of an estate being administered by the Administrator-General is a child, the Administrator-General shall transfer and deliver the share of the child to the guardian of the child.

(2)	The guardian of the child shall manage the property levied to him or her in sub-clause (1) in a prudent manner and shall- 

a) 	apply the property for the benefit of the child;
b) 	take reasonable steps to safeguard the property of the child from loss or damage; and 
c)	annually account in respect of the child’s property to the Administrator-General, the surviving parent if any, or any other person as court may direct.”

The justification is in compliance with the Children’s Act and the Succession Act to require that the share of a child is transferred to the guardian of a child; to change the nomenclature used from “minor” to “child” since the word “child” is the one that is normally used; and to define the word “child.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, maybe it is not important but a minor is a minor. For instance, if you have a child of three years who cannot write – minors are children who are really young. 

A child of 16 years will write but a minor of four years has no capacity to do anything. I do not know why you want to remove the word “minor.” That person is a child but has not reached the age to take action. 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, the reason we agreed to the word “child,” when making this amendment, was that we are also looking at the Succession Act. 

When we get there, you will see that we have made a provision for the welfare of the child. If we go with the strict interpretation of a child, it stops at 18 yet we are trying to stretch the welfare to 25, considering the time our students take to go through school. This is up to around 25 when they finish university. That is why we want to use the word “child” in a blanket sense instead of the word “minor.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: A minor is a minor. You know, for instance, a child of 12 cannot commit an offence in law, that one is a minor by law.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, our understanding is that this child and minor be interpreted depending on the circumstances and the law. 

If it is in respect to succession where we are referring to welfare and we are saying that the welfare should cater for a child yet we know we want to stretch it to around 25 years, we would rather have the word “child” accommodated there. 

But if we are talking about a minor in terms of dole incapax or the capacity to commit a crime, that would be the criminal sense and that would be different. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: This Administrator-General administering an estate, maybe he is dividing the estate among all the people. There is a child of six months, one of seven years and a child of 23. The portion of the child of seven months is given to the guardian because this person is a minor. Even the one of seven years – 

MS RWAKOOJO: Madam Chairperson, when you look at the Succession Act, you will realize that a “minor” is defined as “any person who has not attained the age of 21 years” and “minority” means “the status of such a person.” 

“Children” refers to the lineal descendants to include legitimate, illegitimate and adopted children. 

We thought the definition of the word, “child” would rather encompass all this.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are bringing a law, which we haven’t done, which is in the future.

MS RWAJOOKO: We keep cross-referring to it. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But we haven’t done it.

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, what the minister said is that they are taking care of children who could have gone beyond the age of 18 but are still within the school age. 

You are aware of a situation in the north - I remember at one time Parliament was petitioned for assuming that children come out of university at the age of 25 when actually children from the north, because of the experience we went through, were coming out of the university at the age of 25 when the children of the north, because of the experience we went through, were coming out of the university at the ages of 30 to 34. Does it hurt this Act if we specify the age by stating the bracket – school age bracket?

MR KAFUUZI: I simply made reference to the Succession Bill, which we have not yet amended. I humbly request that we discuss it when we reach there.


THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the principal Act has a provision for a minor. There is a reason for having that provision. Therefore, you cannot just wish it away. The law envisages a situation where someone cannot manage their own affairs.

MS NAMUGANZA: Madam Chairperson, I wish to seek more clarification because the committee chairperson said that the Administrator-General can transfer property to a guardian to look after this child and in this case, I take your serious note of a minor.

I have not heard the supervisory role of the Administrator-General after handing over this property. This is because, as you may be aware, many guardians, especially of minors or those who are not empowered enough, might say “I am going to take care of this baby” when they are just interested in the property.

If the Administrator-General just transfers the property to the guardian, I do not know whether his eye remains there or now he says that everything is to be taken care of by the guardian who may be coming near this child just because of the property. We need stringency there.

MS RWAKOOJO: Madam Chairperson, we concede to your advice regarding a minor being a minor and then having the definition of the word “child” but having both minor and child. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is important because a minor is a minor. At least a child of 20 years can speak on their own but a minor cannot. Instead of substituting, we should add this proposal.

Honourable members, we add a new subsection under Section 27 as proposed by the chairperson. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16

MS RWAKOOJO: In the proposed amendment to section 30 of the principal Act, substitute the word “Shs 15 million” with the words “2,500 currency points.”

Justification:

To harmonise the provisions with sections 2(5) and 4(5) of the Administrator-General’s Act, which expanded the value to 2,500 currency points and to express the varying currency points for consistency and to shield it from being eroded by inflation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause -(Mr Aogon rose_)- Hon. Aogon has a problem with currency points. (Laughter)
 

MR AOGON: I would like to find out whether the chairperson intended to get the value that is equivalent to Shs 15 million. If you are talking about 2,500 currency points, that would be Shs 50 million. To be certain, did you mean to attain that value of Shs 15 million or Shs 50 million as currency points? Thank you.

MS RWAKOOJO: Yes. I think we had agreed to have 750 currency points, which would come to Shs 15 million. That of 2,500 currency points would become Shs 50 million and so, it is 750 currency points.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the currency points be adjusted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17

MS RWAKOOJO: In the proposed amendment to Section 35(2), delete all the words appearing after the word “fund”.

The justification is that the exemption is in conflict with Section 2(2) of the Administrator-General’s Act as well as Article 21(1) in so far as it creates a distinction between the matters that can be suffered by the Administrator-General and legal person or any other person in Uganda whose accounts can be attached.

Section 2(2) of the Administrator-General’s Act specifically grants legal personalities to the Administrator-General. This means the Administrator-General can be sued or sue or suffer all things that a legal entity may suffer in Uganda.

Government decentralised the payment of costs, damages interests and any related expenses of litigation in any suit against a Government ministry, body or agency.

By exempting the attachment of the accounts of the Administrator-General, the successful party on these suits will not be able to realise the fruits if its labour.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The Administrator-General has no resources other than the money of the estates.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, the Administrator-General is not a vote. It is under the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. The money it holds is trust money for the beneficiaries in estates being administered by the Administrator-General.

Under Section 35 of the Administrator-General’s Act, “The revenues of the Government shall be liable to make good all sums required to discharge any liability which the Administrator-General, if he or she were a private administrator, would be personally liable to discharge except when the liability is one which neither the Administrator-General nor any of his or her agents could, by the exercise of reasonable diligence, have averted; and in either of those cases the Administrator-General shall not, nor shall the revenues of the Government, be subject to any liability.”

The Administrator-General obtains money from the administration of estates for distribution to the respective beneficiaries. Attaching the Administrator-General’s accounts, which is not an independent vote, will starve the beneficiaries of their entitlement. I beg to submit.


THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I appeal to you not to disturb Section 35. All it is saying is that where the Administrator-General has been sued, the Government will meet that obligation because the money, which is with the Administrator-General, is for the estates. We should not tamper with Section 35.

MS RWAKOOJO: Madam Chairperson, I believe we have understood that because it comes out well in section 35 and we concede to that. We would be using the monies of the estates of deceased people, which would be unfair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 17 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, do we have any amendments?

MS RWAKOOJO: In Clause 18, repeal of Section 37 of the principal Act.

For Section 37, substitute the following: 

“Distribution of estate

After completion of the administration of an estate by the Administrator-General or his or her agent, the Administrator-General or his or her agent shall distribute the balance among such persons as appear to be entitled to it and remit the amounts so due by bank transfer, bank draft, registered money order or postal order or any other method, as the Administrator-General or agent considers necessary.”

The justification is –

    1. To remove the threshold and to allow transfer of such property to any person who is entitled to share in the estate;

    2. To impose an obligation on the Administrator-General to distribute the proceeds of the estate to the rightful beneficiaries.

    3. The proposal to delete Section 37 will create a lacuna in the law in so far as it removes the mechanism for the distribution to the beneficiaries of the estate, as well as to persons who are outside the territorial jurisdiction of Uganda.

    4. The deletion will also allow the Administrator-General to retain property of the estate, thereby unjustly enriching the Administrator-General, to the detriment of the beneficiaries of the estate;

    5. To expand the provision to cater for the distribution of the estate by the Administrator-General.

MR AOGON: I would just love to earn the wisdom of the committee to find out whether there should not be a formula, when distributing this money; the balance. What formula is the Administrator-General going to apply? Is he simply going to divide without a proper formula? Is it pro rata? Is proportionality going to be applied or he just decides that this one is bigger than the other one? Is he basing on the height or is it not necessary to have a formula?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General, why are you seeking to delete this clause? Why are you also repealing it and what are you replacing it with?

MR KAFUUZI: I am not sure, if I have got you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are proposing to repeal section 37. Why and with what are you replacing it?

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, it means now I have to make reference to the Succession (Amendment) Bill, once again, because that is the one we intend to use to cure; the one we are deleting here. If we leave it as it is now and pass the Succession (Amendment) Bill, then we shall have to come back.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The headnote says, “Disposal of insignificant balances” that is what Section 37 deals with; insignificant balances.

MR KAFUUZI: Briefly, I can say that in our proposed amendment to the Succession (Amendment) Bill, we are creating percentages, which will cater for this. There will be no balances after that if we go with the formula as we proposed.

MR AOGON: The amendments on the Succession Bill are not yet on the Floor and I do not find it proper to refer to something, which is yet to come. What if they do not go through, what will happen? Anticipation is not in order.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General, our rules preclude us from legislating in anticipation. Let us deal with the Bill, which is here. Forget the Succession Bill; it is not here. What is before us is this Bill. 
I put the question –

MR EDWARD OTTO: Madam Chairperson, with respect to the Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) (Amendment) Bill, I am privy to some best practices that actually provide for ranking, when distributing the residue of the estate where, for example - although, this is mostly in western jurisdictions, where spouses are given about 50 per cent plus the children.

I think that creating a schedule here, where some sort of ranking analogous to what is in the succession law, probably might be a way to deal with this matter. We could have a schedule, particularly to deal with this, as opposed to looking at another Act altogether. 

We could create, like in the Administration of Estates Act, generally, you have schedules which rank the distribution. In most cases, it is because some of these jurisdictions are based on nuclear families. You find a spouse gets like 50 per cent, the children maybe like 30 per cent and then other dependents.

I think having a schedule in this case would probably be a way to cure this, as opposed to trying to deal with it through another Act altogether. Thank you.

MR KAFUUZI: I am sorry to dwell on this but on insignificant balance, you are looking at Shs 2000, Shs 20,000 and then you are asking the Administrator-General to transfer it by electronic transfer. The process alone is – That is why we propose a deletion in the hope that we cater for this in our coming Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the Shs 500 in the law here was of 1933. So, it is a lot of money. It was not Shs 2000. Why don’t you take what the committee has proposed? 

MS RWAKOOJO: Madam Chairperson, I want to ask that they go by our position.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think the headnote should not be “distribution of estate” because this is a residue of the estate.

MS RWAKOOJO: Yes, it is.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, I think you just use the old marginal note of insignificant balances because this is a residue.

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, can I seek clarification? Can the chairperson of the committee clarify to us what the specific definition of insignificance is? From there, maybe we will be able to find a way out. How much is it? How do you translate it in monetary terms; that word “insignificance”. Thank you.

MMS RWAKOOJO: The only guidance I have is the Shs 500, that was provided for in section 37 - it reads “After completion of the administration of an estate by the Administrator-General or his or her agents, if the net balance for distribution amongst heirs abroad is less than Shs 500, the Administrator-General may distribute the balance amongst such persons, as appear to be entitled to it and remit the amount so due by bank draft, registered money or postal order”. 

I honestly cannot tell what would be insignificant.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, but this is in the Act. This is what the present law is. If you change it to residue after distribution-

MS RWAKOOJO:  For the headnote?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, because this is what remains after you have distributed.

MS RWAKOOJO: Yes. I think that sounds better. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us change to residue after distribution, then we say after completing it etc. Honourable members we –

MR AOGON: That issue that was suggested by honourable of having a schedule attached - because the residue may not be that residue of 1933 which is 500; it might be a significant residue. We have not defined the word “insignificant.” Therefore-

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have abandoned the word “insignificant” and said “residue after distribution.”

MR AOGON: Will we then go back about the amount?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes.

MR AOGON: That is okay, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us amend the headnote to read “residue after distribution” of estate, and then we take the proposal by the committee. I now put the question that section 18 be amended as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

The schedule, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.43
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto?

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, and the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.44
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered a Bill entitled, “The Administrator-General’s (Amendment) Bill, 2019” and passed it as follows: 

Clause 1 was deleted, Clause 2 passed without amendment, Clause 3 amended as proposed by Attorney-General, Clause 4 amended as proposed by Attorney-General, Clause 5 amended as proposed by the committee, Clause 6, no amendment, clause 7 amended by insertion of a new clause, Clause 8 passed without amendment, Clause 9 passed without amendment, Clause 10 passed with amendment, Clause 11 (insertion of a new clause after clause 10)  passed with amendment, Clause 12 amended, Clause 13 amended, Clause 14 insertion of a new clause passed, Clause 15 amended, Clause 16 amended, Clause 17 passed without amendment, Clause 18 passed with amendment, Clause 19 passed, Clause 20 passed.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.46
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE ADMINISTRATOR-GENERAL’S (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

5.46
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Administrator- General’s (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Administrator-General’s (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be read the third time and do pass?

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE ADMINISTRATOR-GENERAL’S (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2021”

THE SPEAKER: Members titled settled and Bill passes. Thank you very much. (Applause)

MS RWAKOOJO: Madam Speaker, allow me to thank you very much for steering us through the passing of the Administrator-General’s (Amendment) Bill, 2021. I would like to thank my members of the committee and members of the House for your worthy contributions. This is a very old law and it was dear to me because that was the first department I worked in in the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs many years ago. Thank you so much everybody. God bless you. 

Oh! Thank you, Attorney-General, pardon me, last but not least, thanks to you Attorney-General.

5.48
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, I wish to thank the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and the chairperson. I wish to thank you, the Speaker, for your stewardship. Our earlier mix up was because we were given leeway to harmonise and we did have a discussion with the mover - the private member of the Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2019.

Perhaps, now, you can guide us because having harmonised with her, we are yet to forward our harmonised position to the committee. We fear to have a similar confusion that we have just gone through. We seek your guidance but other than that, I wish to thank everybody, my senior colleagues who have participated in this. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I believe it is still necessary to have the backing of the committee to your proposals. Therefore, you could use a few hours to do that. We shall not take it up today, so that we give you time to organize yourselves.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, normally when a Bill is passed in this House, there are several members who persevere and make sure that there is a lively debate before we reach consensus; clause by clause. However, it has become a practice that the chairperson of the committees and the minister responsible - they appreciate the Speaker, the committee and they do not appreciate other - you know the general public like us -(Laughter)

Therefore, I am expressing my disappointment on behalf of several of us, who persevere to make sure that the “baby” is delivered properly. I would like the minister and the team to amend their ways of expressing appreciation. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think you are quite in order. The ordinary people are here in big numbers – (Laughter).

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, to error is human, and maama and senior colleagues and all Members of Parliament who have taken part in this exercise. I thank you all. 

I have heard people whisper here that they want to call Hon. Aogon “currency point” because he really insisted on it, demanding for clarity. It is very important.

Our Leader of the Opposition, Mama Cecilia, my colleagues the ministers and all Members of Parliament, thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: On behalf of the House, let me thank the ministers and members of the committee, especially the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. It has carried a big burden on their back to ensure that we have better laws.

I also thank members who are always here to ensure that business is conducted in this House. Of course, I must thank the Clerk and her team for assisting us to do our work. Thank you.
 
We shall not go to the Succession Bill today. As you have indicated, there are things you still need to work out. I am sure the committee members are here. Work these out when you can meet.

There are some other items on the Order Paper, which we can handle. For instance, item No. 8. I think it is for laying of a Bill.

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE LANDLORD AND TENANT BILL, 2019 AS RETURNED BY H.E THE PRESIDENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 91(3) (B) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND RULE 142 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

5.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (LANDS) (Ms Persis Namuganza): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay “The Landlord and Tenant Bill, 2019” as returned by His Excellency the President to be reconsidered by Parliament. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure for perusal and report back. Please, do it urgently because time is of the essence.

Can we handle item No.10. I do not know whether the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is ready with their report on the coffee Bill.

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, I serve under that committee but I do not see my chairperson here. However, I am aware that the committee has already handled that work.

THE SPEAKER: So, we are waiting for your report?

MR AOGON: The report is already signed though I am not sure if it has been uploaded on the iPads. 

THE SPEAKER: The chairperson and the vice chairperson are not here. Alert them to be here tomorrow. Is the Committee on National Economy here for item No.11? 

We can also alert the chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee (Local Government) to be ready for tomorrow under item No.12. Item No.13 should be ready for tomorrow. 

The chairperson of the Committee on Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and items No.14 and No.15 should be ready for tomorrow.

Our people on the succession Bill may not be ready in time.  We shall just do the reports.

5.55
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Lawrence Bategeka): Madam Speaker, I rise to present the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to Euros 69 million from Agence Francaise de Developpement (AFD) to finance the construction of water and sanitation infrastructure and associated activities in the district of Isingiro.

Before I proceed to present the report, allow me to lay the following documents on Table –

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson, I have lost one of my ministers. I do not see the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for this item. The Minister of Water and Environment is not here as well. We may have issues that need answers.

MR BATEGEKA: So, can’t we proceed?

THE SPEAKER: No. Let us wait for tomorrow and we notify them to be here. Is hon. Ameede here for her motion? No? The rest are not here.

Honourable members, I thank you for the work done. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(House rose at 5.57 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 18 March 2021 at 2.00 p.m.)
