Thursday, 27 March 2014

Parliament met at 3.01 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like you to join me in welcoming a number of delegations in the public gallery; we have in front of me a delegation from the Friedrich Naumann Foundation of Germany – Please stand up. They have come to observe proceedings of Parliament. (Applause) You are welcome. We also have pupils of Mpumudde Methodist Primary School, Jinja Municipality – where are they seated? They are represented by hon. Moses Balyeku and hon. Nabirye. They are welcome. (Applause) 

We also have students and teachers of Royal Vocational Secondary School Buwoya from Buikwe District, represented by hon. Lulume and hon. Dorothy Mpiima. You are welcome. (Applause)

Hon. Members, religious leaders of Uganda have organised a thanksgiving ceremony on Monday, 31 March 2014 at Kololo Independence Grounds to start at 9.00 a.m. This is to celebrate the enactment of the Anti-Homosexuality Act. The religious leaders are thanking the President, the Speaker and Members of Parliament for their foresight and courage in this matter. The President will be the guest of honour. So, you are invited –(Interjection)– Hon. Odoi is also invited. (Laughter)

MR SAM OTADA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, ministers made responses to issues of national importance that were raised by Members of Parliament and you informed the House that hon. Gen. Aronda Nyakairima would be responding to issues of insecurity in my constituency. And it is actually the reason I am here – because I had to forego another engagement that I had for the seriousness this situation bears on my constituency and to me as an individual. So I want to seek your guidance since I do not see the minister here. How do we proceed since this matter is personal to me and I take it seriously? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, first I am surprised that you had planned to dodge the parliamentary session without informing me –(Laughter)– but yesterday, I spoke on telephone to Gen. Aronda and he assured me that he would come. And since we have just started, I still expect him to come.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LABOUR, EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, I am sorry that the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development is not yet here but will be here shortly with the papers she is supposed to lay. (Laughter)

MR WADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have high regard for hon. Rukutana. But in that ministry, I think there are five Ministers of State and the senior minister, making them six. Surely, if this team has been working in unison, wouldn’t it have been possible for the minister who is here to simply lay the documents that are expected of them and we move forward? Now that he has asked us to wait for the senior minister, how soon will she arrive and is he aware of the documents that are supposed to be brought? And the impression that hon. Rukutana wore is a clear sign that he was not serious; the much I know about hon. Rukutana is that when he is serious, he does not laugh around and since he was talking while laughing, I doubt if he was serious.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, we would like you to urge your colleague because this is a report of the Uganda Government to the United Nations on the status of women and it has never been laid here yet she promised. So we cannot relent.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, I tender our unreserved apology – of course I would have laid the paper but my good friend, hon. Wadri knows that to lay a paper, you must be in possession of it. As it turns out, I do not have the paper in my possession; my senior colleague has it and she is on the way. I really apologise for the delay. And I am not smiling; it is just that I am handsome. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, today we have several guests; again join me in welcoming the Women Council of Mukono Municipality represented by hon. Nambooze and hon. Peace Kusasira – oh, and hon. Bakaluba, the neighbour –(Laughter)

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE TO RULE 176 (4) and (7) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

3.10
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you are aware, the former Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, has not subscribed to any sectoral committee due to the nature of his position. Madam Speaker, this is to request you to include hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi on the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that hon. Nandala-Mafabi be part of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in relation to that, we had deferred the decision on the Appointments Committee but we do have some work which has to be done. So, I propose that we take the decision and if there are changes, we can make them later. 

Okay, I put the question that the Committee on Appointments as proposed be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON ENERGY ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE ELECTRICITY SUB-SECTOR IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as you recall, we had a lengthy debate on this matter yesterday and at the end of the day we agreed that we go and reflect both on the report and on the debate. I have also had time to look at the report together with the annexures. 

One, I find that the minister who was then acting as Minister of Energy wrote a letter to the Minister of Finance – that is why yesterday I asked Members the nexus between that letter and the tariff because I have not seen how that letter becomes the tariff. Unless someone can convince me about that – the letter to the minister is for Ministry of finance, it is not a letter to the Electricity Regulatory Authority. Where is the meeting point of those two?

MR OBOTH OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It was our view from the evidence before us that the loss factor was embedded in the tariff. But in our submission in fact in regard to rising of the cap up to 38, we did not in any way say that that was into the tariff. But we are condemning the irregularity of doing it the way it was done; that was the concern. But the issue of tariffs came more so during the debate here. 

THE SPEAKER: You know, if something is irregular, you should also say how it has happened. If you read the letter of the minister, he was following up on the letter of his minister. He said, “Our letter” and he said so in the letter.

MR FOX ODOI: Madam Speaker, my nephew, hon. Oboth Oboth is a very fair-minded person. I want to go on record as West Budama North that I have indicated to him that we find this recommendation extremely unfair to hon. Bataringaya. 

If you read this recommendation verbatim, it says: “The committee further recommends that hon. Bataringaya, former Minister of State for Energy currently holding the post of Minister of State for Education, be held personally and politically responsible for…” – this is the part which is almost offending, - “…negligence when he sanctioned the raising of the loss factor capping from 33 percent to 38 percent contrary to an earlier position by the substantive minister.”

Madam Speaker, as you have correctly stated, there were a series of communication between the Ministry of Energy and the Ministry of Finance. The communication of hon. Bataringaya was the last in the chain. Now, the position of the ministry as stated in their response is that at this particular time, hon. Bataringaya was holding the portfolio of Minister of Energy in the absence of hon. Migereko who was away on official duty. 

So, for us to sit as a Parliament and condemn this man to holding political responsibility and personal responsibility, for negligence that is not proved beyond a shadow of doubt, would be very unfair. I request, Madam Speaker, that my wonderful nephew withdraws this recommendation and we move on. 

DR KASIRIVU: Madam Speaker, can I therefore move a motion that this recommendation be deleted? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nambooze, you were not here during the debate yesterday; do not say: “Ayee”. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to put this straight. Let us understand what a loss is. Whenever there is loss which is susceptible to Government of Uganda, it means in financial terms that it translates in a figure where one party will have to pay. And having listened to what our colleagues have said, it looks like the senior minister and the junior minister must both be held liable. I want to refer to page 57 of the report. It talks about rebate offered by UETCL to Umeme Ltd from 2005 to 2011. What does ‘rebate’ mean? “Rebate” means money paid by Government of Uganda to Umeme for maintaining a certain specific loss and rate – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you explained that very well yesterday. What I want to see is where in that letter the minister instructs ERA to raise the tariff. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the senior minister talked about the loss; on 17 November 2006 - Annex No. 4 says the Minister of Energy was saying that the loss should be maintained at 33 percent. Madam Speaker, Minister Bataringaya wrote confirming about that letter and talks about amendments. The amendments he talked about were derived from the minutes of the meeting of 23rd November, which is also attached as annex 3 which talks about moving from 33 to 38 percent. The amendment the minister is referring to is as a result of the meeting of 23rd November, in which – see paragraph one, which says that the threshold be maintained at 38 percent loss and 20 percent non-collection. You realise that the minister now moved from 33 percent to 38 percent of loss and 20 percent non-collections. The minutes are also attached.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, can you explain the meaning of “threshold”? All it is saying is: don’t exceed this.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I can explain that, Madam Speaker. The “threshold” means “don’t exceed this and below this, you are allowed.” When you look at the table, the minister says they never went above 33 percent. But what was the rationale of moving from 33 to 38 percent? The moment they moved from 33 to 38 then 34.4 came in and you can see it the table. Also 35 and 26 came in. That meant – (Interruptions)

MR TIM LWANGA: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for giving way. Madam Speaker, when you look at that letter of 17th November, you realise that the most important paragraph is the third paragraph. It reads thus: “This is therefore to grant our final approval to the restructuring of the Umeme concession subject to review of the default threshold for the distribution losses and collection rates currently held at 38 percent and 20 percent to a more acceptable level. Current figures for loss reduction of 33 percent and collection rate of 10 percent could be considered as acceptable benchmarks.”

The information I want to give is that the phrase “could be considered” meant that it could be discussed further and come to a compromise on the acceptable rate. The minister did not set any rate. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

3.30
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the same spirit - because there has been a misunderstanding of this issue – the previous recommendation that is affecting the technical people who discussed this matter should also apply because it touches the same issue. So, I request that we reconsider recommendation one at page 52 of the report.

THE SPEAKER: We will come to it later. You proceed with the other responses.

MRS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The next is recommendation 3 at page 52 of the report. I would like to say that we agree with the committee. As a matter of fact the regulator reviewed the targets for the energy losses and Umeme is expected to reduce the losses to 14.6 percent by the year 2018.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that that recommendation be adopted.

(Question out and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: What? You don’t want her to agree with what the committee said? She has agreed with the recommendation of the committee. Why are you saying no? Please proceed.

MRS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On recommendation 4 at page 52 of the report, I would like to say we agree with its content.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that that recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, we also agree with the committee’s recommendation No.5 on page 52 of the report.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that this House do adopt that recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: We concur with the recommendation of the committee on page 58.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House do adopt the recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, we further agree with recommendation one on page 69.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that this House do adopt that recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: In addition, we agree with recommendations 2 and 3 on page 69.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that this House do adopt those recommendations.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, I wish to state that we agree with recommendation 1 on page 83 of the report –(Interruption)

DR KASIRIVU: Madam Speaker, before we get to this recommendation, I want to be guided because there is a matter that I will be raising in regard to something on page 70 where the committee made a very good observation but did not make any recommendation. How do I proceed?

THE SPEAKER: Speak to it. What do you propose? What do you want us to do?

DR KASIRIVU: Madam Speaker, at page 70 of the report, the committee made a very good observation about the irregular appointment of the ERA Board. And you are all aware that the ERA Board is a very serious agency in the sector, which makes its appointment have an effect on it. This Board was improperly constituted by the then minister. Therefore, I want to move that the minister who appointed this Board irregularly be held personally and political responsible for the mess in the sector.

Two, that the Board be reconstituted. I beg to move.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have been looking at this report for quite a while. I was also on the Natural Resources Committee and have been following developments in regard to this matter very carefully. I would like to say that if this country is democratic – if such occurrences of grave mismanagement in a sector that is headed by a political leader takes place and we let the technocrats take responsibility while letting off the hook the political leaders who are given that docket to supervise –

THE SPEAKER: Which area are you addressing? There is no general debate. Address his proposal. We finished the general debate.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, this book is very voluminous and I don’t specialise in electricity; even if you asked me how much the tariff is, I don’t know but I am just seeking guidance. At the end of this debate, can we be told how much the tariff is going to reduce to because we may be just talking to ourselves. The ordinary Ugandan wants to know how much the Umeme tariff is going to reduce because Uganda has the second most expensive tariffs in the world. Can we be told? You can continue debating and voting on the rest but the minister should tell us.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you have an opportunity to ask questions for oral answer from the minister. Let us proceed. He has moved a motion. Minister what do you say about his proposal?

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, I recognise the concern raised by the honourable member and this is an area that the ministry is working on to ensure that the Board is strengthened and having the appropriate competencies so that it is able to carry out its work.

THE SPEAKER: No. That is in the future but this is a finding that was not properly constituted.

MR REMEGIO ACHIA: Madam Speaker, the committee was clear in its finding that the Board was improperly constituted according to the law. How can we continue to work with a Board which was not legally constituted? I agree with the hon. Atwooki that the Board of ERA be properly constituted and you know this Board is in charge of immense decisions affecting the electricity consumers in this country. They have to understand the formula and they have to understand how the tariff is being set. They have to know the economics of the energy consumption in this country. How can we entrust such decisions to a Board which is an illegal body to make decisions for the country? 

Madam Speaker, during the concession time between 2006 and 2009, this Parliament approved Shs 1.3 trillion as subsidy. It is this Parliament that stopped the subsidy. So, we cannot go on with this illegal body. Let the Board be constituted properly.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, if you read through, it is clear that there is a conflict of interest and the moment there is a conflict of interest and you do not declare, you are held liable. I think we should demonstrate that we are above protecting people for the sake of it. It is clear hon. Hillary Onek is the chairperson of Packwach Power, an electricity company, while Mr Apile Santo who is the current chairman of ERA is the finance director in the same company. The chairman goes and picks his finance director from his company and appoints him the chairman of the board. Even a P1 kid can see that this is total abuse of office and that nobody should come up to defend people who are abusing office. 

Madam Speaker, if Parliament is serious, it must take a decision on this. I want to support what hon. Atwooki has raised: 
    1. That hon. Hillary Onek first of all be personally held liable and politically liable for abuse of office.
    2. The Board they appointed be disbanded immediately and a new Board be put in place. The reason I am raising this is that the information on the report is clear and I don’t know why my good chairman whom I respect forgot to – (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, I don’t want to lose the good track of the former leader of opposition. The reason we left the report on hon. Hillary Onek and the ERA board hanging in balance was that during the investigation, we established a conflict of interest but also we established that the matter was in court. I would have been glad to know from the minister now whether it has been disposed off and this Parliament is still at liberty to fill in the gap.

THE SPEAKER: What was the matter which was in court?

MR OBOTH: The IGG was investigating this matter and I think some two former employees of ERA, engineer Frank Ssebowa and Samuel Kwesigabo, took the board to court and they were bringing out some of these issues. So, we didn’t want to be sub judice and eventually we left it hanging. 

THE SPEAKER: You know our practice; if you recall, when our Committee on Local Government Accounts were discussing some local government accounts, where they found matters were in court, they indicated that this matter is in court in the report.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to thank my chairman who has given me information I wasn’t privy to. Despite the fact that there was no court ruling that the ERA Board is properly constituted, I want to propose that, Madam Speaker, you put a question raised by hon. Atwooki that hon. Hillary Onek be held politically and personally liable for abuse of office and secondly, we disband this board which was illegally put by a person who abused authority entrusted to him.

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, I need to correct one thing; the Board was not illegally constituted. That is not correct; it was legally and regularly constituted. However, the matter pertaining to the conflict of interest is still in court and that is why my response was that yes, this is an issue we are looking into to ensure that the competences which are lacking in the Board are going to be addressed so that we can have a fully constituted Board to be able to effectively run the affairs of the regulator.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you see, the committee says that the composition of the Board of ERA is not in accordance with the Electricity Act with respect to qualification, expertise and conflict of interest, so if it’s not in accordance with the Act then it is void.

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, I looked at it, I compared what the existing board membership is and the Act and there was only one area of weakness where it required a member of the board to be an engineer with experience in the power sector. There is an engineer on the board but she doesn’t have experience in the power sector.

THE SPEAKER: Then it is not properly constituted.

MR FOX ODOI: Madam Speaker, the evidence on record speaks volumes. You cannot have an employee of a regulated entity as a chairperson of a regulator. The regulator is an employee of a regulated entity speaks volumes. I would hasten to say that even a deaf person can hear this evidence speaking. We request hon. Muloni to concede that we pass the motion moved by hon. Kasirivu Atwooki that this Board be disbanded. We are only arming her to clean up the sector and the people who created the mess must clean up their mess.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the report be amended –

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, my submission is for hon. Kasirivu to re-state his recommendation and then we pass something we know. That is all I wanted. Let him re-state because he was amending a recommendation and I want him to amend it properly.

THE SPEAKER: No, I put the question that the report be amended as proposed by hon. Atwooki.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the recommendation do form part of the report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, minister you can now move.

MRS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The recommendation –(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Guidance, Madam Speaker, on something small.

THE SPEAKER: We have finished with that.

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, we agree with recommendation No. 1 on page 83 of the report. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that this House do adopt that recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, we concur with recommendation No.2 on page 83 of the report - (Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, we have just passed a motion moved by hon. Atwooki Kasirivu where we have agreed unanimously that the Board be disbanded. Is it not procedurally right for us to deal with the issue of the staff who handled the contract yet the same staff is now the political head of the sector? Is it not conflict of interest? It is a consequential kind of issue. We should take it up consequentially because we should not deal with petty or small things and we ignore bigger things. At the time the contract was signed - 

THE SPEAKER: What recommendation are you talking about?

MRS OGWAL: Consequential. We have just moved -

THE SPEAKER: No, consequential must flow from something. From which recommendation is it flowing?

MRS OGWAL: We are talking about conflict of interest. Based on the motion which we have just passed, I have observed and I want to draw the attention of the Speaker and the House to the fact that the same person that was a substantive managing director of the company who presided over the signing of the contract is now the political head of the sector. Doesn’t that constitute conflict of interest? I want your guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think you will move that amendment at the end. Let us deal with the recommendation of the committee. Yes, please do not smuggle; you will have time to make your proposals but do not smuggle. We are dealing with ERA. Hon. Ogwal, olimba naawe.

MRS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. We are in agreement with recommendation No. 2 on page 83 of the report.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that that recommendation be adopted by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: Recommendation No. 3 on page 83 of the report; Madam Speaker, while we recognise the concern that the committee vests into issues in the Energy Sector, I wish to report that there is already a sector wide committee which is constituted by those representatives that the committee is talking about, which meets to review matters regarding the energy components of the sector.

In addition, we have quarterly reporting to the Prime Minister who also reports to Parliament coupled with the ministerial statements and the performance reviews that Government carries out. So, while we recognise this importance, we are saying that the committees are in place and the Leader of Government Business - the Prime Minister - will continuously report to Parliament coupled with the various areas and times that we report the matters to Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: When were they established?

MRS MULONI: They were saying we put in place an energy coordination committee, which reports to Parliament on a quarterly basis.

THE SPEAKER: I am just asking, when did the government set this up? Maybe it was after the report was published? I do not know.

MRS MULONI: No, it has been on.

MR MULONGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister is right that they have a sector wide oversight committee but what the committee did indicate here is different from hers. The committee understood the strategic importance of the energy sub sector and its dynamics; the breadth of this energy sub sector that requires focused attention. The committee she is referring to is an over working one; there are minerals, oil exploration and everything but the committee requires this one to focus on the energy sector particularly. So, I beg that the House upholds the committee’s recommendation. Thank you.

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, as my honourable brother has said, the sector wide committee is on energy. The other committees are on other areas. The Petroleum one has its own committee.

DR BAYIGGA: Madam Speaker, it is very difficult to verify what the minister is talking about unless she lays on Table the names of those people constituting such sector wide committees as evidence of having formed such a committee. I therefore request you, Madam Speaker, to put the question in respect of the committee’s recommendation. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, it seems that you have no objections to the proposal; you are only saying that you already have it. So, if you have it then let us confirm and you will report back. I put the question that the recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, we concur with recommendation No. 4 on page 83 of the report.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that that recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: We concur with recommendation No. 5 on page 84 of the report.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that this House do adopt that recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, we do not agree with recommendation no. 1 on page 116 of the report. Government is going to set up a small group that is going to review all the agreements that have been undertaken in the sector and come up with areas that can be reviewed so that the concessions can progress well.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, honourable minister for giving way. I have just heard a statement where you said that Government is going to set up a small group. Can you speak like you are speaking to Members of Parliament? Which group? When? Qualify it by whom? Is it a malwa group? Is it Arrow Boys? Don’t just come and say Government is going to set up a small group to manage huge multi-nationals like Umeme. Can you be a little clear? I am talking as a former chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurances. (Laughter)

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, I am looking at a small team of competent people who are knowledgeable in the sector and have the technical expertise that will be able to review all those agreements and identify the areas for a review in all the concession agreements. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas the minister chooses to sound plain, the minister does not admit. As you may recall, we had a specific term of reference to scrutinise the provisions of the agreement and we came out with some of the provisions that we deemed not favourable to Uganda or to the people of Uganda. Those were the terms of reference. For the minister to come and say that she will form a small group of knowledgeable people – and at least we looked at ourselves as knowledgeable then and we have pointed out sections of the provisions in the concession agreement and we said this was not good or that was not good. 

Madam Speaker, we are inclined to absolutely reject the proposal of forming a small group and if anything, this committee report has been with the minister or before this Parliament for over a year. Will the small group work only after adoption of the report? We needed something that would comfort Ugandans on whether Government can acknowledge that they were poorly negotiated terms and provisions in this agreement. That is what we needed and not the knowledge of forming a small group.  

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Oboth Oboth and the committee. For some of you who do not know hon. Oboth Oboth, he was the Regional State Attorney for Eastern Uganda which was Mbale then and he is very objective and principled. But back to the subject, we went to South Africa one time and we were laughed at that how can a corporation of a country that got independence after Uganda be given the opportunity to lease assets of a country that helped them to get independence? And we could not answer. Therefore, this is the opportunity for this Parliament and for us not to account to ourselves only but to account to the former Members of Parliament who are here, to account to ourselves, our children and our great grandchildren by terminating this agreement so that future agreements that technical people will be signing will not carry the same virus. 

Madam Speaker, I said that by the time of negotiation, hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi was the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy. This matter came to our committee and we were promised heaven on earth. We were told that every place that has power lines within a radius of two kilometres – every homestead and trading centre will within five years be lit. It has never happened. 

We were told that the investor was going to bring a lot of money but instead, it is the Government of Uganda that has been borrowing money and handing it over to the investor in order to help them reduce technical losses which has never happened. The only way forward and I know that some people fear cost implication and costs but I want to tell you that if you want to have wonderful twins, the best is caesarean operation because if you delay with caesarean operation, the mother can die and the twins can die. It is painful but it is better for us to have caesarean operation on Umeme to terminate the contract for the future of this country. I thank you.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. The committee made observations and wrote this recommendation very carefully. We know what it takes to terminate as a country because after having gone into an agreement between two parties, the Government of Uganda and the distribution company - the moment you sign that agreement and one of you wants to walk out of that marriage, we know and we knew what it cost. I want to refer Members to Page 106 of the main report, “Scenarios in case of termination of agreement.” When we first of all looked at the concession, we found stabilisation clauses which were only working in one direction to protect the company from any losses. The company is at liberty to walk out of the agreement but even if it decided to walk out, Uganda is supposed to pay. How much? If it was the company to walk out, then we would pay US$129 million – that is if it was at the discretion of the company.

The second scenario is that if we, Ugandans, found out that this marriage was not working out, could we walk out? We were tied. It says that in case we want to walk out, yes we can but we shall pay US$147.6 million. We put these calculations before all of us if you go to that page. What about if it is a natural termination in that the concession is getting to the end of the 20 years, what will happen even in the natural termination? Uganda is supposed to pay US$98 million. 

The question that I wanted to answer was, how would we have such an agreement? The hon. Minister was saying that we can have a team of experts and I want to inform unless the minister challenges me that the minister was one of the signatories to this agreement as the Managing Director of UEDCL. My minister is well qualified. Has her expertise just increased or not? Which team? When there was disbursement of the three entities of UEB, there was generation, transmission and distribution but of course under the divestiture arrangement, the process was led by the Privation Unit. That is why you find that Mr David Ssebabi is the one who led the process for negotiation. Now what happened to Mr David Ssebabi? They had to hire transaction advisors. We hired lawyers to help us as a country and they were called “transaction advisors”. But who were these? I want to show you the irregularities in this. There was Ezekiel Tuma, a lawyer and Allan Shonubi who were the transaction advisors. 

But can we go to the incorporation of Umeme to become a company? Ugandan laws demand that even when a company and an international one at that is coming to work in Uganda, it must present original documents of incorporation in your country. They did. One of the two companies that came to form a consortium to make Umeme was Eskom from South Africa and the other was Globeq and when we looked at their document, they are from Bermuda and Eskom was South Africa. So, the two formed a consortium to make Umeme.

Now as Umeme was being incorporated, who signed on the instruments of incorporation? They were signed by Ezekiel Tuma on behalf of the two companies, Eskom and Globalist. Then the other one was Shonubi again. And these are the transactions; there could not have been any fairness! I have here the special provision period amendment to the agreement and it is the same people who still signed. So why are we describing this? This one gives us a window as Ugandans – I want to put this on record: Umeme has not done anything wrong; they have followed the agreement given to them by Government. And then someone comes here to tell me that our people acted in good faith. By the time we produced this report, we had the second highest tariff in the world, after Denmark. I want to congratulate Ugandans because as we speak now, you have surpassed Denmark by having the highest tariffs in the world. So with such a scenario, someone can come and say, “Yes, we have agreed on what happened and we can review” but I want to be advised, Madam Speaker – you are a reputable lawyer; in any agreement where two parties have signed, under what terms can you say “Parliament has asked us to review”? And do you think that Umeme, which is a business company will say, “Since Parliament passed that resolution, let us review it?” In case we are to make any amendment to review, it must be laid down there on Table. What are the factors that we want? What do we want to review? And has the company committed itself that they will accept to review terms with the government? But the committee can also go ahead and fail to agree with our terms and then we can ask them to pack and go. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’ujanga): Madam Speaker, I would like to make a brief comment on the statement that Uganda has the highest tariff in the world. On page 37 of the Minister’s response, Appendix I were comparisons of industrial electricity tariffs across the world and Uganda’s is not the highest. This information is available on the website and anybody can access it.

THE SPEAKER: Which page?

MR D’UJANGA: Page 37, Madam Speaker. The dates are all there – you can be able to read them. On the other issue of termination of the agreement, I am glad to hear that – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have high regard for hon. Simon D’ujanga because I was with him in Kyankwanzi during our time in 1991. (Laughter) And we are Cadre No.17. And by then Engineer D’ujanga was head of technical in UEB. And after that, shortly after he left Kyankwanzi, he was made the managing director of EUB. But unfortunately, he left under unclear circumstances –(Laughter)– and at that time when he left, the Member of Parliament representing his area died, whom he later replaced as MP. He would have argued like the way he used to argue when still the managing director. He told me that during his time, he seriously worked to reduce losses to 27 percent and that the tariff had gone down but because of his good work, he had to be retired.

Now, Madam Speaker, I have a document here; it is a report to the President of the Republic of Uganda, from the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development on critical issues in the energy sector, dated April 2012. On page 7, the minister then said – 

THE SPEAKER: Which document is that? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am going to read it, Madam Speaker, so that I lay it on Table; you have it in the report. The Minister of Energy then, Hillary Onek said the following on page 2: “When the losses of Umeme were set at 28 percent from 38 percent in 2010, the tariffs reduced by 10 percent from Shs 426 per unit to Shs 385 per unit. Kindly note that the exchange rate at the time was Shs 1,870 per dollar and the reduction of losses by one percent points out into a saving of about Shs 10 billion per annum. The subsidies were reduced from Shs 26 billion per quarter to Shs 7 billion per quarter.” On page 7, the same report reads, “Mr President, you need to note that Uganda is the highest charging for the rates of power.” 

So, Madam Speaker, is hon. D’ujanga, who was the MD for UEB and has been in the Ministry of Energy all along – and here we have hon. Onek, also an engineer and a senior minister, saying that Uganda’s charges on electricity are the highest – and the Minister of State comes to dispute what he said. Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have looked at this table but I do not know whether it can really help the minister because it talks about Liberia, December 2009; Zambia, December 2010; others are in 2012. I think you are comparing incomparable items. (Laughter)

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Madam Speaker, in statistics, you cannot compare numbers with different base years; it is impossible and wrong. It is meant to dupe us and is like saying that since the salary of a teacher today is Shs 400,000, it is better than that of a teacher in 1970 of Shs 20 - (Laughter) - but you do not convert the Shs 20 into the current value. That is wrong.

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, I am still holding the Floor; I sat down on a point of order.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Achia, the statistician and in trend analysis, you cannot compare things differently. So, Madam Speaker, this is duping Members of Parliament. If they can lie to us by presenting things which cannot be comparable, is it procedurally right for us to continue with this document? There could be other fatal errors in this document. 

That is why, Madam Speaker, you were right yesterday when you said that hon. Bataringaya should not be given chance to defend himself here because he appeared before the committee. Even today, the hon. Minister, hon. Muloni should not have come here to defend what she was part of. It would have been hon. D’ujanga and hon. Lokeris to do that; she was part of the people who made the faulty agreement with Government and we have proved it with the documents she had brought to us here. She wants to dupe Members of Parliament and we are not going to be part of this collusion. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us hear from the Prime Minister. 

4.11
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I am excited by the excitement of the Opposition to see me here. Madam Speaker, I want to say that unfortunately, the Attorney-General, hon. Peter Nyombi, is not feeling well and the deputy is away – (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, midday today, I had an appointment with the Attorney-General which we made yesterday. I went to the Attorney-General’s Chambers on Parliament Avenue and I found him there at midday and he went to chair a board meeting. Is it in order for the Prime Minister to lie that the Attorney-General is not well? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I did not visit the Attorney-General’s Chambers so I do not know whether he was there. But Prime Minister, the hon. Member is saying that he went to the Attorney-General’s office and found him there, working happily. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, yesterday, I did insist that the Attorney-General had to be here because there were questions that required his response. Actually I talked to him the previous day on phone and he told me that he had a problem with his eyes and he was going to see a doctor. Yesterday, when we were here, he actually moved out and I sent someone to call him because he was going to see a doctor. When he left finally, he told me – because I remained here until the end – those of you who were here may recollect that he was going to consult his doctor again and that he may not be able to join us today because of that problem. That is precisely what I am relaying. 

The point is I am here and I would like to say something on this. This issue came to Cabinet and Cabinet considered it and we thought it was a very serious matter because the point being made was that the agreements were not favourable to Uganda. The question was what was the best course of action available to us?

Following the law and the Constitution, we did task the Attorney-General to go and review not only this agreement but many others and come back with recommendations of actions to be taken. He did come back with a partial report that some of the issues he needed technical advice because they were technical in nature. But he expressed a clear opinion that termination had very severe consequences. 

I can tell you as a lawyer –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, you know it is nice to have such people in Parliament because they sometimes brighten the atmosphere. They take you off tension and put you in the range of –(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, we thought that the Prime Minister was serious. When he comes to the Floor of the House and starts anticipating people in the presence of space, what is he talking about? Can’t you point out which person you are answering; you must be serious, Mr Prime Minister. 

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, I do not know whether you were there when hon. Nankabirwa was recapping the three scenarios on termination. First, that if it was terminated at the instance of the other party, we still pay. If we terminate at our own instance, we still pay. If it is terminated by natural causes, we still pay – that is what it said. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, not only did I listen to hon. Ann Nankabirwa, I actually read what she was presenting at pages 106 and 107 of the report. Indeed the Attorney-General did make a presentation to Cabinet on this very issue. 

I was saying that as a lawyer, I would advise that first of all, it is very important that we get the final advice from the Attorney-General, but secondly, whenever termination of a contract is to be considered, it must be considered carefully so that that termination does not result in greater damage than no termination. So, on our part in Cabinet, I want to inform this House that we are still waiting for the Attorney-General after the advice of the experts, to give us that advice and then we take a position especially on the question of termination. Therefore, I would advise that Parliament does not take this decision now about termination.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Rt hon. Prime Minister is a lawyer by all standards. He knows parliamentary procedures and etiquette that by Parliament passing a resolution advising Government to terminate, it will not terminate this year. What we are saying is you go back to Cabinet and taking very careful consideration, implement our decision or get back to us. So, by saying we should defer the decision, you are kind of violating parliamentary procedure in which you are well grounded. So, can you give us the best option other than what you are proposing?

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Further clarification, Madam Speaker. The Prime Minister knows that this report has been here since 12th October and the Attorney-General has been normal and working since 12th October. We have discussed this report for all that long. However, as we come to its conclusion, Government is now asking for postponement. It will be improper for us to extend this debate again in our opinion, when the Speaker yesterday said we have to conclude it. I suppose that the Rt hon. Prime Minister is not right to propose that we extend this decision again. He is a very able lawyer. He one time acted as Attorney-General and Minister of Justice – what we notice is that Government is not willing to terminate this Umeme contract. The reasons that the minister has given to us are not good at all because the scenarios given to us by –(Interjections)– the scenarios given to us by hon. Ann Nankabirwa are good enough for us. And we are in a difficult situation – either way, we have to pay. But we are saying that let us pay now. Umeme can apply again and if they qualify - but this contract must be terminated today. Thank you very much.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Rt hon. Prime Minister, for giving me the opportunity to give you some information and clarification. I agree with what the Leader of Opposition is saying that we should not postpone this debate; we should conclude it. 

But we need to conclude it carefully because when I went to do some search on the Umeme investment, I was informed that there are Ugandans who have bought shares including –(Interjections)– just a second – including, if I am not wrong, the Parliamentary Pensions Fund –(Interjections)– please listen; I have not finished –(Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I wouldn’t have loved to rise on a point of order against my good friend and brother. I am just worried that he is deviating from the principle. We are all trying to protect Ugandans. What I seem to read from his presentation is that he is trying to blackmail Parliament to think that we should safeguard ourselves, trying to appeal to our selfishness to preserve what is wrong because we have shares in there? If we made a mistake to buy shares there and now we have realised it is wrong, I think it is not proper for us to continue. Is he therefore in order to impute that Parliament should be selfish and preserve what is wrong for its own sake?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please substantiate because I don’t want to be part of the blackmail.

MR BAHATI: Of course the honourable lady from Soroti knows that I cannot blackmail Parliament and neither can I cover up anything wrong. The point I was making is that as we make this decision, we need to be careful. And the information I want to give is that instead of saying we postpone this issue, we would rather say Government reviews it with conditions and report back to Parliament within one month. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, let me make my final point and appeal. Government does not rule out the possibility of termination. It does not certainly. The point I have made is that even when you are to terminate a contract, you must do it carefully so that you don’t cause greater damage than the reasons why you chose to terminate that contract.

Government has set up a team of experts. They have not yet reported though unfortunately, they have taken long. But certainly, they will report. So, all I ask of you is – because when Parliament passes resolutions, of course, hon. Geofrey Ekanya is right in his interpretation of the rules, which is not always the case. But he is right in the interpretation this time that when Parliament makes recommendations, Government considers them but I want you to be conscious of the message you will be sending out to investors. The message to investors is very important. Government asks this House to understand what we are doing. We would like to take all the measures we can to protect ourselves and to protect this economy.
Therefore, I recommend that we don’t pass this recommendation as it is and I accept the amendment made by hon. David Bahati which I hope we can make formally so that we adopt that and give ourselves time to handle this issue carefully.

4.31
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to speak. As we are all aware, we entered into a very bad agreement between Government and Umeme and as we all know, at that time, I think in Africa we are among the first countries to disband the whole arrangement. We were experimenting and that means that we were bound to make mistakes along the way because when you are pioneering something, normally, you find yourself in mistakes that you didn’t intend to have in the first place. Hon. Nankabirwa made a very good statement. She said that Umeme has not done anything wrong –(Interruption)

MS GRACE BYARUGABA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have been listening carefully to a colleague submitting on the Floor and she has made a statement that in this exercise, my Government which I respect so much has been experimenting on some of these activities. Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think what she was saying was that we were among the very first on this Continent to unbundle our electricity sector.

MS NYAKECHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. Honourable colleague, I said we were among the first countries to pioneer in disbanding the old system that we had, I didn’t say we were experimenting. Therefore this created complications both in the way the agreements were handled and in the way we ended up with the exaggerated losses that we are having in the country today. 

Hon. Ekanya earlier on said that we need to give Ugandans some bit of hope. We need to make them smile once again. I totally agree with my brother to that effect that we need to make Ugandans smile once again. How are we going to do it? Hon. Nankabirwa gave three different scenarios that if Umeme walked out, we would pay, if Government terminated, we would still pay. If it was natural termination, still we would pay. So how do we get to a conclusive arrangement that is going to make a quid pro quo such that all of us are happy?

I want to suggest something that I know the House is going to shout back at but I want to suggest that we sit down and we renegotiate the contract such that this will enable all of us smile once again as proposed by hon. Ekanya. Thank you.

4.34
MS KABAKUMBA MATSIKO (NRM,Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Prime Minister is asking for more time which is very genuine but I would like to ask, for how long have we been with this report? And I believe that a time of one year plus is sufficient for Government to form an opinion to consult and really give us feedback. If they have not been able to do that, how much more time do they need for them to come back to us? 

In view of that, Madam Speaker, everybody here is saying that this is a very bad agreement. How long has this agreement been in place? And until Parliament insisted that we put in place the Ad hoc committee, to review the activities in the energy sector, Government was quiet as if it was all well. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, Umeme is a company, I don’t agree with my colleague that people have shares but when we terminate this contract, we are not liquidating Umeme; it will continue as a company with other businesses and it will get more contracts and may be even renegotiate with Government. So long as it is profitable, you will continue earning your dividends. So for me, either way, even if we are staying in or renegotiating, we are going to pay and even pay more. I am of the view that we do terminate –(Applause) – and after termination, we can look into it. It may come back to the table with others or itself with Government, and before I sit, even when you are talking about renegotiation, we are talking about the Attorney-General. In this very bad agreement, all of them had a role and some of them even have a bigger role. So, who is going to renegotiate with Umeme? I believe it would be better for us to terminate and terminate now. Thank you.

4.37
MR FOX ODOI (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): I thank you, Madam Speaker. A few preliminary issues, it is on record that we have had this report for a complete year. It is also on record, at least from the point of view of the Prime Minister, that the recommendations contained in this report are serious recommendations. However, the government that has had this report for one and a half years has not shown any seriousness in dealing with the recommendations of this report.

A year ago, the government knew very well that Parliament was in the process of considering a recommendation to terminate the Umeme contract. They had a complete year to review this contract, to deal with it and report to Parliament. They didn’t do that. What did they do from the report of the Prime Minister that I have immense respect for; the Attorney-General wrote a partial opinion. For the first time in my life, I am coming across an opinion of the Attorney-General which is partial. I want to believe that a partial opinion is an inconclusive opinion or half an opinion over a serious matter like this one. It is not a serious way of handling this matter. By way of preliminary, Madam Speaker, I thought I would make those comments. 

Back to the recommendations - the recommendation is that due to the gross illegalities, we should recommend that this contract be terminated. What that ordinarily would mean is that we recommend that Government walks out of this contract. The financial implications are known. They are in the contract. You pay $147 million. Compare that to the contract running its full term where you will pay $98 million. The difference between $147 million and $98 million is probably $67 million. I failed mathematics in O’Level but I know it is about that. That is the only amount of money you would ultimately save if we sat back and allowed this contract to run its full term. (Interjections) - Can I complete then I will listen to you.

THE SPEAKER: Let him complete then I will come to you.

MR FOX ODOI: That is one scenario. From reading the report of the committee, every passing year we lose as a result of this contract. The losses are also quantifiable. So, in a 20-year period, we shall certainly have lost the $67 million that we intend to pay. Can I take that information?

MR KAMARA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been calculating exactly how much we lose as a country. It is in the agreement that we shall pay $ 121 million if we terminate this contract and it is already calculated that we have lost Shs 1.9 trillion within eight years. If this contract ends naturally, we shall pay $98 million. If we get $129 million and we subtract $98 million, we will only remain with $49 million. This money exchanged into Uganda currency is Shs 122 billion and already we have lost Shs 1.9 trillion within eight years. This also means that if we continue with this contract because we are remaining with 12 years, after 16 years, we will have paid almost Shs 4 trillion and within the next 20 years it will be Shs 5 trillion.

MRS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With due respect, the hon. Member knows very well that in the agreement there is no fixed figure that has been put, which Government would pay at any one time when the contract terminates. What is in the contract is a formula, which states that depending on the investment that Umeme has made at the time of termination, you then apply that formula less the depreciated amount.

Umeme earns a 20 percent return on investment and that is why the formula is put in the agreement because if they bring in money to invest and they earn a return on it, if they are to leave, they are not going to leave without recouping their investment. Is it in order therefore for the hon. Member to continue to mislead this House on a figure, which is even much less if Umeme was to go because they have invested more than the figure he is belying to?

Is it also in order to impute that the subsidy that Government has been paying to buy down the tariff is an investment by Umeme? Is it in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the figures came from the committee applying the formula. Please conclude.

MR KAMARA: Madam Speaker, I still insist that this contract be terminated. When you look at these losses we are making because I have only got the average of eight years, you will see that the senior minister is trying to protect this company and trying to show us that this company cannot be terminated whereas all Ugandans are suffering and crying. When you go to the constituency, everywhere the problem is Umeme and yet if we terminate this contract now, we will save more than Shs 4 trillion. Is the minister therefore interested in Uganda losing Shs 4 trillion, which we can save today?

THE SPEAKER: Let hon. Odoi conclude.

MR FOX ODOI: I thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues for the invaluable information I have received. So where are we now? From carefully listening to the Prime Minister, his position, which I take to be the position of Government, is that they have not ruled out the possibility of terminating this contract. I will put it another way. Yes, we have had one year to study this serious matter and we have not ruled out the possibility of terminating this contract. What are we saying as Parliament? That since you are considering as one of the options, terminating this contract, let us back you up. Let us advise you that it is the right thing to do and combined with the partial opinion of the Attorney-General, go ahead and terminate it.

If I got the Prime Minister correctly, he does not object to Parliament recommending that this contract should be terminated. I beg to move, Madam Speaker, that you put the question.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister, our work is finished. What remains is now in your hands. 

4.50
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Madam Speaker, I want to stand here on behalf of the people of Dokolo and of Uganda to congratulate the Parliament of Uganda for coming up with such an agreement on fundamental issues which affect all our voters. The decision that we have taken today must go on record as being correct and I want to bring just three points; we have adopted the agreement –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwal, let us finish the main recommendation and then you can come in. I will see you and I have taken note. Let us run through the other recommendations. Minister?

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker and colleagues, we concur with recommendation two on page 116 of the report.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that that recommendation be adopted by this House.

(Question out and agreed to.)

Recommendation No. 2, adopted.

MRS MULONI: We do not agree with the recommendation on page 130 of the report which is to terminate the Eskom Power Generation Concession, for the reason that the committee has advanced that it is not the fault of Eskom that the water levels went down but because of drought and therefore generation reviewed. But since then when the rains came, the water levels went back up and the two power stations are able to generate electricity. So, for that reason, we do not agree with the recommendation.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the chairperson and then hon. Odonga Otto.

4.52
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are not as a committee blaming Eskom in any way but it was a finding of fact that when the witnesses came before us, they actually informed our committee that at the time of signing the concession, the Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited was operating at 98 percent efficiency –

THE SPEAKER: Efficiency?

MR OBOTH: Efficiency, giving us the impression that there was no need – the Japhadola sometimes have a problem saying that. There was no need to actually privatise that and so among other issues, granting Eskom, a private company running that generation, the taxpayers – the electricity consumers are paying for their salary and running of that in addition to having another generation company with the public – the Government owned company called Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited whose costs are also all embedded in the tariff and that is one of the reasons why we have the electricity tariff in Uganda higher than my grandmother in Tororo can afford.

MR ODONGA OTTO: The Committee on Government Assurances also went to the power generation and we had interactions with Eskom and what came out clearly from those South Africans operating there was that the water license or certificate given to them by the Directorate of Water Development limits the amount of water released from the dam for the actual generation. When the committee went ahead to ask how a government department issues you a licence every month that does not allow you to generate all the power they need, then we came to realise that the Directorate of Water Development is heavily influenced by the Egyptian Government and so it is the Egyptian Government that determines what amount of water should be released. So, the problem is slightly far from Eskom and the Directorate of Water Development should explain why Eskom cannot get the license to generate the power they need because the amount of water being released is limited.

Secondly and importantly, one of the directors in Umeme is earning Shs248 million every month and this is also costed on the bill. What are you talking about?

4.55
MR SIMON MULONGO (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like in addition to the economic reasons given by my colleagues, to advance further my arguments on the issue of geo-hydro politics that ensued during the committee’s hearing.It is true that the country registered some high rates of drought but the witnesses that we came across and the expertise that we got from various professionals disputed the argument of drought and instead gave more ways on the construction of parallel dams at the source of the Nile as a major contributor to the draining of the lake. 

We indeed found this plausible because the lake - and Uganda has experienced drought at various times but this was not experienced. As we speak today, because of global warming and climatic changes, surely, we should be posting less rains in gross terms annually than - if the argument was to carry the day, how come that now the situation has improved? It is because one of the dams has been closed out. 

In this case, the committee carefully considered all these arguments for and against and on page 130 in addition to the recommendations, very well elucidates this argument and we believe that the committee’s recommendations need to stand. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.57
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just wanted to add onto the information that hon. Odonga Otto gave. I was on that Committee of Government Assurances that visited the dam. We actually toured up to inside the turbines and we saw how dilapidated the facility is and posing a risk. The information that we were given by the Eskom director then and who I think is still holding that office to date was that they had capacity to generate the quarter that they were given to be able to supply on the grid but because there was a syndicate between the Directorate of Water Development and the thermal plant operators, the amount of water was limited. Therefore, my suspicion, Madam Speaker and the august House is that around that time, these people tried to make the use of the thermal plant relevant and this was one of the entities which were costing the government where we were putting money for subsidy. So this deal collapsed as soon as Bujagali was commissioned. This should be an area of interest to us as Members of Parliament and Government itself because if individuals can use the main stream government institutions to collude and make money, then where is this country going?  

I would like to appeal to members that this resolution stands as recommended by the committee and therefore we oppose the minister’s proposal that we do away with this resolution. I thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you,Madam Speaker. As hon. Ekanya says, I was the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy during the Eighth Parliament and the issue of unbundling UEB was a serious one. There are many things – if we had time, we would tell Members. I remember that hon. Ekanya, hon. Lukyamuzi and I were castigated when we opposed the disbanding of UEB. There is a book which I want to interest Members to read; it is called Economic Hitmen. If you read it, all the hitmen do the following: They want to build dams, generate power, build refineries and drill oil.

There was a director in the Privatisation Unit called Mr Nyiki- (Interjections) - yes, that one; his name sounds like that of Bishop Zac Niringiye. This director was the one basically at the forefront of disbanding UEB. As soon as he completed the work, Eskom employed him in South Africa. The reason was because he had done a good job. That is what we could call an economic hitman. 

The committee recommended very well that this hitman is now trying to generate power when the government also has a company doing the same. So, Madam Speaker, I do not see the reason – and that is why I agree with the Opposition Chief Whip that yesterday we never allowed Dr Kamanda Bataringaya to discuss the report. Even hon. Muloni should not have been allowed to discuss it because she has been involved in the economics of hitmen from the beginning; she is the signatory and has done – so, when you see her defending things, she is defending her interests and actions. (Interjections) And by the way, I can go farther because I know where she comes from.

So, Madam Speaker –(Interjections)– Let her try and she will see. I would propose that she has no moral authority to speak on this matter because she is part and parcel of the mess. And at an appropriate time, we shall make more amendments to this. The committee’s recommendation was even light; it should have called for the termination of the contract and refund of our money. But they simply called for the termination of the contract. Anyway, let us go by that. However, hon. Muloni does not have the moral authority to get up and speak on this matter.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think I have a difficult situation now; she happens to be the minister in charge of the sector. How can I stop her from speaking about the sector? Let us hear from hon. Achia.

5.04
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Madam Speaker, there is a bigger picture for us to look at in the energy sector. And it has appeared partially clear from this recommendation. On the unbundling of UEB, one of the things which has clearly emerged – and it is on record – from a budget where we used to send less than Shs 2 billion and equivalent of that money today, today with the costs in terms of salaries and maintenance of this board, we are spending more than Shs 120 billion to run ERA, UEDCL, UETCL and Umeme and yet, we would have run them at less than 10 percent. That is one of the factors that have happened in Uganda today.

Secondly, in the process of unbundling the energy sector, this sector was like the lost cows. You know when you bring cows to a kraal, some of them remain outside the kraal. The herdsman who was supposed to take care of Uganda’s interests during the day, turned out to be the hyena at night. (Laughter) That is why you find that instead of taking care of our interests, Shonubi – a good person today is a hyena at night – signing an agreement with very unfavourable terms. 

Madam Speaker, I suggest that besides looking at small recommendations by the committee in terms of UEDCL, Eskom, we need an institutional review of all the arrangements, which were put in place with regard to the energy sector in Uganda. What are the costs and benefits of having UETCL, UEDCL, ERA and all these and yet, we have the Ministry of Energy? If we are talking about promoting efficiency in the sector, it can be achieved, not only by terminating the contract; it will be achieved by holistically looking at the sector and reviewing the institutional arrangement in place so that we get a comprehensive way forward on how we can manage our energy sector. 

That is my proposal, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Are you proposing that you want to make an amendment later?

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Madam Speaker, I want to move that – 

THE SPEAKER: Later? (Interjection) Okay, we have noted your desire. 

5.07
MR ROBERT SSEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know that what we are deliberating here will have long-term implications to our country as an investment destination. Secondly, we, as the finance committee, are deliberating on a bill called “Public-Private Partnership”. It is unfortunate that at the time the government instituted this partnership with the private sector, we did not have this law. The implication is that once a government enters a contract with a private party, those clauses are binding to the government and must be followed to the letter. 

The whole of this contract with Eskom cannot be bad but maybe some clauses are bad. And I urge Parliament not to ask for the total termination –(Interjections)– hon. Members, I happened to have a brother and a cousin who worked with Eskom at the time they were entering that dam. One of the things we should talk about is that we cannot have five or six generators on an aged dam like Kiira Dam. So, the capacity for Eskom to pump as much as they would have wished depends on the amount of water we have, the age of the dam and many other benchmarks. (Interjections)

I would urge you Members not to go for the contract termination but rather for the review as may be informed by consultants. (Interjections)  Madam Speaker, please, protect me from Members who are heckling.

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members.

MR SSEBUNYA: Hon. Members, the issue of Eskom, as others have been debating, is that Eskom is the angel and they are not willing to listen to the water development, which is an institution in this country. So, how can we trust what Eskom is saying and not what the department of water development is saying? If they are deciding and giving certificates to a corporation saying, “Please, pump as much as this”, who should we trust? Should we trust Eskom or our own government department?

Secondly, we have far-long reaching agreements we have signed with the Egyptians on the amount of water that can be released –(Interjections)– please, you had a whole 30 minutes, allow me to speak. 

I recommend to this Parliament, if not to give more time, at least review the recommendations we are about to make.

5.10
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Many people are saying that Eskom is not responsible and the excuse given by the hon. Minister to hon. Otto is that that the Directorate of Water does not allow Eskom to generate power to full capacity. 

I would, therefore, think that Uganda is spending money for no work done. We are maintaining Eskom yet they cannot be helped to fulfil their mandate. Yet, we have another government company, the Uganda Electricity Generation Company Ltd. I know the minister is saying that UEGCL is concentrating on a new dam. I still believe that it can handle the task Eskom –(Interjections)– it is Eskom Uganda Ltd. It is not helpful for Ugandans to have Eskom when it will never fulfil its mandate. Therefore, consider terminating this contract. I would like to support the position and well thought out recommendations of the committee. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.13
CAPT. MIKE MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Madam Speaker and colleagues, let me say I have been in this Parliament since 1996. This has been one of the most well written reports that this Parliament has ever received. (Applause) This report is in the interest of Ugandan. All over the world, strategic assets are in the hands of Government and the country. Even in South Africa, where Eskom and Umeme emerge from, power is in the hands of the State. 

In fact, Eskom is a parastatal of the South African Government. It is, therefore, unfortunate for all of us here today to forego our foresight function to see to it that the people of Uganda get the correct assets back into the hands of Uganda. 

I would also want to add that it is important for members of Parliament to know that the purpose of the department of water to regulate the flow is purely because Lake Victoria is one of the shallow lakes in the world. The deepest part of Lake Victoria is 84 metres. The mean average is 43 metres. In order to regulate the flow, Government of Uganda and all the other countries where water flows through have got to appreciate that at any given flow, 800 cubic meters per second should flow through in order to generate power and to ensure that we do not deplete our lake. 

It is, therefore, important for you to note that if you go to your iPad and carryout a bit of research on Wikipedia, Lake Victoria has dried two times in its lifetime. Go to Wikipedia and check out the life of Lake Victoria; it has ever dried twice. So, when regulating the outflow, 800 cubic metres per second is what is given out. Therefore, I want to say that the decisions that were made by Government then in putting together –(Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, I would like my brother to help us with that information. I want to know when Lake Victoria last dried out so that we can look at it statistically; what are the chances that it is going to dry up in the next 100 years?

CAPT. MUKULA: Madam Speaker, I thank my sister for that position. Let me tell you that the iPad that we have – you check on your iPad; Wikipedia is the reference point. Check the life time of Lake Victoria from the time Adam and Eve left Eden –(Laughter)– from the time God created the world and us, research which has been carried out is there. Anybody who doubts me can go and double check that. 

As I conclude my submission, the English have a very clear appreciation, which says that a wrong input cannot give you the right output. I would like to say that the mistakes that were done by those who initiated this agreement are now being paid by Ugandans and we will continue to pay for them. 

It is, therefore, the duty of Parliament of Uganda today to stand straight and toll with the people of Uganda and make firm recommendations so that we can correct the mistakes that were made for posterity to judge that Parliament of Uganda on such a day spoke loudly and clearly. The Executive have a duty to respond to the people of Uganda after this recommendation. Thank you. 

MR FOX ODOI: Madam Speaker, the committee made a very compelling case for the termination of Eskom contract. A summary of their case is found on page 129 of the report. If you permit me, I will read only one paragraph verbatim. It is Roman four: “While Government continues to pay Eskom Uganda Ltd huge sums of money for operation and maintenance of two plants at the same time, Government of Uganda incurs huge financial expenses by way of funding operations or programmes of a statutory body called Uganda Electricity Generation Company Ltd.” 

Both institutions; Eskom and UEGCL, which carryout similar functions and activities are funded by Government. While appearing before the committee, UEGCL officials confirmed that given the opportunity, they would run and manage the generation of power more efficiently, an argument seen as meriting to the committee. The double funding (notably the exorbitant wage bill) of this company has continued to adversely affect the end user tariff.

So, Madam Speaker, what is the committee is saying? It is saying that we are so abundant in resources that we even pay people who absolutely do nothing and have no value. You have a statutory company created by an Act of the Parliament of Uganda that you pay to do generation. But you go on to hire a foreign company and you still pay them huge sums of money to do exactly the same thing – generation. So, what is it you do? You collect money from the taxpayer and donate it. You pass this tariff to a local person back in Nagongera, the area I represent in this Parliament, who consumes electricity.

When we tell you that you need to clean up this sector, it takes you one year. For the last one year, I have not seen a compelling case from the ministry to controvert the position of the committee. Madam Speaker, I have not seen any. I would even say that they concede the position of the committee.

It would, therefore, be very unwise for this Parliament today to lose this opportunity to sort out this problem. I think we need to pronounce ourselves loud and clear – (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. I just want to enlighten my brother, hon. Fox Odoi, that while we were enacting the Electricity Act in 1999, it was categorical and specifically provided for in that Act that the companies that were going to be engaged in the energy sector were not supposed to have any relationships. Therefore, the participation of Eskom and Umeme violate the Electricity Act, 1999 because of their duo-relationship. Therefore, the action of Parliament is really in conformity with the law to ensure it is complied with.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Just further information to the effect that Eskom is 100 percent a Government of South Africa parastatal. What we have actually done is to accept that because we are bad managers, as Ugandans, under UEDCL, we hand over our management role to another government-owned company.

I also want to give you more information to the effect that Lake Victoria actually dried up three times, according to the Wikipedia reports. So, it is over and above what my friend said.

MR FOX ODOI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The chairperson of the committee, while making his presentation, also stated that at the time of unbundling, the generation sector was being efficiently run – 98 percent efficiently run. It could not get better than that. That two percent points below 100 percent – what did we do at the time? We made a mistake that we now realise, parted with a core sector of our economy – generation of energy – we need to backtrack.

Madam Speaker, I support the position that we terminate the Eskom contract. (Mr Bahati rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Finally, let us hear from hon. David Bahati.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, when we make laws in this House, we mean it. I have looked at the laws that back the Uganda Electricity Generation Company Ltd vis-a-vis the work that Eskom is actually doing – the Uganda Electricity Generation Company Ltd is mandated to do what Eskom is doing. 

So, I think it is time, as Parliament and Ugandans, to believe in our own country and to believe in our own institutions. If there is a problem with our own company, we should be able to equip and train people so that they can run these institutions effectively. But for us to delegate a strategic asset like energy to a foreign company when actually we can do it ourselves is not very right.

I want to thank the committee – I think the recommendations are very well laid down. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to move that you put the motion to a vote so that we can move on.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that that recommendation of the committee be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: The amendment is general; it will come at the end and please, formulate it.

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, I have clearly listened to colleagues but to correct the record, I would like to say that it is not true that one of the dams is not operating. Both dams are in operation. 

Also, on the issue of water release by the Department of Water Development – this arises out of an agreement by countries through which the River Nile flows so that the control of water release is managed to ensure we do not affect the water levels because River Nile flows through many countries. We are part of that agreement and that is why the release of the water to the dams is controlled by the Department of Water Development.

Madam Speaker, I further want to say that it was Government that took up the policy of liberalisation and privatisation. It embraced it and therefore, because of inadequate funds that Government had at the time, it came up with a proposal of unbundling UEB – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, some of us were in this House – it was a very big battle between Parliament and Government. That, I can assure you. So, let us leave that unbundling. You will deal with it later; for now, deal with the recommendations.

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, all I am saying is that the decision that is now being taken is a reversal of that policy that Government took at the time and supported by Parliament. It is just for the record.

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Minister, can’t we review if it is not working? Can’t we review it? Don’t we have powers to review our decision?

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, it is only fair that I respond to some of the issues that were raised touching me as a person. At the time the unbundling was done, I was a government employee. Therefore, I am one of those who were affected – hon. D’Ujanga and I were government employees and when that decision was taken, we were part of the affected party. But we worked very hard to implement government decisions. By the time these agreements were signed, I was the managing director of one of the successor companies. I did all this in good faith and my conscience is very clear.

Madam Speaker, yes, I am in Parliament as the Minister of Energy but also, as a Woman Member of Parliament for Bulambuli District. So, I would like to ask colleagues to appreciate that the role that I played was in good faith. And all the agreements that were signed – the agreements onto which I appended my signature were cleared by the Office of the Attorney-General.

Madam Speaker, let me now move to the next recommendation, which is recommendation one on page 135 of the report. This recommendation together with recommendations two and three at the same page talk about the same matter of fuel consumption. While we agree with recommendation number 2, where the committee recommends that the IGG and the DPP take up the matter, we likewise want the same recommendation applied to number one and also number three, so that the IGG and the DPP investigate this matter and appropriate action is taken.

THE SPEAKER: I see something, which is a bit odd here. In your response, you say; “Rt hon. Speaker, the Executive is in agreement with this recommendation provided, however, that the Attorney-General establishes the prima facie case.”

MRS MULONI: Exactly, now, instead of the Attorney- General, we wanted the Attorney-General to establish the issues in that area. Let the DPP and the IGG take up the matter. It is the same case so that is what I am amending that it is on the same matter applying to different parties. So, let the IGG and DPP take up the matter for the three recommendations.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that those recommendations be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: Recommendation number four, on page 136. We agree with this recommendation.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that those recommendations be adopted.
(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: Recommendation number five on page 136. We agree with the recommendation.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House does adopt that recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: Recommendation number one, on page 144, we agree with the recommendation.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House does adopt that recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: Recommendation number two on page 144, we concur with the recommendation.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House do adopt that recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: Recommendation number three on page 144, we concur with the recommendation.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House does approve that recommendation.

(Question was put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: Recommendation number one on page 153. While in principle, we have no objection to an audit being conducted into the Escrow Account, stopping its operation would tantamount to a government default and so we would like an amendment to this. The audit can go ahead without necessarily stopping the operation of the Escrow Account.

MR OBOTH: In principle, we would have no objection to the proposed amendment.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the recommendation of the minister be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: I will move to recommendation number two on page 153 of the report. We have no objection to this recommendation.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that that recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: Recommendation number three on page 153, we have no objection to that recommendation.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that that recommendation be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: On recommendation number four on page 153, we agree with the recommendation and possibly, to say that this no longer exists because the capital allowances were removed. But we are in agreement with the issue of URA investigating. They should be able take up the matter and investigate it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have no objection to the recommendation by the minister per se. Does she confirm that she was giving generous capital allowances to Umeme?

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, I have never given out capital allowances to Umeme. This is an accounting matter which has taxation involved in it and it is the responsibility of URA. When we carried out an audit because of the way Umeme was treating the concession in terms of accounting, we flagged it up and immediately brought it to the attention of Government and indeed, the matter was handed over to URA to go ahead and analyse the matter and bring it to its conclusion. So, the issue of us or me giving allowances to Umeme does not arise.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, what she is saying is the right thing. What they did, they gave generous capital allowances in the agreement. When they gave the allowances, it meant that these people would not pay taxes. That is what it means. What will remain is to declare either little profit or no profit and do not pay taxes. This was done by the people in the agreement. 

So, what I was trying to raise is that she says she has no objection and I am happy for that, but at an appropriate time, we shall also say that if you knew that you loved Uganda, why did you give this generous capital allowance? I want to thank her for accepting.

MRS MULONI: Thank you, my brother, but Madam Speaker, again, the matter is an accounting treatment as I said. It depends on how you treat the concessions, whether it is an operating lease or a finance lease and as Government, we recognised this matter and immediately raised it to URA to determine after carrying out an audit and the audit advised us that part of the existing equipment that belongs to Government should be treated in a different manner to the equipment that Umeme would bring in. 

So, this matter was dealt with by Government conclusively and handed over to URA.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the recommendation of the committee be adopted. 

(Question was put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: I will go to recommendation number five on page 153. We agree with the recommendation but wish to say that instead of the 18 percent, which the committee had proposed, the target that the regulator gave was 14.7 percent, which is a much lower tariff factor that would be arrived at in the seventh year.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the recommendation be adopted.

(The question was put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: The regulator did set the target.

THE SPEAKER: Are you proposing an amendment for reduction?

MRS MULONI: I was only observing that whereas the committee was saying that it should be reduced to 18 percent, the target that has been put is 14.7 per cent, which is better.

THE SPEAKER: It is not an amendment.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to propose that the target be put at 14.7 percent instead of 18 percent because that is what ERA is saying.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the recommendation be amended as proposed by the minister. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS MULONI: On recommendation number six on page 153 of the report, we have no objection and as a matter of fact, the technical losses are now standing at 14 percent and the commercial at six percent. So, there is now a clear split between technical and commercial.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the recommendation of the committee be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: We concur with recommendation number seven on page 153.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the recommendation of the committee be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: Recommendation number eight on page 153 of the report is talking about the generous capital allowances and it is the same thing that we said; the regulator has taken up the matter and so, has URA. I now move to recommendation-


THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the recommendation - are you amending?

MRS MULONI: I have no objection.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I put the question that the recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: Recommendation number nine, 10 and 11 on page 154 talk about the same issue. On the first recommendation of Mr David Sebabi, that he hijacked the mandate of the Attorney-General; the constitutional mandate of the Attorney-General was never hijacked and the Attorney-General’s Office participated full time in this committee and also, all the agreements that were signed were actually cleared by the Attorney-General’s Office.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, probably, the word “hijacking” could have created an impression to the minister that there was a coup in the Attorney- General’s Chambers but that was not the case. One of the things that informed our opinion was looking at the quality of work that was done. We summoned one of the witnesses including the Deputy Attorney-General with the technical staff involved who came and gave us very useful information. 

Unfortunately, I previously worked in the same office and so, on that day when the technical staff came, I had to excuse myself because she was my boss. But the committee members were not impressed with the nature of work and more so, the issue of transactional advisers whereby those who advised Government on these technical legal issues were from outside Uganda.

One point is annex (d) in the concessional agreement, which was coached in such a manner that the Attorney-General’s opinion in this agreement is not an opinion per se. It was a structured opinion. All the Attorney- General had to do was to append his signature and put the date and that is what appeared to us as hijacking but the Members can think of something.

MR MULONGO: Madam Speaker, further to what my colleague, the chairperson, has presented, apart from structuring the agreement, there was also a proviso that should the Attorney-General fail to append his signature to this structured agreement, it would be deemed to have come into effect after two weeks. In other words, the Attorney-General had no way out but to append his signature on to it.

When he appeared before us, the Attorney-General sounded helpless and so, in this case, what the chairperson is saying is right. This is one of the obnoxious abhorring legal challenges that the committee came face to face with. It is very absurd.

5.44
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL AND MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, it is true that the ad hoc Committee on Energy invited the Attorney-General to make a presentation to the extent of their participation in this transaction. At that time, Madam Betty Nakungu who was a desk officer on this matter was not in a position to attend. So, I appeared before this committee together with the Director of Legal Advisory Services and an officer in the same department.

Based on the presentation given to me and based on the level of participation of the ministry given to me by the officer concerned, I made a written response on these matters to the committee and in one of the presentations, the issue was since the Attorney-General did not draft the agreements and did not witness their signature, what exactly was his role in the transaction? That was the issue.

The response from the Office of the Attorney-General was that the Attorney-General advised on the tender process, participated in the negotiations, reviewed and approved the agreement and copies of the approvals at the various levels and stages of the transaction were attached to this.

Therefore, this is a professional question really because, of course, public servants in one way or another are protected when they execute their functions in good faith. When a person goes beyond that, that person certainly is questioned to the extent of that irregularity.

Here is an officer confessing that she did participate. So, it is the level of malfeasance of this particular officer that needs to be established. If you have got either to transfer it to Sebabi or pin it onto her but as far as the Office of the Attorney-General participating in this transaction is concerned and as far as the records that we have are concerned, the office participated.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, that is not in dispute but the level of participation - and I actually said the quality. The quality of work should be a lesson to us that when we have international agreements, there is no reason why we should not be able to customise them and make them reflect the aspirations and the situation on the ground. The issue of copying and pasting – (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Attorney-General of this country is a custodian of law. I am not a lawyer myself but I did a bit of law and from the submission in the report and hearing from the chairperson of the committee, the Attorney-General appended a signature on information, on an issue or contract of which he was not convinced nor understood well. This is a grave shortcoming to a public officer, particularly a lawyer that he should append a signature to a document that he is not convinced about as submitted by the honourable chairperson. 

The clarification I am seeking from the honourable chairperson who is also actually a lawyer is, was this not enough ground to hold the Attorney-General responsible?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Anywar, maybe, you want to know from the Attorney-General; did the Privatisation Unit have the authority to contract transaction lawyers? Can I sit here in Kampala in my office and also appoint transaction lawyers because they are saying that they had no authority? We want to know who has authority to contract lawyers on behalf of Government.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I am intrigued by the statement of the Vice-Chairperson of the committee that the agreement was drafted and it had a clause that with or without the endorsement of the Attorney-General, it would be deemed signed and valid. 

Therefore, doesn’t that, according to our Constitution, which says that any agreement and other laws that are not endorsed by the Principal Legal Advisor of Government is null and void to that extent? Doesn’t that mean that by the fact that it was deemed signed even before the Attorney-General could append his signature, it is null and void?  

5.51
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I really do not think that there is anything to stop say the Privatisation Unit to engage any person whom they think can help in the process on a transaction. What is important is that if anything has got to bind Government or worth following by the government involving any legal issue, the Attorney-General, under Article 119 must agree. 

In other words, you can have your transaction lawyers or whatever you want to call them, fine. But if there is any legal issue on which Government is involved, the Attorney-General must agree, must consider that. I think that is the essence of it. I have said – I do not know but I keep on hearing that the Attorney-General appended a signature on a document he was not convinced of as if we need to look for the Attorney-General who is said to have – these are the questions that you should have raised in your committee. You should have called that particular Attorney-General and asked him or her whether they were convinced. I do not have that information with me. 

What I have now is that the technical officials involved confirmed to me and that is what I presented to your committee that they indeed participated in this transaction. I gave you this document and I have a copy that I can give you.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, that would be the best if that is what happens. But here, where people sit and draft the opinion for the Attorney-General is on annex D. They draft it and say this is where you will put the date and that is where you will sign and then it is taken to the Attorney-General’s Chambers in that very form of word by word. The way they had prescribed it is what came out as the signed document and opinion of the Attorney-General. It is there on annex “D”. So, that is why we are saying that the only participation that the Attorney-General’s Chambers did was to put the date and signature but the way they wanted it to appear word by word is how it came.

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Speaker –

MR OKUPA: I am giving information, my colleague.

THE SPEAKER: The point made by hon. Mulongo is, I think, very serious. How can there be an agreement where we are told that it will become effective without the chief legal advisor of the Government? How can that be?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. This is going to appear in the law that is coming on Public-Private-Partnerships. A transaction advisor is recruited like any other consultant and once he gives his advice, whether structured or written, when it is appended to by the Attorney-General as long as it is –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. KasuleSebunya, the Bill is not before us. We may not agree with you.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: No, I am saying, Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: No, the Bill is not here. 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Let me not refer to the Bill –

THE SPEAKER: The Bill is not with us. It is not before us.

MS ANYWAR: Order.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Okay, let me not refer to the Bill. But I am saying – [Ms Anywar: “Order, Madam Speaker.”]  that a transaction advisor –

THE SPEAKER: Order.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: What is the order?

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our rules of procedure do not allow us to legislate in anticipation but the honourable member is trying to imply that we should be legislating in anticipation.

Secondly, you have already guided the honourable member that our rules do not allow that. Is he in order to continue arguing with the Rt hon. Speaker while you have already guided on this matter? Is he in order? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Motion, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Motion -

5.57
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Madam Speaker, I rise on a motion that hon. Robert Kasule Ssebunya no longer be heard on this subject matter - I beg to move - for becoming a nuisance and disrespecting the Chair of the Speaker. I beg to move a Motion.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the Bill has not come to us and we cannot discuss the content; we cannot take that recommendation. Please, do not touch on it because it is not here.

MS ANYWAR: The motion, Madam Speaker.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: I withdraw the matter on the Bill. But let me say this; that a transaction advisor is a consultant – (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Motion.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: No, please. A transaction advisor is a consultant who is recruited like any other consultant and once –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, is that the definition in the interpretation section of that Bill? If it is, sit down. Please, hon. Kasule Ssebunya.

MS ANYWAR: Order. Motion.

THE SPEAKER: Where were we? Yes, hon. Ndeezi.

5.58
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Representative): Madam Speaker, even if we do not have any law, the Constitution is very clear when it comes to the powers of the Attorney-General in legislation. Article 119 paragraph 3 says, “The Attorney-General shall be the principal legal advisor of the Government.” Then paragraph 5 says, “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, no agreement, contract, treaty, convention or document by whatever name called, to which the Government is a party or in respect of which the Government has an interest, shall be concluded without legal advice from the Attorney-General, except in such cases and subject to such conditions as Parliament may by law prescribe.” So, Madam Speaker, even if we do not have the law that he is talking about, it is very important for us to establish under what circumstances the Attorney-General was involved and not involved.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. More clarification to this that I wanted to give is - if I am informed that actually, the role of the Attorney-General was played, then what was the purpose of the transaction advisor? The truth is that as you see in recommendation nine, there was collusion. Everyone appreciates that perhaps the Office of the Attorney-General needed to be assisted technically; it may perhaps have lacked the expertise in this subject matter. That one would have been agreed to but it was still the constitutional mandate of the Office of the Attorney-General to hire any expert to beef them up and not the role of the Privatisation Unit. But what happened? This is what we are talking about in recommendation nine that there was collusion with the transaction advisors. And what came about was a bad agreement. Perhaps my honourable minister would want to inform this Parliament if she is comfortable with the role played with the chief negotiators. Are you happy with the outcome – the bills Ugandans are meeting today? If you are happy with the results, are we competitive as an investment destination? Would you like to inform this House, of the investors we have in this country, how many products they make here are competitive in the East African market? Wouldn’t it interest you to investigate whether it is not the high tariffs that make the production costs high, thereby affecting Uganda’s economic growth? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have the final submission there before we hear from the chair.

MR MULONGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I agree with my good friend and the respected learned Attorney-General, hon. Ruhindi, on the participation of his office in this matter. Yes, there is an officer who attended but there is a difference between attending and participating. On page 96, it is very clear and stated in the last line on the second paragraph thus; “The Office of the Attorney-General was just represented by a legal officer whose contribution in the exercise was not documented.” The officer could not even say a word; it was not seen anywhere-(Interjections) - just give me a minute.

Madam Speaker, on page 97, we quote what our honourable colleague has just quoted about the responsibility. And the opening paragraph, which is the closing one on page 96, says: “Mr David Sebabi informed the committee that the Attorney-General’s opinion was also negotiated among other clauses of the agreement” which made matters worse. (Interjections) After the clarification, I hope I will be given time to finalise my point.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have the point of clarification from hon. Ekanya.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I think the committee should help us and specifically hon. Mulongo. The Constitution is categorical that the Attorney-General is the principal legal advisor. If the agreement was deemed the way you have said, and the participant was a junior officer, why didn’t they object to signing, arguing that their participation was not to capacity and that the agreement was wrongly drafted? Why didn’t they put it in writing? The committee is quiet on that aspect.

MR MULONGO: Madam Speaker, the committee is not quiet; if you look at the paragraph which starts with the quotation of the Constitution’s provision, the last statement says, “The committee failed to get proof from the current Deputy Attorney-General, hon. Fredrick Ruhindi, who represented the Attorney-General during this investigation that the Attorney-General performed his duty.”

Madam Speaker, we were not convinced that the Attorney-General was effective in the office in terms of negotiation of this agreement.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the committee chair and then the Attorney-General. (Interjections) Okay, the Attorney-General wishes to go first.

MR FRED RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, the only other small information I wish to add is that the Attorney-General is a member of DRIC. So, in his capacity as the Attorney-General, not only does he advise within his chambers, but also advises when he sits on DRIC as a member – where most of these issues of engaging transaction advisors and others also emerge. I thought that that information should also be captured.

THE SPEAKER: What you are saying, Attorney-General, is that you endorse what was done by your representative on the DRIC? 

MR RUHINDI: Yes, because it has been accepted; and it has been put in writing by that office. Unless the person who is suspected to have done otherwise, we have it on record, like hon. Ekanya is saying.

MR EKANYA: Attorney-General, is it normal to deem agreements – that with or without the signature of the Attorney-General, who is the principal legal advisor to Government, the agreement will be considered to be valid? Is that normal?

THE SPEAKER: He is referring to what hon. Mulongo said that one of the clauses in that agreement said that within a fortnight, if the Attorney-General had not assented to it, it would be deemed to have come into force. 

MR RUHINDI: If I may answer that with another question: What was the eventual position? Was it that the Attorney-General never gave advice? If the Attorney-General gave advice, it makes that position that was put in the agreement –(Interjections)– it is not what is following because the Attorney-General, after all, under the Constitution, gave the advice.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have hon. Oboth.

MR JACOB OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want the Attorney-General to know that we are not imputing bad motive or incompetence on your side – you are not even there, for the record. You gave us very useful information. But I know that if you were to be honest with yourself and with Ugandans, if you were asked if the provisions of this agreement are favourable, I am sure the way we know you, you would respond in the negative –(Laughter)

We were two lawyers in that committee. We found that - and if it is a practice, Madam Speaker, it should stop; the constitutional mandate of the Attorney-General becoming part of the contract to be negotiated. Where an opinion is negotiated, it ceases to be an opinion. So if we are going to get into contracts in this country and negotiate the legal opinion of the Attorney-General, the Attorney-General should be fired. (Laughter) In that case, what is he doing? We want to benefit from the wealth of experience and knowledge of the Attorney-General. He would say “No” to certain provisions; he can send a person – Madam Nakungu who was there, is a senior lawyer, but I believe her hands were tied because she probably did not have capacity to say “No”. If you have opinion that even they tell you where to put the letterhead of the Attorney-General – that is what is in the contract – and the date; and then address to Umeme; specifically the address is already put there. Then you put there “Attorney-General” and then you sign. And in this case, Madam Speaker – for the record – it was not signed by the Attorney-General, though it was meant to be signed by the Attorney-General. However, it was signed by the Solicitor-General, who was actually maybe acting as the Attorney-General. But usually when you sign letters for the Solicitor-General, an opinion from the Attorney-General would be “Solicitor-General” down. In this matter, the Permanent Secretary was the minister. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Attorney-General, don’t you think that arising from this debate, we now require a specific certificate from your office to accompany these agreements to say that you have read, considered and approved – even if you are our representative in that committee, don’t you think that would be a good idea? 

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I am at a loss as to what practically we are trying to achieve. If an official from the Attorney-General’s Office participates and the Attorney-General, represented by the Solicitor-General, writes a letter which is in my possession here saying: “Reference is made to yours PUSRP14.02.4 dated 30 May, 2004 on the above subject. Please find the opinion in relation to the lease granted in respect of the electricity distribution system. Signed E. Nakungu for Solicitor- General.” In the presence of this letter, how can we – (Interruption) 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, honourable minister. What you are referring to is surely a cover letter. That is the standard format in the Attorney-General’s Chambers to write after perusal. What we are talking about here is the opinion – do you have a copy of the opinion and I read for you annex d; do you have it? 

MR RUKUTANA: I was still continuing. This is a letter alluding to an opinion. But the opinion itself is here, dated 10th June, 2004 addressed to Umeme Ltd, the same chambers, 36 Nile Avenue, P.O. Box, 3213 Kampala. And it is headed, “Opinion in relation to the lease granted in respect of the electricity distribution system.” I do not need to read the entire opinion but it is dully signed by L. Tebaruha Solicitor- General/Acting Attorney-General. 

I am not yet done – there is yet another document. Finally, UEDCL concession document; support agreement; power sell agreement and lease and assignment agreement. It says: “I refer to your letter dated 14 February 2003 forwarding to us the final UEDCL concessional documents plus a copy of the certificates of incorporation of Umeme. This is to advise that after a review of the draft concession documents, we find them in order and you may go ahead and execute them. Signed, B. Kayinamura for Solicitor-General”. 

Now, in light of this, how can we sit here and say that these agreements were not approved by the Attorney-General pursuant to the requirement of the Constitution. How else do you want the Attorney-General to work?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I respect hon. Rukutana very much, but for the first time, he has gone off track. Appendix d, which he may not have says - form of opinion on headed paper from the Attorney-General’s Chambers. That means somebody drafted it for the Attorney-General’s Chambers. There is no date; but again they address it to Umeme Ltd. 

Madam Speaker, the opinion of the Attorney-General goes to the Government entity which is trying to contract. In this case, it was UEDCL not Umeme. Here it looks like Umeme was the one asking for the opinion instead of the government entity asking for it. 

MR NDEEZI: Madam Speaker, I have read carefully. And on certain cases, the office holder has power to delegate – it is clearly stated in the Constitution. In the case of the provision of the Attorney-General, there is no provision for delegation. Therefore, as of now, the Attorney-General has committed no wrong at all; the people you claim have signed on behalf of the Attorney-General did so when the Attorney-General never committed himself – (Laughter) – if you read the law carefully, the Attorney-General was never involved. Some imposters have claimed to sign for the Attorney-General but the Attorney-General was not involved. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, on page 97 of the committee report, they noted that: “It also emerged during this investigation that the negotiations between Government of Uganda and Umeme Ltd took place in Washington in United States of America. There was no justification whatsoever for the government to have chosen Washington as the venue for negotiations with Umeme Ltd for a service to be locally contracted in Uganda”. This lent credit to the belief that the whole process of procuring -”

Now, what I am asking counsel Rukutana, that opinion you are reading is it part of the opinion negotiated in Washington and then drafted in Uganda? You could shade more light to that now that you have come out to defend the indefendable. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, what hon. Ndeezi has said is a serious matter. There was nowhere the Attorney-General delegated and powers cannot be delegated but it says that all agreements of Government will be perused by the Attorney-General. 

The way I see this, the Attorney-General perused the agreement for Umeme and not for Government of Uganda. So hon. Rukutana, I want you to look at the heading and know that what you are reading actually demonstrates that the Attorney-General’s Chamber was far – maybe it is one of the teams that should be brought in this report to be held liable. 

And if hon. Ruhindi, whom we know very well is trying to defend it, then I am getting worried that the man I used to believe in has gotten spoilt because this is a dangerous thing he is trying to defend. If you are defending it, then I am getting worried because I used to know you as a very good man - (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I wanted to answer hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, you know I am in danger of losing the point because what we are discussing is the accusation that Mr Ssebabi hijacked the role of the Attorney-General in this transaction.  That is the substantive point in the report and the recommendation.

We have listened to all things that have been said including a provision that if the Attorney-General did not give an opinion by a certain date, it would be deemed to have been given or something like that-(Interjection) Okay, that may have come around but obviously, it did not make sense and it ran contrary to the Constitution. But that provision was rendered useless by the Attorney-General and it no longer applied. 

THE SPEAKER: The issue is who had the audacity to remove the jurisdiction of the Attorney-General. That is what Members are asking. Who had the audacity to say that even the Attorney-General was not necessary and that if it expires, they would be okay? That is what Members are asking.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Whoever it was, it was someone ignorant of our constitutional provisions. (Laughter) However, the more important point is: Did the Attorney-General perform his constitutional role of rendering advice? The answer is yes.

MR OKUPA: What we know is that the Attorney-General’s opinion – Rt Hon. Prime Minister, is sought and not dictated. In this case, the opinion was already drafted. It was only left for the Attorney-General to put the date, print it on a headed paper and appends a signature. That is not how the opinion of the Attorney-General is sought.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: The opinion of the Attorney-General is the opinion of the Attorney-General irrespective of its origin. Once the Attorney-General says this is my opinion, please do not say that, “But that was the opinion of Mr Amama Mbabazi”. The moment the Attorney-General adopts it, it automatically becomes the opinion of the Attorney-General. Please, the Attorney-General is here and he has told you that they actually gave an opinion. 

So, you know, I have been hearing questions about transaction advisors and things like that. Of course, in international practice and because of the nature of the technical complexity of transaction these days, transaction advisors are necessary. What the Attorney-General needs to do is to have the capacity to understand the advice and give their advice having understood the complexity that these transaction advisors will have brought out.

Let me also address this question that it was not the Attorney-General himself, but the Solicitor General and therefore, it must have been the Attorney-General, no. In our Constitution, all executive authority lies in the President. That is what the Constitution in Article 99 provides that “The executive authority of Uganda is vested in the President and shall be exercised in accordance with the Constitution and the laws of Uganda”. It goes on to say that, “Subject to the Constitution, the functions conferred on the President by clause 1- which I have just read-may be exercised by the President either directly or through officers subordinate to the President”. What this means is that all executive authority, which is under this Chapter of the Constitution titled, “the Executive” see Chapter Seven.  (Interruptions)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to thank the Prime Minister for giving way. Here, with me is a document with the role of the Attorney-General – see Article 119. The Article talks about very many things but let us look at clause 5. It says that “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, no agreement, contract, treaty, convention or document by whatever name called, to which Government is a party or in respect of which the Government has an interest, shall be concluded without the legal advice from the Attorney-General, except in such cases subject to such conditions as Parliament may by law prescribe.”

Now, did Parliament, for example, prescribe the transactional advisor to be the one to draft the opinion for the Attorney-General to just come and put a signature? That is the clarification I wanted to seek from you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

THE SPEAKER: Actually, you should also go to sub clause 6 because it creates exemptions, which the Attorney-General should have issued by statutory instrument. Please, read it out.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I was going to read it but I thought – anyway, it also reads thus: “Until Parliament makes the law referred to in clause (5) of this article, the Attorney-General may, by statutory instrument, exempt any particular category of agreement or contract none of the parties to which is a foreign government and its agency or an international organisation from the application of that clause.”

Madam Speaker, the Rt hon. Prime Minister was one time the Attorney-General and it was not at that time –(Interjections)– yes, Madam Speaker, I have recalled this transaction could have been concluded when my brother Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Amama Mbabazi, was the acting Attorney-General of Uganda –(Interjections)– yes, in 2004 and we were in this House with him. 

It was not hon. Ruhindi; he was a backbencher with me. He is just defending the wrong things. Madam Speaker, since we have got the person; I mean the Attorney-General then, who never performed his duties efficiently, he must be politically held liable. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: What he was saying is that the Solicitor-General was acting for then Attorney-General. Yes, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: You know the English would say – no, I will not say that. No, hon. Nandala-Mafabi is my” little” brother. And I have no intentions – the expression I would have given would not have presented him in positive light. But he is my friend.

Now, I read Article 99 and I want to now read for you Article 274 – you may read it. But the marginal note of that Article is about the existing law and it says thus: “Subject to the provisions of this article, the operation of the existing law after the coming into force of this Constitution but the existing law shall be construed with such modifications, adaptations, qualifications and exceptions as may be necessary to bring it into conformity with this Constitution.”

Clause (2) says “For the purpose of this article, the expression “existing law” means the written and unwritten law of Uganda or any part of it as existed immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution, including any Act of Parliament or Statute or statutory Instrument enacted or made before that date which is to come into force on or after that date which is to come into force on or after that date.”

So, you need to hold the laws to know how the Attorney-General operates. If you look at Article 119, you are reading clauses 4 and 6. If you looked at 4(C) for example; “to represent the Government in courts or any other legal proceedings to which the government is a party”. Surely, you cannot interpret this to mean that the Attorney-General must go-(Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Let me read what I want to read, then you can tell me what to read for you. I will do so since we are friends, I will help you. I am just showing the functions of the Attorney-General shall include the following; that is clause 4 paragraph c, “to represent the government in courts or any other legal proceedings to which the government is a party”. You know courts begin- there is a definition here of courts. Supreme Court is at the apex, you go down to magistrates, you go down even further down. This cannot mean that for Government to be represented in any court, the Attorney-General must have physical presence. There are other laws which define how the Attorney-General will operate and those are covered by Article 274 that I have just read for you.

So, when any authorised officer, for instance, the Solicitor General gives an opinion on behalf of the Attorney-General, which is adequate, you cannot say this is not the Attorney-General giving an opinion. Please.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I am glad that the Prime Minister is highlighting the office of the Attorney-General as an office. Actually, in common parlance in conventional terms, it is called the Attorney-General’s Chambers. This country, I can assure you, if you were to say that for every agreement, the Attorney-General should append his or her signature, that office is a clearing house, then you will paralyse it. Every officer, even the Head of State operates through his ministers and heads of departments. That is how Government operates. The Attorney-General’s office, like any other office, operates as an office through officers of the Attorney-General. I thought I would make that clarification and in addition to that, if you look at section 29 –

MS KARUNGI: Madam Speaker, I just wanted to understand whether the Attorney-General’s Chambers have no capacity to employ more workers who can help in analysing all these contracts or whichever work they have to do; that is why may be they are delegating work to other private officers. Thank you.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Attorney-General has said anybody in his office can let us sign the contract; who takes responsibility if the contract is signed wrongly? Thank you very much.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, in a very big contract like this that is involving trillions of Ugandan money, does the Attorney-General go to take heed at Serena Hotel and leave this contract to be signed by an officer? If it happens, then the Attorney-General’s Chambers should be closed or they should be transferred or be immediately sacked. Because, this is a huge transaction, the Attorney-General cannot tell us that you can run away and you abandon work and leave it to a general officer. I had a similar problem with NMS when they sent a junior officer to start handling medicine he did not even understand and I kicked him out. 

Therefore, I want us to know, surely, what exactly happens in a transaction like this one? Where is the Attorney-General? And what is his job? He is given a good car, the President chooses him, and you cannot sign a contract like this one and you give it to a small man? Why? Tell us.

MR RUHINDI: I think the clarification is made in good faith. And we all know the challenges in our Public Service, Madam Speaker. I wish we could have the competent people who are fully trained- and in a modern society, let me tell you, to catch up with the progress on every detail - just recently, we were actually enacting the Anti-money Laundering Act. I went to Ghana and found them with specialised court on matters of anti-money laundering, with specialised staff and fully trained. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, we are getting off the point we are handling here. The issue here was on the mode of the opinion of the Attorney-General. That is where the committee was having a problem because it was an opinion that was drafted, do you contract people to get for you an opinion? No, you do not. That is the matter at hand. Let us avoid bringing now the generalities going into the contract agreement. We are talking about the opinion. Can we stick to that? If a mistake was made at the time like we saw that they drafted an opinion for you which would not be the case; let us own it and we move forward.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I was giving information. I was waylaid with clarifications and I was trying to respond to clarifications. The only thing I wanted to highlight by way of information also, was that we may draw upon is section 29 of our Interpretation Act. This section says, “Any power conferred or duty imposed on the Attorney-General, by or under any Act may be exercised or performed by the Solicitor General (a) in case where the Attorney-General is unable to act owing to illness or absence or (b) in case of class of cases where the Attorney-General has authorised the Solicitor General to do so.”

This provision existed at that time. Of course, now it has been overtaken by the constitutional amendment, which was made in 2005 because in 2005, the Office of the Deputy Attorney-General was created and therefore, in the absence of the Attorney-General, the Deputy Attorney-General acts.

At that time, in 2004 or 2003, this was pertaining and if Tibaruha, of course, signed, this rests on the committee to have verified that either the Attorney-General then was either sick or was absent and the Solicitor General acted. But even as the Prime Minister was explaining, if any official in the Ministry of Justice acts because it is a process and instructions go there - You worked there and you know. Let me finish, please, because they are putting the matter –(Interruption) How do you give information when I am giving information?

MR ODOI: Thank you, hon. Ruhindi, for giving way. Madam Speaker, hon. Ruhindi is a very good lawyer and the Prime Minister is also a very good lawyer. They all know that the Supreme Court of Uganda pronounced itself in the case of Banco Arabe Espanol vs the Attorney-General that the only opinion of the Attorney-General that is binding is that one which is given under his hand and seal. So, it cannot be the opinion given by any junior officer. It must be the opinion of the Attorney-General given under his hand and seal.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, hon. Fox Odoi has got it wrong and I want to ask whether he is in order to mislead this House because the Banco Arabe case in the lead judgement – Look, here it was hon. Justice Kanyeihamba. He is the one who gave the lead judgement and in his judgement, he categorically stated that the opinion of the Attorney-General is highly persuasive and any Government agency departing from it must have compelling reasons. He did not say that the Attorney- General’s opinion is binding. Please, I can -

Further to that, the Attorney-General’s opinion – and hon. Fox Odoi, you are a practising advocate and lawyer. There is no way the Attorney-General is going to give every agreement in writing under his hand. If you do not know, there are Bills that come here which go through the First Parliamentary Counsel, under standing orders. You know that. There is an office, which exists with officers. They act on behalf of the Attorney-General. I want to inform you categorically. You are lawyers and you know this very well. So, hon. Oboth, when you were in Tororo or Mbale, you were advising on behalf of the Attorney-General. If the Attorney-General had to sanction everything you were doing there, would it be possible?

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear the Prime Minister and close the matter.

MR OBOTH: Since the Learned Attorney-General has mentioned my name, I worked as a regional head. I signed all letters, perused agreements, contracts and advise and signed for Solicitor General. If the Attorney-General today wants to tell the whole world that his opinion is purely persuasive, then he should clearly be on record. All we are saying is that it is not who does what but that the opinion should not be part of the negotiation; whether it is international or whatever transaction. We should be able to have capacity. 

Attorney-General, you should be happy that I am coming with pain from the same office where we see the Attorney-General’s Chambers are side-lined. That is a vote of no confidence that you cannot do your work;  so, we hire other people and they are given a lot of money that could train young lawyers in this country to do better things. I am surprised that Attorney-General, you do not see this point. This is for you and not against you and we are not against officers being delegated. We could sit in several committees but I have never - This is one single opinion that I have seen signed as Solicitor General/acting Attorney General. I thought that would have been a civil servant and a politician. That is the first time I am seeing a permanent secretary also acting as a minister. It used to be in Amin’s regime that all PS’s- (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: You know, hon. Oboth, should consider the presentation I made because I said that under Article 274, the old or existing laws, including that Interpretation Act, which the Deputy Attorney General read were saved and would be modified to be consistent with the Constitution. So, even in the case where in the constitutional amendment of 2005 we created the position of Deputy Attorney-General, still, that revision applies; that Section 29 of the Interpretation Act, which means - this is for hon. Osegge now – that in the absence of the Attorney- General or the Deputy Attorney-General, the Solicitor General then would perform that role.

But back to the basic question - What is the issue before this House? The issue is the hijacking of the powers of the Attorney-General by Mr David Ssebabi. All the things we are discussing may be interesting but the issue now is, did Mr Ssebabi hijack the duties or the constitutional mandate of the Attorney-General and the answer is clearly no, because the Attorney-General indeed did participate, gave an opinion and the Deputy Attorney-General is telling this House that that is the case.

So, I really think we should not mix up things. The question is very clear. Did Mr Ssebabi hijack the mandate of the Attorney-General and clearly, the answer is “no” because the Attorney-General did give his opinion in this matter; the Attorney-General did participate, even if it was through representation, that is legally okay.

THE SPEAKER: Information.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much. I thank the Prime Minister for giving way. I am rising on a point of clarification. You know, the Prime Minister and I come from Kanungu and in Kanungu, the power is managed by Ferdsult and I want to know whether he has checked his bills in Kanungu where Ferdsult is managing and compare it with Kampala here where Umeme is in charge. The bill is astronomical here where Umeme is in charge. We have already agreed that the Umeme contract was bad and that is why we recommended that it should be terminated. So, somebody is responsible for the drafting of that bad agreement.

The clarification that I am seeking from him is that are you saying that we remove the burden from Mr Ssebabi to the Chambers of the Attorney-General for the bad contract that was signed? There has been sufficient evidence from the committee that the Privation Unit that Mr Ssebabi headed actually duped everybody and misused the office and misled the Attorney-General’s Chambers. Are you now saying that we should shift the burden from the Privatisation Unit to the Chamber of the Attorney-General for the bad agreement that we have already agreed on?

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister.

HON. MEMBER: Further clarification.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Can I finish?

THE SPEAKER: Let the Prime Minister finish. It is negotiation?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Mulongo.

MR MULONGO: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I am a bit uneasy about the way we are handling the question of delegation and questionable authorisation by a vested office with statutory powers because we are laying precedence that could pose a challenge even in future because a chronology of events have been given by the committee in the report and we are saying that as long as that office was represented by whatever subordinate staff, that should be taken as officially done by that holding office.

So, the clarification I am seeking from the Prime Minister is whether legal or statutory power vested in an office and indeed, an individual or a body can be delegated just like that because I have seen supporting legal provisions for that, or whether it is implied power to all – any other person to do it or it is taken automatically that as long as that person is in that office, they can represent that officer in whom statutory power is vested. So, I thought that the Prime would explain that.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister – 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well if I may, hon. Baryomunsi raised a good point that of course, we come from Kanungu –(Interjections)– no bridge and it is terrible. But it is also true that the company that is distributing power in Kanungu called Ferdsult is doing a very good job and yesterday, if I may say so, when I answered the question by hon. Besisira from Kibaale about generators - no, about transformers, indeed, I did find that Ferdsult is responsible and following the theft of those transformers, they have placed an order from outside and we hope that these will arrive soon for the people of Kibaale. I thought that I should make that addition for him.

So, in Kanungu, Ferdsult has introduced prepaid meters and in the whole of Kanungu, we use prepaid meters and it is true, in my case, anyway, that before I introduce a prepaid meter here in Kampala, the bills were much higher. 

But my expectation is that Ferdsult which is a Ugandan company is building capacity and I hope that by the end, with others that will hopefully come up, will take over. I hope so and there is no doubt that Ferdsult looks very promising and if they maintain this, I look forward to them and others, in case they come up, taking over the concession when its time runs out.

On the question –(Interjections)– just a second, please. On the question of delegation of power from my brother, hon. Simon I read Article 99 because that provision is replicated. “The executive authority lies in the President and the President will exercise that vested authority in him in accordance with the Constitution and the Laws of Uganda” That is clause 1 and clause 4 that says, “The functions may be exercised by the President either directly or through officers subordinate to the President.” So, that is why I said that all this power is exercised by delegation and that delegation is in accordance with the law. Okay? So, you have to look at all the laws of Uganda in order to get a specific answer to any question.

But, finally, my point again, recommendation 9 on page 154 says that Mr David Ssebabi hi-jacked the constitutional mandate of the Attorney-General and two, in recommendation 10 says, that he should be prosecuted for financial loss. Recommendation 11 says that the concerned members, including the Attorney-General should be held culpable for abuse of office. These are the recommendations that I am responding to and we should strictly – you know, in the corner of my eye he looked like hon. Odonga Otto and so, it would have been difficult for me to continue normally. (Laughter)

So, all this hinges on that usurpation or hijacking of the constitutional mandate of the Attorney-General. It is clear from all the evidence that we have that this is not so.

The evidence that we have had even from the report itself – the argument is that it should have been the Attorney-General himself and not a subordinate officer. 

Hon. Nandala said that it was Amama Mbabazi who was the Attorney-General; well, I have never acted as Attorney-General – I was the Attorney-General, as you know because there is a difference. (Laughter) I did not even know about this transaction; I suspect that maybe at that time I was not the Attorney-General. However, that is not important; the important thing is the Attorney-General owns up the process. He says he participated and the committee says he should have participated directly himself. Maybe he should have but he was represented and that representation, under our laws, is effective. So I recommend that you, as Parliament, do not adopt this recommendation. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, what you are saying is that if you agree that the agreement was bad and the Attorney-General says he was part of it, it means that he is also culpable.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I said that in cabinet, we assigned the Attorney-General to study that agreement and report back. And I said that he reported back but that the work had not been completed because they needed some input of experts. That is the point I made. And that we are waiting for the final report and then we will act on the basis of that report, which we do not have now. And that is why I said – (Interruption)

MS OSSEGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It pains me when I look at the Prime Minister’s head – who is almost my father – to put him on a point of order. We have gone through this over and over again and the Prime Minister seems to be taking us in circles, without adding value to what we are debating on. Is he in order to continue doing that and yet we have sat for a long time in this House – it is now seven o’clock – and we hope to finish this report?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think this is an intricate matter and all of us have been listening to one another with the hope of coming up with the best solution for the country. So I put the question that resolution No.9 – Yes, hon. Osegge?

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In light of the fact that the Prime Minister categorically admitted that the Attorney-General participated and given that this House is in agreement that this agreement was grossly defective, I would like to move an amendment that the Attorney-General at the time be held culpable for negligence of duty and incompetence.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not know whether examined the question whether was he available or not. How can you say he was negligent when you do not know where he was? I do not think it would be fair to make a conclusion of that nature.

MS OSEGGE: But Madam Speaker, there was a letter that was signed on his behalf. And they have admitted on this Floor that whoever they delegate once they have assigned, the responsibility falls back to the Attorney-General. They should have denied it at that point but it has taken us very long to come to this conclusion. And I think it would not be fair to Uganda to say that the Attorney-General did not know because he was not around; he is culpable.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Madam Speaker, this is not the first time we have received a situation like this from the Attorney-General’s chambers. If you remember the issue of Basajjabalaba, the contract from the Attorney-General was again like this and it became very difficult to know who actually approved the payment for the Attorney-General. This is because somebody drafted a similar agreement and we are told that the Attorney-General then signed without understanding what was written there. Let us not be like – This thing was written in English and I believe that the Attorney-General and people in the Attorney-General’s chambers understand English, although they do not understand the law very much. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, at the end of this report, this House should move that the Attorney-General’s Chambers be strengthened by bringing in people who can do a good job for this country.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My worry about the motion that had been proposed by the committee was that maybe Mr Ssebabi did not receive the delegation powers and the Prime Minister has confirmed to us that this gentleman was acting on behalf of the Attorney-General. They also confirm – (Interjection) Yes, he says he was delegated. And he has admitted that there was a defective clause, where if the Attorney-General admitted it or not, the agreement would be valid. In respect of that I do second the motion as amended by hon. Osegge that both officers – Mr Ssebabi and the Attorney-General be held responsible. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, recommendation should come out of evidence. So let me put the question that recommendation No.9. No.10 and No.11 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendations adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, let us proceed.

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, recommendation No.1 on page 156 of the report – Those are the three we have finished and they are all on the same matter because they are all arising out of whether the Attorney-General participated or not.

Recommendation No.1 on page 156 says: “The current concession is a public-private partnership with the government owning 100 percent.”

So the recommendation that this PPP framework should have Government holding at least 51 percent does not arise and therefore we would not accept that. This is because by holding 100 percent, it means the assets all belong to government.

THE SPEAKER: Are you talking about shares or assets?

MRS MULONI: I am talking about assets; this is a public-private partnership, where Government owns all the assets. And it is though a 20-year concession where the private party leases the assets to do business, invests into adding assets and earns a return on investment.

THE SPEAKER: Committee chairperson.

MR OBOTH: It is interesting, Madam Speaker, to know that we have a PPP arrangement when actually, the minister had earlier on said this was as a result of policy to privatise. In our investigations, we found out that Umeme concession was 100 percent owned by a private company. But UEDCL, the asset holders owns 100 per cent of the assets that were originally belonging to UEB, UEDCL and Government. 

It cannot be a better way to put it that I am failing to appreciate the reasoning of the minister in this regard that owning assets, which are also leased out is a relationship that has qualified to Public – Private Partnership. 

In our findings, we found that 100 per cent – in fact, we were asking, “Who owns Umeme?” We found that Umeme is the company that fought the concession, unless Government is coming out to say that the distribution concession is partly owned by Government. That never came before us. We asked the same question and for the record, questions were put ahead of time to all the witnesses accordingly, including to Government. So, I am surprised that I am getting this response here. In any case, our hands as a committee, are tied. We leave this for the general recommendations and resolutions of this House. 

That is the information I wanted to give. But UEDCL owns the assets; if I am wrong, the minister can make the correction. 

THE SPEAKER: But the shares are different from the assets. 

MR OBOTH: Exactly, I did not want that to come from my mouth. (Laughter)

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, a Public – Private Partnership is a partnership where you have the public and the private investors having an arrangement. The arrangement that Government of Uganda adopted after bringing on board the liberalisation and privatisation policies was through a 20 year concession. In this concession, Government of Uganda owns the assets through the successor companies by 100 per cent. But it leases those assets to a private party, which party invests in those assets and adds a return. So, it is a form of Public Private Partnership. 

7.14
MS ANN NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am perturbed that the arrangement of the distributor and the Government of Uganda is of a PPP nature. The honourable minister may be interested in informing this House that the distributor was contracted to distribute power and invest in the network. But even when they invest in the network, it comes at a cost; it is imbedded in the tariffs and earns a return on the investment of 20 per cent. 

So, can I know where the Government of Uganda benefits from? The minister should also inform this House the composition of Umeme – what consortium forms Umeme? That would give us a better picture. 

7.15
MR SIMON MULONGO (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Madam Speaker, the recommendation on page 156 recommendation No.1 is premised on the account or understanding that the current concession is terminated. In other words, this follows a recession of the current arrangement. We are saying that upon termination of this contract, any future arrangements – the shareholding structure should be premised along this principle of Government owning at least 51 per cent of the interest. We are not describing the current concession. So, it should be understood in that light. 

7.16
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, hon. Oboth Oboth is right, the minister is right and everybody else is right. There are about five different models of Public Private Partnership: the model with Umeme is concessional with the infrastructure; Umeme offers managerial skills and brings some of the money it recovers. 

But the committee is proposing that in future partnerships, Government should continue holding assets and Government should also hold a stake, which to me is the best. This model of concessioner of PPP, which Umeme got – the Government of Uganda has been extending capital to reduce what we call technical losses. 

When Umeme came on board, they got money. According to the agreement, Umeme is supposed to extend the power, yet every time we want power, we have to put it in the budget to extend the power in the rural areas and trading centres. 

So, the proposal of the committee is fundamental. We have done research in other countries; street lights, hospitals and military installation do not pay power because Government has stake in it. That is why we lose women in hospital because Umeme has decided to cut off power for its bills that have not been cleared. 

Therefore, this proposal is the best. In fact, I would recommend that Government should have a stake of 70 per cent because just distributing and collecting money is still possible.

7.18
MR FOX ODOI (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are two distinct things here. The first is, it is not in dispute that Government owns 100 per cent of the assets. The second stand-alone issue is the distribution concession, which is the business; the business that uses the assets to generate money. It is apparent Government owns zero per cent. That business is owned exclusively by Umeme. So, the proposal is saying that let Government own at least 51 per cent of the distribution business. The minister is now taking us back to our ownership of the assets, which we all know from the evidence available that Government owns 100 per cent of the Assets. The only relationship the state has with the business is that they use its assets to generate its money. Do we own any percentage in the agreement? No, zero. 

THE SPEAKER: So, this is a proposal for the future.

7.19
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, if you read page 105 of the report, it clearly shows who owns Umeme and in that company we own nothing. Number two, Umeme came with no money, we gave them assets; everybody agrees. Even recently, when they were being – we said you are doing nothing; they went to the stock exchange because a company that goes into stock exchange - it means that company internally has no money. In fact, Umeme should have been sent away long ago. It went to the stock exchange because it had no money. 
It came with no money. It got a distribution line and started making money using our staff and now, when we were forcing them, they went to the stock exchange. This is the first time I am seeing the accounts of Umeme being published and it was just recent; the publication was done in The Red pepper Newspaper. Today, I have seen it in The Daily Monitor. But initially, they could not publish their accounts. I know they did this because they wanted to show the public that they are doing something.

So, Madam Speaker, having said that – there are two types of leases, which the Prime Minister talked about. We have the operating lease and the financing lease. Now I do not know how ours is defined. But the moment you say that there is a lease, it means assets are going to be hired for use and that person must pay rent. But for this case, have we been paid for leasing? We have not been paid for leasing and I think that is what the committee is coming up with.

First, they are using our assets but with no payments. Madam Speaker, for the future companies that will come in – I do not even agree to the 50 –(Interjections)– okay, it has been said that at least 70 per cent. The reason for that is that it is Government that invests in the infrastructure. The biggest investor is Government. These people just come here to collect money.

In fact, for us who are now on pre-paid arrangement – recently, when they asked them how much we had invested in prepaid meters, they ran to our homes in Kyambogo and elsewhere to do the calculation. This is because they had just got the money from the stock exchange. Otherwise, they had had nothing.

Actually, the only investment they have is in the prepaid meters but also on money that does not belong to them –

THE SPEAKER: Please, make your proposal. Is it 50, 60 or 70?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, I want to first say that I agree with the committee but we should adjust this figure to at least 70 percent because the assets are owned by Government.

DR KASIRIVU: Madam Chair, I also support the recommendation. However, I would like to be helped by the committee because Umeme is not the only company involved in distribution. Some areas of this country have other companies doing concessionaires. Can I be helped what we will do with those other companies?

THE SPEAKER: Can we – we will give you an opportunity later. Let us first deal with the recommendations of the committee for now because we are also waiting for a proposal from hon. Achia. So, also keep your proposal. You will bring it in later; we shall discuss it.

Okay, I put the question that the recommendation, as amended at 70 percent, be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, I now move to recommendation No.2on page 156 of the report and say that we concur with it. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that this recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: On recommendation three, on page 157 of the report, I would like to say that we agree to it.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that that recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: We further agree with recommendation No.4on page 157 of the report.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that that recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: We further agree with recommendation No.5fon page 157 of the report.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that that recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: We further agree with recommendation No.6on page 157 of the report.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that that recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: We further agree with recommendation No.7 on page 157 of the report.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that that recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: We further agree with recommendation eight on page 158 of the report.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that that recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: We further agree with recommendation No. 9 on page 158 of the report.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that that recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: We further agree with recommendation No. 10 on page 158 of the report.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question – on this recommendation?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Madam Speaker, I want to raise an amendment but in fact, there is no need for an amendment. It is consequential. You recall where we talked about 14.7. It says that the strategy to bring the distribution losses to 14.7 percent – 18 percent becomes 14.7. We have already done it.

And the loss average – maybe, we can say that to match the regional distribution loss average of -3, which becomes 12 percent.

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, these are the targets that had been set by the regulator after investing into the network. So, by the year 2018, the losses were expected to have dropped to 14.7.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is what we are doing. (Interjections) What? It does not make sense? No, what we are saying is that we are amending that the distribution goes to 14.7 to match and the distribution losses to an average of 12 percent because you have to subtract the other 3 per cent.

MRS MULONI: Which 12 percent? No, I think I have made it very clear. When you look at the table, you realise that in the loss factor by 2018 we should have it at 14.7 percent. So, do not again deduct 3 percent from it.

MR MULONGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Yes, we are moving on to pass recommendations as if the tenacity of the current arrangement will continue. If that was an arrangement reached between the government and the providers of these services and yet we are even recommending termination of the same – we do not know what will obtain with the new comers on the scene; we do not know whether this will remain at the same rate. Are we trying to legislate in anticipation of what might happen in the future? I just want to seek your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: But are you saying that this one binds the future? I thought it only binds the players who have been addressed during this time. That is what I understand.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, this is benchmark. This is the mandate that Parliament gave to ERA. But we are now here setting a benchmark based on nothing. We are just saying should it go down or – so, this mandate was given to ERA. So, what are we – I would like to suggest that we recommend that ERA looks into this matter.

THE SPEAKER: But have you read the recommendation? ERA sued in conjunction with relevant players.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Yes, then let us stop there because they are the ones with the mandate. We cannot go on to lower it when the mandate is with ERA.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This Parliament tasked the committee on behalf of this institution to come up with a report before this House. The honourable colleague is alluding that our undertaking, having entrusted the committee to do all the research and consultation, is based on nothing. Is the honourable member in order to undermine the work of the committee before us?

THE SPEAKER: No, he is out of order.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I am seeking for you indulgence.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the recommendation is that ERA should together with the relevant players develop a strategy. That is the recommendation. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I am seeking for your indulgence. Hon. Simon has raised a fundamental point. If we set the strategy to bring the distribution losses to 18 or 14 percent, moving forward using current technology and the practice in other countries, that transformers and meters are decentralised in other countries, now, the strategy of the losses are even five because they are using prepaid meters; transformers are decentralised and meters and therefore, all losses due to theft have come down. 

Therefore, if we say the target of 18 per cent, it becomes very dangerous; 18 percent should not be there. We should keep quiet about it and that was the proposal from hon. Simon.

THE SPEAKER: with the strategy to bring down distribution losses.

MR EKANYA: yes, we just keep quiet about it instead of setting it because it can be done even below 14.

THE SPEAKER: But the minister had agreed with it.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do appreciate the contribution by hon. Ekanya, but you are now operating in a way with benchmarks. We know why we are proposing 18; that was by the time, if we left it blank and even ERA had set a target of 14. We know that in South Africa  it is less than 5, but we want to put something realistic. Now, we have even been helped by Government, ERA is saying it is 14.7 percent. 

So, I was thinking that we would replace instead of 18 that the committee had brought forward, we replace 18 with 14.7.

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, the response that we had given was premised on the fact that the regulator had looked at the issue of losses and set targets and also determined how much money must be invested in order to bring the losses to this level. So, in principle, the issue of reducing losses is acceptable; no doubt about it. I have no problem with that. Why we had brought in the 14.7 percent was because that was the target that ERA had set for Umeme after investing a certain amount of money. So, accepting what the committee has recommended is okay. 

MR EKANYA: Hon. Oboth Oboth, the chairperson has been in South Africa, the target is even 5 percent and we are now setting this for the next 5 years. These people were going to negotiate; their hands are tied and they will say, “You see, Parliament already said 14. Why don’t we put it at 5 percent; in case it goes higher, then come or we keep quiet?”

MRS MULONI: It is a regulatory matter, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Supposing we say that “the power loss reduction strategy to bring distribution losses to match the regional distribution losses” or something like that.

MRS MULONI: As long as adequate investments are made, then you can achieve. So, it also comes along with the investments that you are going to put in the sector, either Government or the operator or both.

7.35
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity. What hon. Kasule and Ekanya raised catches my feeling and thinking; supposing we bring this idea you are saying regional. Supposing the regional one increases it, shouldn’t it be a base to match ourselves with countries, for example, Rwanda and Tanzania? What I would propose is we just leave it blank and say, “the reduction strategy to bring the distributional losses down.” That will accommodate because you are already seeing that ERA’s target is already 14.7 per cent; here, the committee is recommending 18 per cent. So, by the standard of the committee, they are already ahead, so, putting ourselves to the region puts us in a trickier situation.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, this figure of 14.7 percent, which was determined by error, was not determined at will. These are technocrats who put in calculations and scientific formulas depending on the investments they are envisaging on the improvement of the system and it was scientifically arrived at 14.7 per cent. Therefore, I would urge my colleagues, hon. Members, that this is not an arbitrary figure, it was a figure, which was arrived at scientifically and we should take it.

7.37
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi East, Kanungu): Madam Speaker, in light of the argument, I just wanted to amend so that the recommendation reads that we bring down the distribution losses to at most 14.7 percent - that is the upper limit;  that means we can even reduce to lower than that. That will accommodate the different arguments.

7.37
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa West, Kabale): The spirit of the argument on the Floor is that we should leave the figure to the regulator because there is a formula for determining that and circumstances.But as Members of Parliament, we can suggest that we develop a power loss reduction strategy to bring the distribution losses to a single digit level because that is the minimum level and then, we leave it there in the next five years.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Madam Speaker this is also a two way thing. First of all, the reduction on losses is dependent on the investments and this investment, that is why there was a critical question asked by hon. Nandala, the question of what kind of risks do we have? Is it a financing risk? If Government fails to invest in this, how do we drive down the losses? What obligations does a company have in bringing them down? What kind of obligation? Do we have an agreement that the company must invest so much with in this period? 

And if the company does not do it and does not bring down the losses, what penalties are there for not investing? Unless we understand this, then we know in working towards the target, who works the most in terms of the obligation to reduce this loss. I am proposing that the minister clarifies to us before I propose the amendment. Then, if it is Government, then we are in control; we bring it to single digit.

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, I would strongly advise that for now, we leave the figure at 14.7 percent because this has been arrived at as my colleague says after some vigorous analysis.If we sit here and say we go to single digits, it may not be achievable for two reasons. One, you need a certain level of investment and then, of course, your money also has other callings. So, you would have to decide.

Secondly, even if you had all the resources, in order to carry out the remedial activities, you would need time. So, in five years, you may not be able to achieve the single digits. So, we are safer to leave it like this and then, we can review it. For example, it was 18 per cent but now, after review, we find that 14.7 per cent is applicable. So, we better leave it like this and review it with time.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, we do agree with that position but I thought that we were going to benefit from Kanungu if we put it at most. We are providing the ceiling but it can operate downwards, which is safer.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Oboth, can you restate your position?

DR BARYOMUNSI: ERA should, in conjunction with the relevant players, develop a power loss reduction strategy to bring the distribution losses to at most 14.7 per cent, in the next five years. That means if we put in more investment, we shall be able to bring it down to a single digit but we should cap it.

THE SPEAKER: It should not go beyond 14.7 per cent. Okay, hon. Members I put the question that recommendation No. 10 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, we agree with recommendation No. 11 on page 158 of the report and a lot of work is already being done. We want to see how we can accelerate pre-paid metering. (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: I thought the policy of Government was pre-paid metres and metred transformers so that a community like where Madam Speaker stays should know the units of power they use in that area. They can sit and say, “this is the bill we are paying and the cost.” This is because what Umeme does with some of these things is that there are people who steal power and they transfer the cost to others. So, can you really adjust to metering transformers so that we can have efficiency throughout?

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, what hon. Ekanya is saying is actually being done. If you have a community that would like to take care of itself and be metered at the transformer level, it is billed under a different category not as individuals but at a higher category and at a different tariff. So, that is already under practice. If you have a community that wants to be metered in that manner, you apply and you will be advised and guided on how to go about it.

I was saying that already, a lot of work is going on here and as Government, we want to accelerate pre-paid metering so that people are able to manage their bills comfortably. The strategy that the regulator had agreed with the concessionaire was that they were targeting 160,000 pre-paid meters by the end of this year and to have everyone on pre-paid metering by 2018. However, we think that with injection of funds by Government, we could actually accelerate and have everyone on pre-paid metering at a much earlier period.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that that recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: We have no objection to recommendation No. 12, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that that recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: We concur with recommendation No.13, Rt hon. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that that recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: We concur with recommendation No. 14 on page 159.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that that recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: We concur with recommendation No. 15 except for part two which says, “expansion and enhancement of the legal and institutional mandate of ERA by transforming it into an energy commission of Uganda with UETCL, UEDCL as a department. This would be a policy reversal and the fact that ERA is a regulator, you do not expect the operators to be part of its department. The regulator actually regulates those companies but we are in agreement with the rest of the recommendation.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson, what is your rationale? Okay, hon. Members, I put the question that recommendation No. 15 be amended by the deletion of part two.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that recommendation No. 15, as amended, be adopted by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: We concur with recommendation No. 16.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that that recommendation be adopted by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: We concur with recommendation No.17 on page 159.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that that recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: We concur with recommendation No. 18 on page 150.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that that recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: We concur with recommendation No. 19 on page 160.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that that recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: We concur with recommendation No. 20 on page 160.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that that recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: We concur with recommendation No. 21 on page 160.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that that recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: We concur with recommendation No. 22 on page 160.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that that recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: We concur with recommendation NO. 23.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that that recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: We concur with recommendation No. 24.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that that recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: We agree with recommendation No. 25.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that that recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: There was a proposal. Hon. Achia.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Madam Speaker, considering the discussion we have gone through regarding the cost of funding the various companies and the unbundling of UEB, I propose that this House recommends that the institutional arrangements in the Energy Sector that are currently in place be reviewed with a view to identifying efficiency in institutional arrangements and that the minister reports to this House in six months.

THE SPEAKER: But that is a vague recommendation. It is so broad. I do not know what she will have to look at. Earlier, you had something more specific but now, I do not know what she will look at in six months and report.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Madam Speaker, generally, that the unbundling has suddenly sky rocketed the cost from around Shs 2 billion to Shs 120 billion because we are paying the Boards of these four bodies including the generation company, the distribution company, ERA and ministry. For all of these bodies that we have created, we are paying billions of shillings and this unbundling has increased administrative costs.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Achia, I know the rationale and you have said it. What is the recommendation? It should be achievable. It should also be smart. You know it is vague.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: That this institutional arrangement be reviewed with a view to generate efficiency in the sector.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I see my colleague trying to bring it but he is bringing it in a broader way. But I thought that if you looked at the recommendation on page 30 (63), it covers what he is trying to say and it is more – I thought that would cover what he is trying to do if I am reading him right.

THE SPEAKER: Have we already taken it?

MR OKUPA: Yes, we have already –

THE SPEAKER: We have already agreed on it?

MR OKUPA: So, it captures and it is more specific - Page 30 on that 63 –

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Madam Speaker, that is the response on page 30 because now we have deleted. Actually, we were exchanging letters between him and me. But now, we have reviewed the idea that there would be a possible merger of certain institutions here. We have rejected that proposal by the committee.

So, in view of that, I am recommending that general review of the current institutional arrangements in place be undertaken with the view to identify efficiency –

THE SPEAKER: It is not achievable. 

7.51
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you. I thought that the recommendations that we have passed actually will improve efficiency in the sector if they are implemented.

Madam Speaker, in many other Parliaments, they have a general rule in the Rules of Procedure that when Parliament has passed recommendations, Government must report back within a specified period but our rules are silent and most often, we deliberate here and make recommendations and then, there is no follow up and we never know whether the Government has actually implemented. 

So, I wanted to accompany the resolutions that we have passed with a specific recommendation that the Leader of Government Business in Parliament should report to Parliament the progress of implementation of these recommendations within a period of three months so that we are sure that we have not wasted time all these many days. We should be updated and sure that Government is actually taking our recommendations seriously and we should progressively get reports from the Government side that they are implementing what we have submitted. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Achia, the members of the committee say that what you are saying is already part of their recommendation. 

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: True, it was in the committee recommendations – Recommendation 15 on page 30 sub-section 2. They were arguing for a merger of the generation, transmission and distribution but we have rejected it.

HON. MEMBERS: No!

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: We have rejected that, Madam. That is why the chairperson has conceded to the proposal of the minister that that would be going back.

THE SPEAKER: No. What he conceded to was the expansion and enhancement of the legal and institutional mandate of ERA by making it a commission comprising UETCL, UEDCL and UEGCL. That is what he conceded to as not feasible because the subject cannot be part of the board. That is what he conceded to.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: In that respect, my proposal then would be to merge UETCL, UEDCL and UEGCL – that means to merge generation, transmission and distribution as one body and leave the regulator out in order to get efficiency.

THE SPEAKER: So, to reconstitute UEB in other words?

7.54
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): I want to support Dr Baryomunsi on what he has brought. This is because we want only to separate two things – the regulator is the most important thing. We pull out the regulator because the regulator must be independent. 

If we merge distribution with transmission and generation – what is distribution? You generate in Jinja or wherever, you put on the grid and distribute through the wires – is not transmitting through the wires to distribute to our homes or factories? What do you need? What is happening is that if you have all these three, it means that you have three boards, three managing directors, three financial controllers and the cost is so enormous and it is factored in the tariff. The reason as to why –

THE SPEAKER: Okay, put it properly; formulate it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I support Dr Baryomunsi by saying that we amend the Electricity Act and the part to merge generation, transmission, and distribution. We only separate with the regulator, which is ERA for purposes of efficiency and cutting on the cost, which goes to – let them be directly under one entity.

THE SPEAKER:  Minister?

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, the minute you opened the sector to liberalisation and privatisation and you have other players with Government, where there is a regulator – now, the minute you combine, generation, transmission and distribution and yet, at the generating side you have private generators, one transmitter who buys power in bulk from the others and then sells it to the different distributors – we also have more than one distributor. There is competition both on distribution and generation and only one transmitter. 

So, the minute that there is competition and Government itself is involved in the business, then when you merge generation, transmission and distribution and you have Government now being the sole transmitter and yet, it is also in business in the generation and in the distribution, then there will be a conflict. So, the complexity – Government can analyse it and see how best to do it. We get the point but there is that complexity.

MR OKUPA: As the minister goes, I can concede to her having to consider a distribution, generation and transmission but can we have regulation completely distinct from them? Let it not be merged but have part of the regulation not merged together with them. I think we are agreeing on that. The regulation should not be part but distinct in order to regulate.

THE SPEAKER: I think that what the Members are saying is that they want a Uganda Generation, Transmission and Distribution Company. That is what they are saying.

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: That is what they are asking for. So, hon. Members, I put the question that that recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

7.59
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, I would like to move a new proposal. You know this report has many people who are involved but not all of them have been captured. What I mean is that no recommendation has been done to each and every one.And so, I want to move a new proposal that all the people who were involved in this transaction are named – whether you signed or did what – be held personally liable for the loss and abuse of office. 

The reason I am bringing this is that the committee has been kind to some people. There are those who signed and they have – if Ssebabi who was just with opinion has been brought, what about hon. Muloni who was in Washington and really signed is not here. (Interjections) - he is not here. So, I want to move – 

THE SPEAKER: Let us first hear from other Members also. 

8.00
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, for the avoidance of doubt, I beg to move a motion as follows: In accordance with Rules 47, 48 and 51, and I beg that you invoke your powers that this motion be moved without the three days’ notice. I have given a copy to the Speaker and it is very brief. I will read it very slowly in very clear Ugandan English.

“WHEREAS the ad hoc committee on energy on the performance of the electricity sub-sector in Uganda has presented for consideration and adoption  ofa report with a number of resolutions;

AND whereas a number of revelations have come to light in the said report that demonstrate the unprofessional and unethical conduct of a number of Government officials, legal professionals and politicians;
AWARE THAT the current political leadership is capable of conflict of interest in this matter;

FURTHER aware that the Parliament of Uganda is obliged to ensure accountability on the part of the executive;

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that:
    1. Since the contracts between Uganda Government and Umeme Ltd and Eskom have been terminated with immediate effect by resolution of this House, Government should, within 30 days, present a technical paper to this House, indicating the manner in which the energy sector is going to be managed.
    2. The civil servants, public officials and the political leaders, both present and past, implicated in the said report, be held personally liable for the loss occasioned to the country.
    3. In light of conflict of interest demonstrated by the report, the current minister in charge of the sector, who was then an employee of the state enterprise in the ministry and participated in the formulation of the terms and conditions of the contract, which occasioned loss to Uganda, be replaced in so far as the presentation of the Government response to the report is concerned.”

Madam Speaker, this motion is moved and is seconded by a couple of other people like hon. Nandala-Mafabi, hon. Odonga Otto and hon. Beatrice Anywar. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do appreciate the thinking behind this motion. But then, the responses have been completed. I do not know what else is remaining.

Secondly, what we have done is to recommend – it is not our responsibility to terminate the contract – we recommend to the government to terminate. So, for us to move ahead of the government would not be right. I would rather we buy hon. Baryomunsi’s proposal that we get a feedback. What do you think, Prime Minister?

8.04
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Of course, I would not certainly support a motion like that. But anyway, the motion is not on Table. The Speaker asked me a specific question and I have risen to answer it. And that question is: In relation to what hon. Baryomunsi proposed – I think it was about the period. 

First of all, I would have no objection to the principle that in this particular case, Government comes back and reports progress or its response to the recommendations made by this House. And he proposes three months. I agree with you that three months is too short a time. (Interjections) I agree with my dear sister that hon. Baryomunsi’s three months is too short a time. So, I suggest that you give us six months because these are complex matters. I can come in one month and give you a report of what we are doing or not doing. (Laughter) But if you want real answers on where we have taken action, I suggest six months.

8.06
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not know why, but I am inclined to agree with the Prime Minister’s proposal, especially that it is Government committing to do what we are requiring of it within six months. And we have had many times –It is a positive step. Six months from now is not much a time, given that even we, as a committee, had to take a lot of time to look into this. Madam Speaker, I implore colleagues that we agree to six months.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not know how many recommendations we have approved but all of them require action. I do not know whether we would-be realistic to say that they can all be answered in one month. Termination is a process – I have never seen that agreement and so, I do not know the process of termination – whether it involves writing and coming – I have no idea.

MR OBOTH: Termination itself begins by giving a notice of 90 days. So, there is no way you can expect the government to come back and report within 90 days and yet, they are supposed to give a notice of three months. So, by the structure of the concession –(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: My recommendation was that Government should give a progress report. We are not necessarily saying that within three months, they must have fully implemented all the recommendations. And I was also looking at the end of the session because the three months will take us to June; they can give a progress report because I am sure they would not have implemented everything. But I do not think it creates any harm. Unless you are saying that you are not very eager and enthusiastic to start implementing the recommendations; otherwise, within three months, there must be something to report.

MR BIGIRWA: Three months would be realistic. And I agree with the committee chair when it comes to the legality, especially to do with the termination of the contract. Madam Speaker, you will realise that not every recommendation in the report is about termination; there are other recommendations to do with restructuring and others. So, I would propose that in line with the legality surrounding the termination, maybe we can cap that one out. But with the others – 

THE SPEAKER: No, let us agree on a progress report within three months.  

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I have thought a little more about it. One year is more realistic - (Interjections) Yes, you know, really, you know what you have - it is not only termination, it is even re-constituting UEB because it is –(Interjections)(Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Madam speaker, the Prime Minister should be able to - I love you and respect you, -(Interjections)– he is my elder; the Bible talks about love. It is not erotic love, it is – do you want me to preach?

Madam Speaker, it is very unfortunate that the Prime Minister is seemingly taking us unserious – we have just agreed by consensus across the board that we want a progress report, not the final position but from the approach of the Prime Minster, it is very evident and clear to us and this country that there is lack of willingness to take any step towards the direction of the interests of Ugandans.

Is the Prime Minister in order to negate, first of all, the proposal he made by himself and we agreed with him, at the end of the day, he is changing his mind. Is he in order to take us for a ride, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Prime minister, we should meet each other half way. Let us agree on the progress report on the status of the recommendations at three months. You say, “I have attended to five; the other thirty are still waiting”, then we give you more time. 
But to say that one year, Prime Minister, no. Please, I am appealing to you. Is that okay? So, progress report, three months. We have decided.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just want to add one more amendment and this is a practice world-wide. Parliaments do recommend that the Government considers hospitals and military installation exempted from bills. I beg to recommend.

The reason is - world-wide, I have done research on this, hospitals, especially Government hospitals and military installations, people lose life because they do not pay power bills. I wish to recommend.

THE SPEAKER: But let us leave the managers to deal with that-(Interruption)-Hon. Members, you know, the way you presented that motion, you are saying that the minister should not be there until the report is completed. It has been done; so, it is done. We have finished.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: procedure -

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Speaker, guidance. Yes, the third part of the motion moved by hon. Ogwal was that the minister should be involved in the response in this report. The minister – we have just said we are giving them six months to implement; is it the same minister going to implement, including sacking herself?

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Members, what do you want us – do you want to say we have now sacked the minister?

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: No, Madam Speaker. It is possible that when they are implementing, the government might see it necessary to ask the minister to step aside or to – So, how shall she implement-

THE SPEAKER: We shall need a specific motion given with notice; argued on its own merit. I put the question that the government do report to Parliament on the progress of the status of recommendations in three months.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR KASIRIVU: Madam Chair, I wanted to move an amendment to recommendation No.3  which is on page 19, where the Attorney-General together with the Minister of Energy and ERA instituted a view of concessional agreement signed with Umeme Ltd. I wanted to add other power distributors, so that the Attorney-General reviews other agreements because we are not sure what other agreements are saying.So, I wanted to say, instead of only Umeme, to add other concessionaires.

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Members, have you examined those other agreements? How can you make a recommendation on something you have not examined? You are anticipating. You cannot move ahead of – they have not been brought before this House, we do not know the content. If you want, you will have to move a specific motion. Bring the agreements here, we discuss and – but now, to say, “look for all of them.” It is not fair.

MRS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Recommendation No. 1 on page 52 was on a matter that was the same under recommendation No.2 on page 52 and since that recommendation no. 2 on page 52, we discussed and deleted it, I want to recommit that recommendation No. 1 which is on the same matter also be deleted. (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: No, she gave notice. Please, speak to it.

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, this was a matter to do with the lost curb and based on the discussions that we held, it was recognised that this was a policy issue that was simply giving a limit beyond which Government was at a liberty to terminate the contract and it was not a regulatory matter for this curb to be put in the tariff and therefore, the technical officers who did the discussions and recommended for that administrative action did not do any wrong because it was to do with the management of the contract. (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, these are some of the fears we have been having. And we had earlier stated that the political head given a responsibility and - 

In this case, we are exonerating a political head to take political responsibility and we are selectively exonerating the technical team from also taking responsibility. I would want to be clarified- at what point in time does one, the political head take political responsibility in this country and two, why the selective exoneration of the technical team while they are supposed to be taking responsibility.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not think we should make this matter general. We discussed what was the role of the minister, the junior minister, who wrote to the Minister of Finance about policy issues, I asked you, what is the connection between the Minister of Finance and ERA? Where is the instruction from that minister saying, “make it 38?” There was no nexus between the minister’s instructions and the ERA. He was writing to another minister, not the regulatory authority.

MR WERIKHE KAFABUSA: Madam Speaker, after your explanation, recommendation No. 2 on page 8 and recommendation one on page 7 actually go hand in hand. If, indeed, we have pronounced ourselves on the amendment in respect of recommendation No.2on page 52, it means that even recommendation one equally – because there is no way you can exonerate the minister and you leave the technical people; the explanation was the same.

MR LOKERIS: Madam Speaker and colleagues, the technical people discussed – the regulatory authority and the technical team – were haggling over the suggestion by Umeme that the technical losses should be at 41. The discussions went on until they agreed that it should not be 41 but 38. It is this discussion that was reported to the minister to consider the capping. That was done after the technical discussions had taken place. That is how the minister came to think that it was the right one. It gave those people the chance to oscillate below. What this means is that the minister acted on the basis of these discussions.

So, the ingredients are the same. Since we have already said the minister did not make any mistake, then even the ones who made a decision should not be held liable because the discussions were on the same matter.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am well aware that the technocrats are supposed to advise the minister, if I can be corrected and that should be technical advice. So, is the minister in order to mislead and misguide us when he is very aware of the work of the technocrats in guiding the minister?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Mulongo.

MR MULONGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, First of all, your initial question about the minister writing to his colleague in finance and the nexus between the Minister of Energy and ERA was fundamental.

We elaborately put it in our report that given the PERD Statute, the overall management of the institutions under divesture was under finance. It is finance that appointed the board. It is, therefore, finance that determined policies that were being implemented by divesture institutions.

So, the address by the Minister of State and of course, earlier by the Minister of Energy himself was correctly to the Minister of Finance. To demonstrate that this had a direct effect on the implementing institution and the regulatory board can be seen from the point that it was followed by ERA. In other words, by writing to the Minister of Finance, the responsibility directly fell on the shoulders of ERA to implement that decision.

So, I find a clear trail and a clear nexus between the directives were issues correctly under the standing laws to be effected by ERA. That is one.

The second is about the responsibility of the technical people, in as far as this report is concerned, regarding the vulnerability they exposed our country to in terms of high costs emanating from the reviewing of the limit from 33 to 38.

Madam Speaker, of course, I agree with the minister’s explanation about – if you look at our table 3.3 on page 47, in which we talk about the loss factor, you realise that we carried out computations and how this translates into a cost to this country. 

The tariff is arrived at by looking at the cost of generation, the cost of transmission and the cost of distribution plus the losses.

This is simply because somebody must bear the cost of the power that has been sold but not paid for because it is either lost by way of technical reasons or commercials. This is how Ugandans bore the burden of the high cost.

When you allow the threshold to go higher, it simply means that the structure of the tariff can play even higher as long as it does not exceed the threshold. We have demonstrated this in two ways. In one, we showed the escalation of the tariff in that table and two, by way of the rebates – we may not agree with the minister on issues elsewhere, but the rebates involved movement of funds. 

When you look at page – please, look at the nexus between the rebates after the subsidy and the high tariffs that we are paying that led to the exaggerated power losses as an incentive to the power distributor. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, we have made our recommendation. Let the government report back to us on what they have done as agreed in those three months. House is adjourned until Tuesday.

(The House rose at 8.28 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 1 April 2014 at 2.00 p.m.)
