Thursday, 25 March 2010 

Parliament met at 12.43 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.) 

South Africa National Anthem (Two Verses)

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your Excellency, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda; Your Excellency Dr Jacob Zuma, President of the Republic of South Africa; Your Excellency Mama Khumalo, the First Lady of South Africa; the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Ministers, Members of Parliament, our distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen: sawubona!

On behalf of all the Members of Parliament and indeed Ugandans, I have immense pleasure in welcoming Your Excellency, Dr Jacob Zuma, President of the Republic of South Africa, and your delegation to the Parliament of Uganda! (Applause)

I wish also to welcome our President, President Museveni, and we thank you, Your Excellency, for inviting President Zuma to come to our country and also make it possible for him to address the people of Uganda from the Parliament. Thank you very much! (Applause) 

Your Excellencies and hon. Members, for the benefit of our distinguished guests, I would like to inform you that this is the Eighth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. We have 327 Members: 214 constituency representatives, 80 district women representatives, 10 Army representatives, five workers’ representatives, five youth representatives, five representatives of people with disabilities and eight ex-officio Members nominated by the President. 

This Parliament, which commenced in 2006, is operating under the multi-party system where the parties are represented and here, some honourable members are independent. Your Excellencies, our ruling party has the bulk of the Members of this House but the official Opposition is the Forum for Democratic Change party. We also have the Democratic Party, the Uganda Peoples’ Congress party, the JEEMA party with one Member and the Conservative Party also with one Member, and we also have the 37 independents. 

The Parliament of Uganda has a vibrant committee system, which I am proud to say is one of the best committee systems in Africa. This has been said many times. Your Excellencies, many parliaments from the region come to understudy and adopt some of the best practices from this House. It is these committees, which process all matters that are referred to Parliament, which are then formally adopted in the plenary by way of reports. 

I wish to further report that Parliament enjoys good relations with other legislatures all over the world especially under the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association and the Inter-Parliamentary Union. Indeed, the Parliament of Uganda enjoys very good relations with the Parliament of South Africa and with the provincial legislatures and Your Excellencies, I am happy to inform you that many delegations from the provincial legislatures of South Africa, comprising Members of Parliament and staff, have been to this Parliament on exchange visits. Similarly, many Ugandan parliamentary delegations have visited South Africa to exchange visits, attend conferences and participate in seminars. Your Excellency, just a week a go, I led a parliamentary delegation to the Executive Committee Meeting of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association - Africa Region, to the Port City of Durban. 

Your Excellency, may I take this opportunity to congratulate you upon assumption to the high office of the President of the African National Congress and that of the President of South Africa! (Applause) This Parliament commends you for the tremendous work you have done and are still doing for the people of South Africa and Africa in general. But in a special way, I wish to commend Your Excellency for brokering peace in Burundi, who is our neighbour, and more recently your very visible efforts in brokering understanding, reconciliation and conflict resolution that we hope will usher in peace and stability for the government and the people of Zimbabwe. (Applause)

Your Excellency, you are our guest and this is your day. I would, therefore, like to conclude by saying that it is a great pleasure and honour to us, for you, President Zuma, to have found time out of your very busy schedule to visit Uganda and to also come to the Parliament. We commend our President for continuing to befriend distinguished people who always end up coming here to meet the people of Uganda. I wish you Your Excellency a very pleasant stay in this county. I wish you rewarding meetings and a safe journey back home.

I now invoke my powers under Article 101(2) of the Constitution in conjunction with the powers conferred upon me by rule 194(1) of our Rules of Procedure, to invite Your Excellency, President Zuma, to address the Parliament. 

12.43
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA (His Excellency, Jacob Zuma): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. Your Excellency, President Museveni, the hon. Speaker, hon. Ministers and deputy ministers, hon. Members of Parliament, and distinguished guests. Allow me first of all, to thank you for this privilege to address the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, on this occasion of our state visit. 

We have been treated exceptionally well since our arrival; the warmth is indicative of the depth between our two countries and peoples. From ministers to senior officials and the business delegation representing various sectors, we all extend our gratitude for the wonderful hospitality and look forward to a very successful visit. We have accepted the invitation to undertake this state visit because there is a lot that we must do together to ensure that the bonds of friendship and solidarity yield fruits economically, politically and socially. 

But before we outline our views on areas of co-operation, let me state that people of South Africa have not forgotten what Ugandans did for them during their hour of need. 

In 1989, when the negotiations for the independence of Namibia seemed to stall due to the ANC/MK presence in Angola, the leadership of ANC took a historic decision to withdraw from Angola to allow the process in Namibia to be completed. Just to explain that, the negotiators from South Africa wanted to make the presence of MK in Angola a condition to stall the negotiations. So we thought that if we took a decision to remove our camps in Angola, it would clear that obstacle.

The ANC approached some countries in Southern Africa for possible military bases for its armed wing; the Government and people of Uganda, under the leadership of His Excellency President Museveni, received us with open arms, and our cadres landed in this state and sister country safely. Many of those who received their basic training here in Uganda occupy positions of leadership in the South African National Defence Force today. Our words of gratitude to the Ugandan people should be heard by all in this beautiful country, young and old.

We will always remember the sacrifice, solidarity and support of Uganda during the struggle against one of the worst crimes against humanity. It is with in those same hills and on those same streets that our liberating cadres found comfort, inspiration and strength. The people of Uganda never denied shelter and assistance and they never asked for anything in return. They gave because they knew the difficulties that we faced and they could not sit on the sidelines when their brothers and sisters in South Africa needed them. Our relationship is based on what we experience together and that strong relationship and comradeship.

Hon. Speaker, Your Excellency, today I salute you as comrades and partners in developing this continent, we all call home. Arising from the historic and unbreakable bond between our peoples, the attainment of democracy in South Africa created new opportunities for co-operation. Former President, Nelson Mandela, visited your country twice in 1994, the year of our liberation; a signal of the importance that we attach to this relationship. This year we celebrate the 20th of his release from prison and it befits that today we now stand before the leaders of the Republic of Uganda to once renew our commitment. Let us celebrate together the emancipation of our people and the common goals that we pursue to develop Africa.
 
Ladies and gentlemen, the excellent relations between South Africa and Uganda were elevated to a strategic level with the signing, in 2005, of the South Africa-Uganda Joint Permanent Economic Commission. We trust that this visit will allow us to further explore the function of this and other formal mechanisms of cooperation. 

It is important that the practice of our bilateral relations, much as our intent and that of the implementation follows agreements in doing so - we can recall recent history of effective co-operation with significant results. South Africa and Uganda have worked closely in the search for peace in Burundi with Uganda as chair of the regional initiative and South Africa as the facilitating country. I had the pleasure to work with Your Excellency during the Burundi process. I was inspired by your commitment to finding a solution and by the way in which you were always ready to provide leadership.

Hon. Speaker, we continue to co-operate closely in continental and international fora working together towards the shared objectives of a better Africa and a better world. Much of our co-operation today has been made possible by the close ties of our past. 

During his visit to Uganda, in 2005, former President, Thabo Mbeki, pledged, as a token of gratitude to the Government and people of Uganda, to assist in the construction and refurbishment of the military camp of the ANC in Kaweweta into a school of leadership facility for senior Police, prisons and military personnel –(Applause)- and we are privileged that on this visit, we formally opened this school –(Applause)– which will remain as a testimony to the trustworthiness of the Ugandan people. 

During my own visit to the site on 17 July 2008, I said and I quote, “As liberation movements in the past, we were always conscious of the changing role of soldiers. We understood that the cadres that we trained to liberate our countries would one day play a meaningful role in an integrated society ready to defend the very same revolution that they have been engaged in.” 

We are conscious also of the changing nature of bilateral relations. Once we were comrades in the fight against racism, now we are partners in the struggle to achieve a better life for our people. (Applause) We are partners in expanding the opportunities for commerce, investment, trade and the exchange of technological and technical capacity. 

We both seek to increase the economic capacity of our people to create sustainable employment and to meet the basic needs of the poor.

We both seek to provide every child with quality education and to produce graduates with skills and experience suited to the needs of the modern economy. 

We both seek to better utilise our significant natural resources and to diversify our economies. 

We both seek to improve our regulatory environment to become more competitive and to create opportunities for the development of small business. 

If we tried to achieve these objectives alone, in isolation, we will at best meet with only limited success. These are objectives we need to pursue in co-operation with others. 

Uganda is a country with great economic potential and an important destination for South Africa and South African trade and investment. South Africa exports to Uganda an amount which is equivalent to SAR 1.3 billion and imports SAR 98 million from Uganda. 

Close to 50 South African companies operate in Uganda, contributing to employment creation and to the country’s tax base. In a range of sectors from banking to bottling, from energy to retail, South African companies are an integral part of the Ugandan economy. This has much about business confidence in Uganda and about sentiment towards its prospects for future growth. 

It also says much about the country’s position in the region and the contribution it makes towards stability and development in East Africa. 

Although there is already a high level of South African investment here, tremendous hope exists for further expansion, particularly in the areas of technical and human resource development. 

We have come to Uganda with a significant business delegation keen to discuss with their counterparts opportunities for future co-operation. This is an element of our bilateral relations that we are keen to nature and we hope to discuss at Government-to-Government level as to how we can facilitate this inter action. 

The people of Uganda and South Africa will be looking at this visit as an opportunity to advance their interests. They will be asking what benefit it brings to them as they struggle to improve their lives.

Hon. Members, the people of Africa have done much to free themselves from the yoke of oppression, exploitation and what. They fought colonialism, obtained the money, but not all of the conflicts that once plagued the continent. They forged democratic and stable nations where once there was dictatorship. 

Now, they must confront the challenge of forging a future free from deprivation and disease. They must build an Africa that is prosperous and free. Challenges are many but none can deny the progress that has been made. If we are to proceed any further, we will need to do so together. The unity of the nations of Africa is paramount.

Since its formation, almost a century ago, African National Congress took as one of its central objectives, the unity of the people of Africa. (Applause) That has informed the vision and programme of the South African liberation movement ever since. It is an objective that is shared by many on this continent; not least the leaders and people of Uganda. That is why we have a shared responsibility to build such unity, to strengthen continental institutions like the African Union and support continental programmes like the New Partnership for African Development - I know it is NEPAD in short. We need to support institutions like the Pan African Parliament to ensure it indeed becomes an organ that can effectively represent the will of the people of Africa. (Applause)

I wish to take this opportunity of being in this House to make a special plea to the hon. Members of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda to invest time and energy in the work of the Pan African Parliament. Only through the efforts of dedicated public representatives will this institution become a real force for continental democracy.

In July this year, Uganda will host the African Union summit. This country will be called upon to work with the continent to promote unity and togetherness and ensure that the continent maintains its cohesiveness. We know that this country, will indeed, lead us well as a host. (Applause)

We also wish to thank Uganda for supporting the square kilometre Array project, especially during the African Ministers’ Conference on Science and Technology held in Egypt recently. (Applause) The FKA Project was endorsed as an African project in preparation for the 2012 final selection between South Africa and Australia. 

Hosting the telescope will help us answer fundamental questions in the fields of astronomy, physics and cosmology. We may even detect intelligent life elsewhere on the universe. It will underscore our capability in science and innovation and also add prestige to Africa.

As we seek unity at a political level as Africans, we must acknowledge that lasting unity must involve economic integration of our continent. Common markets are far more effective at bringing countries together than common declarations. Economic development is constrained by the borders that colonialism imposed on the African landscape. That is why we all support economic integration across regions. We have to overcome lines drawn on a map; lines that reflect more of the differences between the nations of 19th Century Europe that worked on them than between the peoples of today’s Africa. The peoples of today’s Africa are certainly different and that must be reflected in their integration.

We must throw our own lines on the map. These should be lines that represent roads, railways, electricity lines, pipe lines, fibre optic cables. (Applause) Africans must develop the capacity to trade with other Africans; they must be able to invest in each other’s economies and draw on each other’s skills and expertise.

We are a continent rich in minerals, in produce, in people, yet we remain very poor. It is only by uniting our peoples; by pooling our resources and combining our efforts that we will overcome this devastating legacy. (Applause) That is what makes the relationship between South Africa and Uganda so important. 

Within our respective regions, we both have important political and economic roles to play. We both make a significant contribution to the development of our respective regional economic communities; we are both involved in conflict resolution and peace-keeping; we are both attractive destinations for investment, trade and tourism and we both offer great potential for commercial development.  

At the same time, we share a common vision for Africa’s development. In other words, co-operation between our two countries stands to benefit not merely our two countries but also the broader effort of continental generations. Indeed, it could regenerate Africa.

Let me close by saying that Uganda has always been seen as the geographic heart of this region and indeed on the African Continent. It binds through the collection of music, art and cultural activities. Its rhythm vibrates along the more than 30 indigenous languages. It embodies diversity, but cultivates a proud nation.

Hon. Speaker, we would like to celebrate with Uganda the excitement we are to experience soon of hosting the first ever African soccer World Cup. (Applause) The world will descend on South Africa in June and July and we will do our best to make the tournament a monumental success. (Applause) We have to use the World Cup to challenge all stereotypes about this continent. Together in this African World Cup, we must provide that as Africans. We are capable of the best! (Applause)

Once more, I thank you most sincerely for the privilege you have accorded us to address you, the elected representatives of the people of Uganda. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your Excellence, I believe the applause speaks volumes about what you have spoken today and I want to thank you, your Excellency, President Zuma for the very powerful message especially concerning the future of our continent. I want to assure you that I will find time on the Order Paper at some stage for the Members of this House to debate this speech. Thank you so much. (Applause)

Your Excellency, President Museveni, it is always a pleasure to have you with us and I think it would be cheating us if you did not speak to the Members today. 

As I invite you, I know that you are familiar with the sitting arrangement in this House, but your coming today with President Zuma has enabled us to have free sitting. (Laughter) Your Excellency, I invite you to address the Parliament. (Applause)

1.30
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Mr Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): Your Excellency and brother, Dr Jacob Zuma, the First Lady of South Africa, the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker of Parliament, hon. Ministers, hon. Members of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen. We have one guest of honour today; I am not a guest of honour. The guest of honour is President Jacob Zuma. (Applause) 

I just want to thank him for agreeing to visit us, first of all and also for coming to the Parliament to talk to you. (Applause) 

The speech he gave is full of great insights into the future of Africa. Many of them are in accord with our positions, which are well known to you. The speech is from a wealth of experience of the principal organisation which President Zuma leads, the African National Congress. It is the oldest political party in Africa. It was founded in 1912.

Now I can hear somebody who is not well informed –(Laughter)– trying to bring up the credentials of some other group. That group cannot feature much, because after the African National Congress – and that is why you people should take politics more seriously, do a little bit of study so that you are informed. After the ANC, there were many other parties in Africa like the ones in Gold Coast (Ghana), even the ones in Nigeria are much older than some of the groups one Member is trying to front. (Laughter)

The African National Congress becomes a very important player because by 1900, old Africa had succumbed to foreign invasion; all of the old Africa had been colonised, except for Ethiopia. Only Ethiopia defeated colonialism at least for that time. Later on, they were also occupied by the Italians in 1935. But in 1896, Ethiopians had defeated the Italians in the fight of Adowa. So by 1900, the whole of Africa had been colonised. 

This was a vote of no confidence in old Africa because to be conquered is not something you can be proud of. So the old systems had all let Africa down; they failed Africa. That is how these people in South Africa said, “By the way, we need to organise ourselves afresh”, and they came up with the African National Congress in 1912. 

In 1955, I was a school boy in one of the schools in Ntungamo. I was in primary three and I heard a very nice song being sung by the older boys who were in primary six - they were called “goers”. That they were going from the primary - they were finishing. And it was a very beautiful song so I inquired what sort of song it was but it was in a language, which I could not understand. Apparently, it was a Zulu song which has just been played now as the National Anthem of South Africa. (Applause)

As President Jacob Zuma told you, we came much later on the political scene but we gained state leadership earlier than the African National Congress who had been fighting for a long time. You know how we came here. (Laughter) We came here in 1986, took over the leadership, of course we had been active for many years but not as long as the ANC.

Now in 1989, as President Zuma told you, of course I had been working with the African National Congress office in Dar-es-Salaam from the 1960s; 1967-1968 and I was working with comrades like Pirisio, Josiah Jele and others but in 1989 or there about, a delegation came. I think it was led by Alfred Nzo or somebody like that and they told me the story which the President told you that the ANC had to leave Angola because the Angola Government and the Cubans were negotiating with the South African Whites to give independence to Namibia but they could not give independence to Namibia unless ANC left Angola. 

I took the matter to the Cabinet. You know you people, you think politics is just a career. (Laughter) I do not mean all of you but maybe some of you. (Laughter)

HON. MEMBERS: Awori. (Laughter)

MR MUSEVENI: Awori is a very wise comrade -(Laughter)- unlike some of the others who cannot read the compass properly. (Laughter)

That Cabinet meeting where I put this issue was one of the longest. When you remember that time, we had a broad-based Government that means we had all these different groups including some of the ones which are fighting for seniority. Now, I do not want to reveal what we discussed there but some of the people were saying, “Look here, how can we annoy the Whites? If we bring ANC here, the Whites will be very angry and we already have problems with Kony.” You know we already had problems with Sudan and we were adding on the South African Whites. The question was: what would be the situation? 

Fortunately, I had enough support and I remember what everybody was saying and who was sitting where because I remember the meeting very well. (Laughter)

So in the end what we call in our political language, the progressives defeated the reactionaries -(Applause)- in the Cabinet. So I was able to go back and tell our brothers - there was the treasurer, an elderly man who used to come during that time -(Interjections)- yes, that one. I do not remember the details but I was able to tell the comrades that, “The ANC people can come here”. In fact, initially we had been told that the African Union would feed them and so on but the African Union has got its own problems. So we said they would eat whatever we are eating. That is how they came here. (Applause)

Soon after, I got a delegation from the Whites this time. Somebody tricked me; some of these donors; he came to see me and said, “Now you are in touch with the ANC but would you also like to be in touch with the other group, the Whites?” I said, “I have no problem”. Then a big delegation of the Whites came led by a General, Malani; the one who was in charge with a letter from De Klerk which I have in my files –(Laughter)- saying that, “Do not keep ANC there because now we want to be friends with you.” I also answered him and my copy is in my records. I answered De Klerk saying, “I have no problem being friends with you but I cannot have new friends at the expense of the old ones.” (Laughter) 

What was interesting here is the ideological position of leaders. If your ideology is not sorted out - after a long struggle, Mr Mandela was released and our people there took over leadership in 1994. As soon as South Africa got free, the Whites did not care about what was happening to the Black people. They were the first to run to South Africa. The one who has got a toothache goes to South Africa; the one who has got -(Laughter)

I congratulate the people of South Africa -(Applause)- for not letting us down and bringing victory adding new strength to Africa because now Africa has got new strength with the Black people taking over power in South Africa. (Applause) South Africa was there in the past but it was giving strength to other forces on the continent. 

South Africa, under the leadership of the ANC, is giving strength to us –(Applause)– freedom-loving Africa. Comrade Zuma is a freedom fighter. (Applause) He was in prison on Robben Island with Nelson Mandela for ten years before he was released, after which he escaped out of South Africa to Swaziland from where he started leading part of the struggle; he was doing underground work. So, you are very lucky to have these veterans coming here to talk you. (Applause) And you do yourselves some good if you listened carefully to what the veterans are telling you.

Whenever I meet our people from Southern Africa – of course one of the similarities is culture because our languages are very close. Only this morning I was asking him how they call home in our languages there in South Africa. He told me that home is called “Ikhaya” which of course all of you know. Even in Lugbara or Madi, they call it “Ikhaya” –(Interjections)– yes! (Laughter)

President Jacob Zuma talked about insuring Africa. Many people know only how to insure houses, businesses – I hear that some can insure a cat or something like that, but what is amazing is that people do not know that Africa needs insurance - Africa was colonised in the past. Other people who were colonised are no longer there. 

I just came from Brazil yesterday – when you go there or you go to the United States where many of you like to go – the people they call Americans now are not the original Americans. The people who are there are now calling themselves Americans. The original Americans were exterminated – finished! Why: because they were conquered. Once you are conquered, either you will be exterminated or you will survive as a slave. The Africans survived conquest because our strong genes – we do not die easily. (Laughter)

What really amazes me and when I just sit and watch all these prayers is the fact that 50 years after we got back our freedom, people are not thinking of how to insure Africa from ever being colonised again. They are busy running up and down with other things – full of themselves; it is really amazing. So, I am glad that President Jacob Zuma is talking about strategies of insurance for Africa. You are insuring cats, dogs, buildings, cars, but please can you remember to think about insuring the future of the black people? (Applause)

Finally, on the bilateral issues, as President Zuma told you, South Africa has been very active in working with us in Burundi; they helped us. They even sent their soldiers there to help our Burundi people there settle. We thank them very much for the help. (Applause) But also even in Congo – South Africa helped so much in stabilising the situation there.

On the business side, I would like to say that South African companies are playing a very big role here. One of the biggest taxpayers now in Uganda is MTN – I think they are paying something like US $100 million. I think they are paying Shs 200 billion. That company, MTN is paying US $100 million in taxes to the –(Interjections)– it is your money but in the past you were keeping it under the mattresses. (Laughter) And if the money is under the mattresses, it cannot be taxed. But by pulling the money out from your mattresses, it is now taxable and can be used to provide services.

I have discussed with President Jacob Zuma – we want to emphasise two areas in our co-operation. The first one being infrastructure. There are some areas in the infrastructure that we are going to work on, especially energy.

The other area is agro-processing. (Applause) Mr President, in Uganda we produce crops much more easily than in other countries. We also produce a lot of crops – right now we have got maize – we have produced so much maize that there is a big glut. A few years ago we had a big glut of milk – we had so much milk. This is caused by lack of processing. When we process, like with milk, now that we are processing milk and selling it all over the world, the glut is no longer there because it is sold. So, all these products can be processed and sold. 

We are going to address the business forum; there, I will be telling them where they can go in terms of business in Uganda. 

On your behalf, I would like to salute the African National Congress for building a good centre at Kaweweta. (Applause) Kaweweta is our former base in the bush, which we gave to the ANC when they came here. They have now built a very good centre for leadership there. So, some of the people who are interested in skills of leadership could benefit from that centre. (Laughter) It is called Oliver Thambo Leadership School. 

Oliver Thambo was the Acting President of the ANC for a long time during the time the ANC was fighting. I think he took over after the death of Albert Lutuli -(Interjections)- Mr Mandela was not the ANC President; there was another one called Albert Lutuli who died in prison. He was killed by a train. Oliver Thambo then took over. So, that school is named after him.

Again, Mr President, we thank you for having come to visit us and for having agreed to share this wealth of knowledge with our young and aspiring politicians -(Laughter)– who need all the necessary input so that they can be able to become strong and profitable useful leaders. You can be a leader but without bringing much profit. Thank you very much. (Laughter)(Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your Excellency, we want to thank you very much for your address and for the humour you always inject into your messages. Thank you very much. (Applause)

MR MUSEVENI: I forgot, Your Excellency, to introduce the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly. Maybe they could stand up? (Applause)

So, we have these three Parliaments: this Parliament here, then the East African parliament and the Pan African - are they here? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you again, Your Excellency. Hon. Members, I have three announcements to make. The first one is that you are invited to the Parliamentary Prayer Fellowship tomorrow at Imperial Royale Hotel, Primrose Hall, at 7.30 a.m. The cards are in your pigeon holes. 

Secondly, because of this very historic and landmark visit of President Jacob Zuma and Mama Khumalo, you are invited for a group photograph on the steps of Parliament together with our President after the close of this meeting. 

The third one is that I would want to wish you a very good Easter but because President Zuma has invited you for the World Cup, I want you to have sufficient time to go and organise together with your voters to go to South Africa –(Laughter)- to defend and cheer massively for our teams and also be visible in South Africa. 

So, I will adjourn the House to 6th April so that you can enjoy Easter, have a rest, meet your voters and come back refreshed. The House is adjourned. 

 South Africa National Anthem (Two Verses)

Uganda National Anthem (Two Verses)

(The House rose at 2.03 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 6 April 2010.)

