

Tuesday, 23 March 2021

Parliament met at 3.18 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting, which is very different from other sittings because it is the 100th Anniversary of legislating in Uganda. So, you are welcome. (Applause)

Before I make my communication, I would like to first inform the members and our guests that the exhibition, which is going on in the lobby, will be on until Friday afternoon. Those who have not had the opportunity to see history will have an opportunity to do so.

Secondly, the Ministry of Health will be undertaking a vaccination exercise here on Thursday and Friday for the Members of the 10th Parliament, staff and members-elect of the 11th Parliament. So, Thursday and Friday will be used for that activity.

Honourable members, the history of Uganda’s Legislature dates back to the colonial period when the British colonial office established the first Legislature called the Legislative Council (LEGCO), in 1920.

At inception, the LEGCO had seven unelected members - all of them Europeans – and it was chaired by the then Governor, Sir Robert Coryndon. As the inaugural head of the first LEGCO, Sir Coryndon led the foundation for subsequent heads of the Legislature.

The size of the Legislature grew, in response to the need for increased representation of the natives, rising to 32 members in 1950, 61 members by 1955 and 78 by 1961.

The LEGCO generally had limited legislative powers, as most important decisions came from the British Government in White Hall. The main activity of the LEGCO was to legislate for law and order in the Uganda Protectorate.

One hundred years later, post-independence Uganda has had ten Parliaments that have each made distinct contribution to the evolution of the nation state of Uganda, notably:
The First Parliament, from 1962 to 1963, headed by John Bowes Griffin as well as the one headed by Narendra Patel, from 1963 to 1966. Then we had the one of 1967 to 1971. These operated under the 1967 Republican Constitution, with Mr Narendra Patel as its head. They were also largely transitional Parliaments from colonialism to self-rule, with post-colonial law and institutional reform as their main preoccupation.

After the 1971-1979 period of military rule, devoid of a Legislature, the third Parliament, the National Consultative Council (NCC), under the Chairmanship of Prof. Edward Rugumayo, came into place. However, I need to add here that Prof. Rugumayo did not complete his tenure in the NCC; the tenure was completed by the late Alex Waibale.

Later, in 1985 - of course between 1980 and 1985 - we had the leadership of the Rt Hon. Francis K. Butagira. This Parliament laid ground for post-war reconstruction and legislative adaptation from the eight-year military rule, where the country was governed by decree.

After the military intervention of 1985, the Fifth Parliament, under the leadership of H.E Yoweri K. Museveni, was geared at the revival of parliamentary democracy to rectify post-war reconstruction and notably, opening for equal representation of special interest groups in 1989. (Applause)

The Sixth Parliament was headed by the late Rt Hon. James Wapakhabulo from 1986 to 1988. The Rt Hon. Francis Ayume, from 1998 to 2001, was instrumental in overhauling the governance fabric and adapting the various laws to the new constitutional order established the 1995 Constitution.

The Seventh Parliament, from 2001 to 2006 and the Eight Parliament, from 2006 to 2011, were headed by His Excellency, Edward K. Ssekandi, and the latter was instrumental in the revival of multi-party political dispensation, that had been disrupted in 1985.

The Ninth and Tenth Parliaments under my stewardship have been instrumental in consolidating the strides made by the previous Parliaments, in addition to vouching for greater equity and inclusivity in the management of public affairs, as exemplified by the introduction of the Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance, and as referred to the public finance and budgeting fabric of Uganda.

At this point in time, let me commend and laud all the aforementioned Speakers for a good job well done. The Speakers do not work alone; they had other presiding officers - their deputies - who need to be commended too.

In no particular order, I commend Rt Hon. Kulubya Serwano, Rt Hon. John Nume, Rt Hon. Erinasani Bisamunyu, Rt Hon. Alex Waibale, Rt Hon. Alhaji Moses Kigongo, Rt Hon. Joseph Ekemu, Rt Hon. George Cosmas Adyebo, Rt Hon. Betty Okwir, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga and Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah.

Recognition of Speakers is incomplete if I do not recognise the leaders of the Opposition in the Legislature from the advent of independence, as follows: 

    1. Dr Apollo Milton Obote;
    2. Mr Basil K. Bataringaya;
    3. Mr Alex Otim;
    4. Dr Kawanga Ssemwogerere;
    5. Prof. Ogenga Latigo;
    6. Mr Nandala-Mafabi;
    7. Mr Wafula Oguttu;
    8. Ms Winnie Kiiza and 
    9. Mrs Betty Aol Ochan.

In the same vein, I wish to commend the work of the Secretariat of Parliament, headed by the Clerk to Parliament, beginning with Mr E.W Evans, the first Clerk of the LEGCO in the colonial Government, together with his unnamed colleagues, who served during that period.

From the Independence period, I commend the following Clerks:

    1. Mr P.H Pullicino;
    2. Mr Ignatius Barungi;
    3. Mr Edward T. A. Ochwo;
    4. Mr Omwony Ojok;
    5. Mr A.M Tandekwire and
    6. Mrs Jane Kibirige, our present Clerk – (Applause) - and all the staff who have served Parliament in the various capacities.

The evolution of the institution of the Legislature has witnessed tremendous growth in mandate, size and impact. From the seven Members of the LEGCO, in 1921, to the current 10th Parliament of Uganda, which has 459 Members, whose roles encompass representation, legislation, oversight and appropriation.  

The 11th Parliament will commence in May 2021 with 529 Members. This exponential rise in the size and mandate of the Legislature is testimony of its importance in the body politic of Uganda. 

In terms of mandate, Article 79 (1) of the 1995 Constitution bestows upon Parliament the mandate of making laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda. This speaks to the widened mandate of the Legislature beyond just law and order, as it was at its inception in 1921.

The 100-year evolution of the Parliament of Uganda, has witnessed various milestones, landmark legislations, far-reaching resolutions and a general positive impact on the growth and development of the State of Uganda. 

In the same vein, our legislative history has also been rife with challenges. Between 1971 and 1979, Uganda did not have a Legislature due to the political realities of the time. Our history - however positive or negative - offers us invaluable lessons on what to uphold and what to avoid. 

Ordinarily, this would best be re-lived through an elaborate commemoration ceremony. However, due to restrictions accruing to the COVID-19 pandemic, a befitting commemoration will be scheduled to a future date. 

Nonetheless, today, the House will consider a motion on the centennial milestone of the Parliament of Uganda. It is imperative that the Legislature exercises its mandate of legislation, representation, appropriation and oversight in a manner that furthers the realisation of the aspirations of the people. 

It is in this spirit that this Parliament inter-alia instituted human rights, gender and equity compliance requirements in the budgetary processes. 
	
The commemoration of 100 years accords us an opportunity to reflect on the task ahead of the 11th Parliament and subsequent Parliaments, especially at a time when society grapples with endemic socio-economic inequities, rampant human rights violations and rapid population growth among others. 

Parliament should ensure that governmental action, resources and laws are directed towards adequately meeting the ever-increasing needs of the ever quick-growing population, equitable distribution of opportunities and benefits of growth, narrowing the gap between the haves and have-nots, respect for human and peoples’ rights and sustainable conservation of the endangered environment. 

Honourable members, I implore you, as legislators, that the creation of a befitting legacy is within our hands. We should strive to enable the realisation of the aspirations of the people we represent. In order to attain this, future Parliaments have to strategically adapt to rapid advancements in Information and Communication Technology (ICT) and its ramifications on the workings of the Legislature, rapid population growth and the progressive rise in the expectations and needs of the populace; increased regional integration and globalisation and with it the increased role of parliamentary diplomacy.

I wish you all a happy centennial commemoration of Parliament.
For God and My Country. (Applause)

Honourable members, I would also like to read to you a short message from the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association in London. It is written by our Secretary General, Mr Stephen Twigg.

“On behalf of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA), I am writing to congratulate the Parliament of Uganda on a significant milestone in celebrating 100 years of legislation on 23 March 2021.

We note that the precursor of the present day Parliament of Uganda was the Legislative Council that held its first meeting on Wednesday, 23 March 1921 at Government House in Entebbe.

The anniversary falls in the same year that the CPA reaches its 110th Anniversary (1911 to 2021).

The CPA Uganda Branch was formed in 1962 and since then, the Parliament of Uganda has played an active role in the association, including hosting the 13th Commonwealth Parliamentary Association in 1967 and the 64th Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference (CPC) in 2019 that hosted the CPA President from 63rd to 64th CPC.

The Uganda branch also hosted the CPA International Executive media meetings in Uganda.

Members of Parliament of Uganda have played a significant role in the governance of the association. For example, in 2012, Hon. Okupa, a Member of Parliament of Uganda, represented the CPA Africa Region on the CPA Executive Committee.

Madam Speaker, we also thank you for your work during your tenure as the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians (CWP) Chairperson between 2013 and 2016 and previously as CWP Vice-Chairperson and CWP Chairperson (Africa Region), for the significant progress that was made for the CWP network during that time.

Parliament of Uganda continues to uphold the values of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association and implement the CPA recommended benchmarks for the democratic legislatures.

We very much look forward to the future engagement and collaboration with the CPA Uganda Branch.

Stephen Twigg,
Secretary General
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association.”

Thank you. (Applause)  

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO COMMEMORATE 100 YEARS OF THE EXISTENCE OF UGANDA’S LEGISLATURE

3.33
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Madam Speaker, I beg to move, under Rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, a motion for a resolution of Parliament to commemorate 100 years of the existence of Uganda’s Legislature. The motion reads:

“WHEREAS in 1920, the colonial office in Great Britain passed an Order-in-Council establishing a Legislative Council as a legislative arm of the colonial Government in Uganda;

AWARE that the Legislative Council held its first meeting on 23 March 1921 at the High Court chambers in Entebbe and existed until 1962 when the Independence Constitution was made, under which the First Parliament of Uganda known as the National Assembly was partly elected and partly nominated;

ALSO AWARE that in 1967, the Republican Constitution came into force and ushered in the Second Parliament of Uganda, which lasted until 1971 when a military coup ushered in a spell without the Legislature until 1979;

FURTHER AWARE that in 1979 the National Consultative Council (the Third Parliament) was established as the supreme legislative body that lasted until the general elections of 1980;

NOTING THAT following the elections of 1980, the Fourth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda was formed and lasted until 1985 and subsequently in 1986 the National Resistance Council (NRC) became the Fifth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda;

FURTHER NOTING that in 1993, the NRC passed the Constituent Assembly Statute, providing for elections to the Constituent Assembly in March 1994 with the mandate to enact and promulgate a new Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and accomplished its mandate upon the promulgation of a new Constitution of Uganda on 8 October 1995;

APPRECIATING that upon the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution, Uganda conducted general elections in 1996, which ushered in the Sixth Parliament of Uganda and subsequently other elections were conducted every after five years that brought in the Seventh, Eighth, Ninth and the current Tenth Parliament respectively;

RECOGNISING the struggles Uganda has endured to realise its autonomy and stability, and the contribution of successive Parliaments in the quest for national cohesion, tranquility, equity, inclusivity, human rights, democracy and good governance;

APPRECIATING that over the years, Parliament has advocated for good governance through promotion of accountability, interests of marginalised persons and other special interest groups;

FURTHER APPRECIATING the contribution of the various Heads or Speakers of Parliament that have diligently steered the institution of Parliament over the years to enable it realise the achievements that have contributed to the development of Uganda;

RECOGNISING THAT today, Tuesday, 23 March 2021, marks 100 years of existence of the Legislature in Uganda; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that-
1. It collectively honours the various parliaments and governments that have contributed to the attainment of Uganda’s independence, promotion of democratic principles, economic and social development in Uganda.

2. It collectively appreciates the various Speakers or heads of Parliament, other officers and Members of Parliament of Uganda for their excellent stewardship and contribution to the Legislature.

3. It recognises the contribution of the various Clerks to Parliament and officials for their service to the Legislature.” 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, is the motion seconded?

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by the whole House. Please, justify. 

MR MURULI MUKASA: The history of the Ugandan Parliament has been ably enunciated here on the Floor of the House by none other than the Rt Hon. Speaker, in her contributory remarks. I beg that I do not take much of the time of this august House by repeating what has been said. However, there are certain important landmarks, which cannot go without being mentioned. 

The journey of the Ugandan Parliament has been dogged from 1921, when the Legislative Council (LEGCO) was just an adjunct of the British colonial administration and an all-white Parliament; of course, it was joined by an Indian or Asian, marking the racial connotation of the first Parliament. Africans and citizens of the indigenous people later joined the LEGCO and eventually took centre stage in the subsequent Parliaments. 

Over the years, Parliament has been able to achieve a lot of impressive victories. The citizens have taken centre stage in the affairs of Parliament. The Parliament has been all-inclusive and it has championed all the important ingredients of good governance, including democracy and good political participation. These are very important milestones and are very important pillars in the history of our country. 

Further still, Parliament has played a very important role in nation building, in forging a country that is called Uganda. Parliament, especially this particular one, has indeed fulfilled one of the dreams of the founders of modern Uganda. They dreamt of one country, one Parliament, and we are now seeing that dream being realised today.

Madam Speaker, Parliament has attracted the best brains in this country over the years. Indeed, on the Floor of this Parliament, we have had some of the finest debates that we have ever had in the history of this country. We have had some of the best ideas for the development of this country. This is the Ugandan Parliament. 

These achievements are milestones and are not ready to go away from us. They have formed a strong foundation and a bastion of development. We have every hope that what has been planted here will never go away, except that it will grow until this august House becomes the hope, refuge, and best Parliament on the continent. 

We are celebrating 100 years of Parliament. Let us, therefore, project ourselves forward and look into the future. We would like to see Parliament championing a situation where citizens enjoy a vibrant, prosperous and successful modern democracy. 

We would like to see a country that ranks among the best in the world on the human development index. We want to see a country with standards of education and healthcare envied around the world; a country of peace, safety, and personal security. We want to see a country of prosperity; all of us as citizens owing this and pointing to the fact that we have got what we have got because of the Parliament of Uganda. Madam Speaker, I beg to support. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Hon. Muruli Mukasa. Can I invite Hon. Isala Veronica, the seconder of the motion, to speak. 

3.44
MS VERONICA BICHETERO (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the honourable minister’s motion on a resolution of Parliament to commemorate 100 years of existence of the Ugandan Legislature. I am honoured to stand before you today as we celebrate 100 years of Parliament. 

The history of the Parliament of Uganda is well documented and, in most cases, it reflects the history of Uganda. A hundred years ago on this day, the Legislative Council had its first meeting in the High Court building in Entebbe. It laid a foundation for the establishment of the Legislature as well as the representation of Uganda in their administration. 

Whereas the LEGCO was limited to members drawn from the colonial administration, with no representation of indigenous Ugandans and limited legislative powers, it has ushered in a Legislature that is as broad-based as the breadth and width of Uganda, with representatives directly elected by the people through regular, free and fair elections. Its mandate is to make laws for the peace and development of Uganda, with a representation that takes into account all shades of opinion of Uganda. 

As I earlier mentioned, the history of Parliament reflects the history of Uganda and the journey Uganda took to self-realisation. 

As the agitation for independence grew, the Colonial Government had no choice, but to expand the membership of the Legislature to include people’s representatives who were elected by the citizenry, although some parts of the country did not participate.

Upon the dawn of independence, the Legislative Council (LEGCO) was replaced by the National Assembly, which was comprised of members drawn from all parts of Uganda.

This post-independence Parliament was caught up in the political upheavals of the day. When Government was overthrown in 1971, Parliament went into abeyance and was only restored following the overthrow of Gen. Idi Amin in 1979.

1. 	Following the restoration of Parliament in 1979, Parliament sat uninterrupted and has been at the forefront for political, social and economic development of Uganda; through the enactment of legislation, including the Constitution as well as protecting it, and promoting democratic governance in Uganda.

2. 	Holding Government accountable.

3. 	Promotion of human rights

4. 	Equality of all Ugandans before the law.

5. 	Gender equity, fair representation of women in all elective positions, and other governing bodies of Government institutions.

6. 	Equitable distribution of resources, regional balancing, taking care of interests of all shades of opinion, creed, tribe and fostering for balanced development, through approval of loans that cater for interests of all Ugandans.

7. 	Keeping Government in check.

8. 	Passing timely laws for good governance, peace and stability.

9. 	Being the voice of the voiceless, the most vulnerable groups like women, people with disability, children and marginalised communities.

10. 	Custodian of Ugandan morals and values.

11. 	Fighting corruption.

12. 	Working hard to improve mortality rate by appropriating resources to it, improve health sector and capital development.

13. 	The current Parliament is pro-people.

Madam Speaker, what does the future hold for us? To the leaders at all levels, past and present, to our country Uganda and to posterity; congratulations.

A hundred years of Parliament in existence is an opportunity for us to reflect on the sacrifice and service of many Ugandans; through the time of independence, civil wars and the time when there was no Parliament. The progress and the challenges that lie ahead for Parliament to foster the development of the nation is one challenge that needs to be focused on.

As we celebrate 100 years of Parliament existence, I call upon Parliamentarians; we serve our people, our country through legislation, oversight, representation and appropriation, and also not to surrender our capacity for independent thinking and judgment.

I would like to thank and appreciate all the Speakers, from the First to the Tenth Parliament, for their contribution and work well done. May God bless them abundantly.

Let the 100 years of Parliament existence be a strong milestone in strengthening and fighting to defend the ideals of our nation; democracy and independence of Parliament. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us have Hon. Kakooza.

3.53
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Independent, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion which has been moved by Hon. Wilson Muruli Mukasa, Member of Parliament for Budyebo County and Minister of Public Service.

Madam Speaker, you know that 100 years is no mean achievement; it is a long period. I also would like to add my voice specifically to the Speakers, who have been the presiding officers of all these Parliaments. They have made Parliament; stabilised the politics and democratic principles of Uganda as a country, which is much needed in a developing country. 

All the revolutions that have taken place since we got independence are through diligent stewardship of leadership, within these Parliaments. We are specifically talking about the brains of members of Parliament, who pass laws as alluded to Article 79.

The laws are a milestone to development and the democratic principles of the country. For instance, I joined this House in 2001, but there is a law that we passed as a Budget Act. It was the first of its kind in Africa. It was a Private Member’s Bill Tabled by Hon. Kilaso. Since then, most countries in Africa have been coming to benchmark here. 

Madam Speaker, in all the Parliaments in Africa, it is only the Executive that would come with a secret document and read it. Members of Parliament would not easily follow, and as you know, Parliament is the “summary” of Ugandans. Therefore, Ugandans would not know, but speculate on what one arm of Government was going to say.

However, because of the brains and the stewardship of the Speakers and MPs in place, we found that transparency and accountability were a milestone in the resources of Government. It is good that the new Constitution of 1995 highlighted what a democratic government entailed; and what a country was supposed to do.

I would like to thank the framers of the current Constitution that we are using. It is one of the best constitutions in Africa.

Having said that, Madam Speaker, I would like to specifically thank you, in particular. When you became the Speaker of Parliament, there are certain changes within Parliament that have made Parliament as a Legislative arm of Government to become independent. Most times, like the late Prof. Nsibambi said, “All the arms of government - the Legislature, the Judiciary and the Executive - must work inter-reliably but with the doctrine of separation of powers.” I think you have done a lot. We should give credit where it is due. (Applause)

The last one is where we faced a political challenge when the Judiciary passed a stupid court order. You resisted and said that the rebel Members should stay. If it was not for the leadership of this House, maybe we would face another tune of politics. You insisted and said, “These are representatives of this country who were voted for by the people” and you created another shade of opinion, which was good. 

Last but not least is the dedication, service and commitment of the Speakers. I have checked the Hansard. It is only one Speaker who has sat in this House from 2.30 p.m. up to 10.00 p.m. and that is none other than you. (Applause) That shows how dedicated you are to your work. You are committed to doing the work you are supposed to do. 

The legitimacy, the dignity and the decorum of this House depends on the stewardship and leadership of the institution of Parliament so that this arm of Government can do its work as enshrined in the Constitution. Thank you. 

4.00
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, PWD Representative, Central): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and to thank you very much for the history you have given us. 

I am privileged to be one of the few Ugandan Members of Parliament at a time when we are celebrating 100 years of Parliament. To the rest of the world, I am also privileged to be among the few legislators with disabilities, representing the one billion persons with disabilities in the world. 

I thank God and my parents who educated me enough to have the qualifications to be able to join this Parliament. 

I also thank the Ugandan Government for embracing the issue of affirmative action. I thank His Excellency the President for supporting the empowerment of marginalised persons. Our President is the only president in the whole world leading a nation where we have massive representation of persons with disabilities. 

As we celebrate 100 years of Parliament, I read the Hansard of 1962 and other parts of history and I have noted the following:

I noted that our name has evolved from LEGCO, National Assembly to Parliament. 

I have also read about the composition of Parliament and I realise that the number of constituencies and the number of Members of Parliament has been increasing. We must note that as much as women and persons with disabilities are represented, we represent the biggest constituencies. The size is too big. 

I call upon the next Parliament to review this issue and also specifically provide for persons with disabilities, with two Members of Parliament per region. 

I would like to talk about affiliation. Since we attained independence, we have been affiliated to world bodies like the United Nations and the Commonwealth, as you have said. And to this, we have ratified a number of conventions like the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. 

However, I would like to share with this Parliament that implementation of the provisions in these conventions is still lacking. Our reporting system is also lacking in a way that Parliament does not participate as much as other parliaments do, like the one of South Africa. 

Lastly, as we celebrate 100 years of our Parliament, we participated in designing the global development agenda, that is, the Sustainable Development Goals and our country is also aspiring to go to middle income status and to be first world too. Parliament has got a big role to play, especially in the area of budget appropriation. 

Madam Speaker, I remember you supported me a lot when we came up with the idea of the certificate of gender and equity compliance. I thank you very much for that support. 

I am very sure that with this landmark innovation, which is also only here in Uganda in the whole world, if we can use it maximally, using the national budgeting process, the National Development Plans and the manifesto, this tool will no doubt take us a long way in taking this country to middle income status and the first world. Thank you for giving me this opportunity. 

4.04
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is my pleasure today that I am among the Members of Parliament who are here to see Parliament marking 100 years. 

I congratulate you, Madam Speaker, Government and my fellow honourable colleagues. It is not easy. We have gone on record, like the people who were there at the beginning. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker. As some of our colleagues said here, you have done a lot. I remember the time we went with a former Member of Parliament, Ambassador Dorothy Hyuha. She talked about how breastfeeding women were suffering back then but now, we have a breastfeeding centre here. This is a milestone. 

Someone else has just mentioned how some Members were purportedly chased away but you insisted that even if they were rebel MPs, they should still sit in the House. As you know, Madam Speaker, we do not have grudges in the NRM. These are still our members and they are even cadres. If you had taken the advice to chase them away, maybe they would have run away from the party but we are still with some of them and they are very strong. 

Finally, we have Members of Parliament who were here in the last Parliaments, probably the Fifth or Sixth Parliaments. The way they are languishing out there - it is not easy. As we commemorate the 100 years, let us think about them. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, why can’t Government set up something, however small, for these principal citizens who made laws for this country? 

You have former MPs who are down there in the villages; they are 90, 80 years old, but they do not get anything. Through this House, why can’t Government give a gift to these elders of ours? The President had promised Shs 100 million for those who were in the Fifth Parliament and those before it.

Madam Speaker, I want to thank Members for the zeal they have shown. We may have differences, but we move together and this is what we call Parliament. Even if somebody has a dissenting view, let them talk; after all, you remain the same family. Thank you. For God and my country.

4.08
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the Parliament of Uganda and the people of Uganda to congratulate ourselves upon the 100 years of the Legislature. From 23 March 1921 to 23 March 2021 is a big milestone worth celebrating. 

The first debate in the Parliament of Uganda was conducted on 19 September 1960. With the rapidly changing Parliament and evolution in the different parliaments, I know that empowerment of Members of the Legislature is key, especially empowering them with skills, which will enhance debate in the House and enable them to be effective in their roles of legislation, representation and budgeting.

In 1955, the first woman representative was Hon. Paula Allen Kisosonkole and she was nominated by the Buganda Lukiiko. It is on this note that I applaud the framers of 1995 Constitution for providing for the rights of women in this House, especially in Article 33(5) where we have affirmative action for women.

As we speak, we have 152 female representatives. Compared to other Parliaments, this is a milestone that we celebrate as women of Uganda - (Member timed out.) 

4.10
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. As we mark 100 years of the existence of Parliament, allow me to support the motion to recognise and appreciate the journey and the stewardship that we have seen along the journey.

Madam Speaker, you have been able to lead this Parliament and we have seen amelioration in the collaboration with Government and more inclusive participation of the public. This Parliament has graduated from one level to another. I want to thank you for allowing Parliament to go to the public. It was because of you that we saw, for the first time, members of the public sitting in the House to deliberate. We have also seen how their views can find their way on the Floor of this House. You deserve to be appreciated for that, Madam Speaker.

We have also seen how transparency and accountability have been ensured by this House, especially through the accountability committees. We have seen how you, Madam Speaker, have tolerated the different shades of opinion and enabled them to participate in this House. 

We get concerned when some people try to belittle Parliament, especially when they are doing their work of monitoring the Executive. I want to thank the minister for bringing this motion to recognise Parliament for working with Government to ensure transparency and development of this country.

I beg to support the motion that we recognise the Speakers and the role of Parliament in the governance and development of this country.

4.14
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Who am I to be among those witnessing the ceremony of celebrating 100 years of the existence of Parliament in Uganda? I congratulate you; I congratulate myself.

You enumerated a few Speakers who have been here; you are Speaker No.10, but how are those other Speakers who are still alive? How have they been treated. We have seen former Speakers becoming board chairpersons, ambassadors - like our former Speaker, Francis Butagira. How do we treat our former leaders in this country?

As we celebrate 100 years, it should be a time for us to reflect on our gains and achievements. I am aware of the limitations of Article 93 to amend a motion of the Government, but we need to accord our former Speakers better appreciation. Just recently, we passed the Administration of Judiciary Bill that had a retrospective effect for the Chief Justices of Uganda. May I implore the House that we do the same for these few surviving former Speakers and their families? 

Madam Speaker, this is a place of dignity. You are the Speaker of Parliament. You are the No.3 in this country. I have seen men kneeling when talking to you, including myself, because we respect you. How about our former Speaker?

You had initiated, in the Ninth Parliament, what we called parliamentary outreaches. How I wish that this could be taken further in the next Parliament so that we see this Parliament as it is now sitting in regions and subregions, so that we take Parliament to them and they see us handling the concerns of those regions from there, with ministers here attending for a week. We are paid our fuel; we take our allowances and we do our work.

Courts and the Judiciary now go and handle matters in the regions. Why can’t we take Parliament? Maybe that is when people will appreciate the role of Parliament. That is when they will appreciate that we are not only here to drive big cars but fight for their cause.

Madam Speaker, the first Japadhola to come to the LEGCO was Paul Ofwono. A few Ugandan Jopadholas and I who are here are very lucky and fortunate. I congratulate Ugandans once again. Thank you.

4.18
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Today, when I went to the exhibition show in the House, I read the literature that is attributed to the first day of Parliament - the 21st day in 1921 - where it says, “Uganda has moved another milestone in its steady progress”. I was amazed by that statement that 100 years ago, we had started our journey of steady progress which the NRM has resurrected and we are moving on.

Madam Speaker, I have also read many other documents, including old laws and ordinances and I found many of them still valid to date. Therefore, I would like to first thank you, Madam Speaker, for the initiative; for the museum and all that you have put up.

Reflecting on the 100 years, I know that at some point, the steady progress was cut short and interrupted. However, Madam Speaker, today at 100 years, it is a day of further learning. We are still in steady progress but we must make sure that especially us as Parliament, this steady progress is never again tampered with.

I call upon the members of this arm of Government who have been privileged to be here in the last 100 years, where I have also had a chance to be here for 10 staggered years. I thank God that we have been part of this history.

Let us build on this foundation to be the makers of this country so that from what we have achieved at 100 years, nothing ever obstructs us. I know we have a rich history and it has a lot of ups and downs. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I pledge that we make this 10th Parliament a second foundation of the next 100 years.

Madam Speaker and members, who are here, make that foundation and build on it and be the cornerstone of development of this country, Uganda.

Madam Speaker, I would like to personally thank you for the initiative and spirited performance of supporting and defending this institution which is 100 years old. You have looked after it for the last 20 years or so; it is now your child. May you continue to nurture this child of yours to grow, especially so that those other institutions which may want to interfere with us – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.21
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion of Parliament to commemorate 100 years of existence in Uganda’s Legislature. Permit me also to congratulate the NRM Government for ushering in peace that has enabled Parliament to perform uninterrupted since 1986.

Likewise, Madam Speaker, allow me to congratulate you for being innovative, having created many channels and innovations that have enabled Parliament to deepen and widen performance in its fulfilment of the constitutional obligations.

For example, my colleagues have mentioned that we should appreciate the remarkable capacity of strengthening initiatives in Africa like the Budget office that has been admired and benchmarked by many countries in Africa.

Madam Speaker, I would like to congratulate you for having initiated what has been also appreciated by my colleagues; bringing Parliament closer to the population which has enabled creation of partnerships between the population and Parliament.

For example, you have trained many young students from university. You have created capacity and these students have become very supportive to all the parliamentarians who come here. You have strengthened the staff here and they have become dependable to most of us when we are doing our work.

However, Madam Speaker, I have one prayer. The competition between the Opposition and ruling party MPs sometimes tends to blur issues of common interest. I pray that the next Parliaments work together in harmony, irrespective of political divisions. 

It is my considered opinion that the Opposition and ruling party should work together on issues of common interest, for example, prosperity for all, strategic security and guarding our identity and heritage. 

Otherwise, Madam Speaker, I congratulate you – (Member timed out.)

4.24
MS AGNES AMEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and the Minister, for the statement. I congratulate the Republic of Uganda for the milestone and congratulate all of us here present as Members of Parliament.

The motion was rich in history. History is only relevant when it is progressive. Today, Parliaments are being looked at in the lenses of so many things but most especially in the lenses of good governance; to unpack a bit of that, good service delivery, healthy co-existence, respecting diverse voices, human rights, to name but a few.

I congratulate you, Madam Speaker, for being equitable; for allowing healthy political debate and allowing members of either side to debate. 

On the issue of service delivery that continues to dog this country, I call for review on how we engage with the Treasury Memoranda. 

Members of Parliament are rich in experiences of the common man because Parliament has been taken closer to the people and we are rich with a lot of issues that go on in the society. However, somehow, we are not connecting very well with the political parties and the Executive. Let us all do self-retrospect and see how we can improve service delivery.

Lastly, I call on all of us here present to foster and encourage healthy politics in this country and thrive as members of one family. Members of the Opposition and those of the ruling party should move as one. The ugly scenes of the past elections should not be part of our history because they taint the institution of Parliament, which is at the centre of politics. 

I beg to move. Thank you 

4.28
MS JENIPHER NAMUYANGU (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibuku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I would like to thank God that we are the leaders today, as we celebrate 100 years for Parliament. 

I had an opportunity to come to Parliament as a Youth Member of Parliament in 1994. I have seen a lot of improvement in terms of infrastructure. At that time, even to speak of a baby centre was unheard of. 

Most importantly, I would like to thank the leadership of Parliament; the Speakers of Parliaments, especially the President - even before, the President was part of the Speakers – for being visionary in terms of allowing diversity in representation. I also thank the youth, women, people with disabilities, workers’ members of Parliament and of recent, the older persons. I am a beneficiary. 

Madam Speaker, the committees of Parliament have played a key role. I would like to thank you for the guidance in terms of widening the scope of these committees. Committees such as the Committee on Science and Technology were unheard of before but we now have all of them.

I would like to agree with Hon. Oboth Oboth when he says that we should move Parliament to the people. A few days ago, I was in Amudat and I was told that no radio signal in the country reaches there. If leaders want to speak to their people, they have to go 160 kilometres into Kenya. Therefore, it is high time we moved to the people as Parliament.

I would like to thank the committees of Parliament that have evolved through time in terms of oversight, especially the accountability committees. At least in the Local Governments, you put the leadership on tenterhooks and we have been able to see a lot of improvement.

Again, I would like to thank this Parliament that we have been able to do very many things in terms of gender mainstreaming and issues of equity. Of recent, we have incorporated the Strategic Development Goals (SDGs) into our planning and budgeting. Many countries have been able to benchmark from us very many things including the woman Speaker in this Parliament.

Madam Speaker, you have done us proud. We cherish you. You have sat and presided over this Parliament without moving away, like one of the colleagues mentioned. You sit here from 2.00 o’clock until the late hours of the night. 

We know that as a woman, even outside this country, everybody is proud of you. We shall always be grateful for your service. We pray that you continue steering this House. (Applause)

The Speaker: Thank you. Honourable members, concerning the radio reception in that part of the country, I think I am on record on the Hansard at least for the last 10 years. Each time I go to Sebei or Karamoja, I come back and say, “Please, can something be done.” However, nothing has been done.

When we were vetting our new ministers for Information and Communication Technology (ICT), we asked them to solve the issue of communication at the Kenya-Uganda Border. They have not delivered.

4.32
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank God that the celebration of 100 years has found me in this House; so, it is a great privilege.

I would like to thank all the previous Parliaments for the great work they did, especially the Parliament that brought in the 1995 Constitution. It was a turning point for Uganda in many ways, especially for women.

From then, we have moved very well and we are still moving. Therefore, celebrating 100 years today was very important and necessary to remind the Ugandans and all of us about the achievements since the Parliament started.

I am happy with that Constitution. The affirmative action was supported and we have all spheres of representation here. However, there has been great outcry out there, especially from our women councillors at the subcounty and districts. Even we, the members of Parliament, represent the whole district while men have constituencies, which are very small. We get the same salary so it is not very fair in that area. 

In the constituency, for instance, you find that you have three subcounties and you have to be everywhere attending burial yet you get the same salary. That is where there is still a problem. I wish it could be addressed in the next Parliament.

Madam Speaker, I would like also to recognise the effort you have put in, in bringing our Parliament to the people. Before COVID-19 set in, I remember we had students from different schools who would come to see our Parliament. They would enjoy and be happy.

I would like to suggest that we put this on programme to ensure that at least every month - we have many districts - we look at them. We can maybe say, in Kanungu, we are going to ask if there are youth, students or pupils to come this month and debate in our House. We can make it a policy that every month, there are schools debating in the House – (Member timed out) 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MS KARUNGI: So that they can feel the touch of our Parliament. When we are there talking to the youth, you see them admiring and appreciating us. Therefore, it is good that we encourage them from the beginning.

On the issue of salaries, this Parliament is the house, home and kitchen of every Ugandan. We have met serious challenges out there. Some of our people are not happy, especially the Artists, regarding the issue of having different salary scales. Having different qualifications is okay but we are getting some challenges. Most of our people are not happy. 

Recently, I was talking to one of the Gombolola chiefs who told me that he gets little money while the Agricultural officer he monitors gets too much. I wish the coming Parliament could look into that and make sure that everybody gets at least the same salary. We go through the same school, shopping markets and take our children in the same schools. 

I wish the next Parliament could look at and reorganise it so that at least everybody feels that this Parliament cares and caters for all classes. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker. For God and my country!

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, concerning the representation by the women, you know that we amended the Local Governments Act but the Electoral Commission declined to implement what we passed. We need to ensure that they now implement it. 

4.37
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. 

I speak as the first Woman Member of Parliament for Mitooma District who is now concluding her second term. On behalf of the people of Mitooma and on my own behalf, I would like to congratulate all Ugandans, this Parliament, you, Madam Speaker, and other Speakers as we celebrate these 100 years of Parliament and the rule of law. It is auspicious and historical indeed.

I came on affirmative action basis, like Hon. Karungi has just said, and I would like to emphasise it. We appreciate this Parliament and the Government for the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution that entrenched equality, human rights and affirmative action. We have 30 per cent women representation in all positions of leadership at all levels of governance. 

However, like Hon. Karungi has just said, this position has now become a problem to the women. You are a woman Member of Parliament representing a district that has two, three or sometimes five constituencies, each of them represented by a man, but the resources are the same, including time. We are also supposed to carry out the oversight functions of Parliament and we are expected to go throughout the districts; we are supposed to touch base with our constituents. 

The time has come to review this position. We know that Government is overburdened with resources but the solution lies in having one district represented by one male and one female Member of Parliament and then others like PWDs, youth and others. 

Madam Speaker, we are proud of you. You are our super role model and a true icon of women power. However, above all, we thank and applaud you for the firmness and professionalism with which you have handled the business of this Parliament, and the support you have given to all Members of Parliament. You have been there to champion our cause and support us in everything. We thank you and we hope that God will give you the desires of your heart. Congratulations, Uganda, on 100 years of Parliament and rule of law. 

4.40
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. Allow me use this opportunity to, first of all, congratulate our President and you, Madam Speaker, colleagues and all Ugandans upon this great milestone of 100 years of Parliament. A journey of 100 years is not a simple one; I know a lot has changed. 

Madam Speaker, when the history of the last 100 years is put down, I know your name will feature prominently. Throughout this period, a lot has transformed in the way Parliament presents itself. Today, Parliament is the only institution among the other three arms of Government which is truly a people’s institution. I think this is greatly part of what you have done for this country, for which we must commend you, Madam Speaker. You have strived to make this Parliament a people’s institution. 

Today, Parliament is the only institution that can actually feel the heartbeat of all Ugandans. It is the last resort that Ugandans can fall back to in case they have problems. Therefore, I call upon all Ugandans and my colleagues to make sure the milestones and achievements we have recorded are maintained and taken to a greater height.

I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, as the head of the institution and our President as the head of the Executive for maintaining a harmonious relationship between the two arms of Government because it is never easy. I know we have had glitches here and there but at least I would like to thank and congratulate you and the President for maintaining this harmonious relationship between the two institutions. I call upon my colleagues and the entire House to use this opportunity as a foundation to ensure that we build a greater Parliament that will serve the interests of Ugandans. 

Madam Speaker, we must not forget that one of the cardinal principles of democratic governance is the separation of powers. Therefore, I call upon my colleagues and the future Parliament to ensure this Parliament remains independent. Let us ensure that this House remains an independent arm of Government that can offer checks and balances to the other arms of Government, more so to the Executive and not necessarily –(Member timed out.)         

4.44
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join other Members of Parliament to support the motion.

I thank God that I am privileged to be among those celebrating 100 years of Parliament. I would like to congratulate the Parliament of Uganda and the Government of Uganda. However, in a special way, I would like to congratulate the female Members of Parliament, including you, Madam Speaker. This is because from 1954 up to 1956, there were only two female representatives. After another three years, the number went up to six. That means the NRM Government has done a lot to support gender and the women emancipation. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to congratulate you in another way because when I read the history of Parliament, I realised that you were the first female Speaker of Parliament; the other one was a deputy speaker. Having managed to steer Parliament for 10 years, I pray that you continue another term and make a record of 15 years, which I think no other Speaker has made. 

I would like to thank you for having concern for your Members. You have opened up schemes that can help Members of Parliament not to starve after here. 

Congratulations to this Parliament. I know Uganda will continue to succeed until we achieve a middle income status. I thank you.

4.46
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate myself and everybody here. I had forgotten that today is a very important day but when I passed around, I realised today is a very important day. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to say that in East Africa, Uganda has become a learning centre for the neighbours in terms of respect for affirmative action. For the first time we had a woman who was a Vice-President of this country; we have you, a woman, as Speaker of this country and I pray that we have more and more so that the world knows that Uganda is a learning place for all of us.

However, while all has been said as we reflect on these 100 years, there is more that we need to study. What is the feeling of Ugandans towards Parliament? Sometimes people demonise Parliament and sometimes people think that we have come and increased our salaries, disregarding lots of work that we do. 

We should also reflect on violations of human rights because, as a Parliament, we need to stand firm and stop all these.

We should also make sure that parliamentarians are given all that they need so that work can be done. I pray that Constituency Development Fund, which has been scraped in this country, is reinstated so that parliamentarians can do their work.

We should also take stock of all leaders in this country and know how they are doing. I also pray to members who are coming to the Eleventh Parliament that we have spoken and seen how you have been steering this Parliament. It is my humble prayer – we are not praying for nothing. 

We are praying that it is only you who can make this institution stand as an institution with respect and an institution that can give respect to the people. I pray that the Almighty God gives you another term to steer this country as the Speaker. Thank you very much.

4.49
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to congratulate all Ugandans, you and Members of Parliament upon attaining the 100 years. This is something that we should not take for granted.

I remember that in school, during history and constitutional law lessons, we were learning about the LEGCO. Looking now and realising that it is part of our history and has gone through metamorphosis and come to the stage of the Parliament that we are in today, is amazing. I support the motion because of that and others.

I would like to look at the women in Parliament. We know that Hon. Kisosonkole was the first woman representative. Conditions must have been very difficult at the time. However, right now, I would like to celebrate the fact that the inclusion of women in the legislative process has been eased. 

I would like to thank you very much for the nursery. I was a Government servant and we used to have to combine our maternity leave with our annual leave to look after these children. However, here, Members of Parliament can come and have their children here, think and legislate knowing that their children are safe. When you balance that for them, you help them to think well; they have peace of mind.

I would like to thank for religious freedoms that we have here. Members are of different religious denomination but we have time to pray and Parliament has recognised and given us places where we can pray from and even facilitated us in getting leaders. There are occasions we have celebrations here and remembered God. Nothing is possible without Him and I would like to thank you for that.

I thank you for the provisions that have been given to Members of Parliament to enable them to work in harmony and with peace of mind. You have provided for our health through medical insurance, we have financial schemes - Parliamentary SACCO, Parliamentary Pensions Scheme. We have researchers assisting us to do our work. We have the clerks - thank you, Madam Clerk and the rest – for making our work easy. We also have training and I would like to pray that the quality of our debates continues improving with the capacity building that we get. 

My worry is about the records: how are we going to continue preserving the records of Parliament? We have got into an era where we have e-records, but we still look -(Member timed out.)

4.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion moved by Hon. Muruli Mukasa. I also feel proud to be part of the Parliament that is discussing 100 years of Parliament of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, Parliament cannot be wished away in our current political environment. It is an institution which reflects the boiling point of the political temperatures of a country. I would like to salute the various Parliaments, including the current one, for the work that has been done to shape the development and the democratic process of this country.

We have moved from far - from slavery to colonialism to where we are. Hearing that the First Parliament did not have Ugandans and the current Parliament is 100 per cent Ugandan is a very big milestone.

However, we still have a section of Ugandans who have neo-colonial beliefs – thinking that people from outside can still solve the problems of this country. I think that as a country, we have to re-assert ourselves that the challenges and the problems of this country will be dealt with by ourselves as a country. Whether we make mistakes or not, we, Ugandans, shall continue to write our own history as a country.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you as the Speaker of this Parliament and the previous Speakers for continuing to strengthen Parliament as an institution. I think Parliament of Uganda has grown from strength to strength. However, there are still areas that need to be addressed. 

A section of the public thinks that this Parliament maybe consumes lots of resources of the Government of Uganda, which is not true. When we budget, we give the Parliament of Uganda less than two per cent of the national budget. Therefore, it cannot be true that we take most of the money.

In addition, the office of a Member of Parliament needs to be strengthened, Madam Speaker. The attrition rate in the Parliament of Uganda is very high. Many members lose. Just in the last elections, we lost over 70 per cent of the members and the question is, why? One of the reasons is that the office of the Member of Parliament has not been strengthened to enable a Member of Parliament play his or her role.

At the constituency level – yes, we have strengthened the Parliament here as an institution but when you get down, why are Ugandans voting out Members of Parliament? Is it because we do not answer - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I was a Parliamentary Commissioner and worked with you and we benchmarked in a number of countries. If I give you an example of Zambia, they facilitate a Member of Parliament to the extent that the Government builds an office for a Member of Parliament in the constituency, hires an assistant whose minimum level of education is a diploma to do research – gather constituency issues – so that when you go to the constituency, you know what the people want.

In many Parliaments, including South Sudan, they have a Constituency Development Fund. Members of Parliament tend to use all their salaries and emoluments to service a constituency. I think that should change. 

The next Parliament should explore areas like the Constituency Development Fund. We could use resources available in the country to facilitate the work of a Member of Parliament in order to have an impact at the constituency level. All these issues should be looked at as we strengthen the Parliament and enable Members of Parliament to do their work. 

Lastly, I was trying to do a computation. A section of Ugandans think this Parliament is very big. At independence, this Parliament had 82 members. The total population is estimated to have been around 7.2 million Ugandans. When you compute the per capita representation, then each Member of Parliament was representing 88,000 Ugandans. 

The 11th Parliament is going to have 529 Members of Parliament. The total population is projected to be around 46 million Ugandans. When you compute the per capita representation, it gives you 86,000 Ugandans yet at independence, each Member of Parliament was representing 88,000 Ugandans but today, it is 86,000. So, is this Parliament bloated? If you use population statics, the answer is “No”, according to Member of Parliament per capita representation. 

My point is that the Parliamentary Commission and Government should work together to strengthen the office of a Member of Parliament in order to deliver what the population expects from us. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Can we have Hon. Mutebi on zoom and then Hon. Kiwanda.

4.58
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe) (On Zoom): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity you have given me to make my humble contribution to this noble motion. 

I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for steering this Parliament up to this day, when we celebrate a major milestone in the history of our country. Parliament is the epitome of democratic governance in any country. It is very fortunate for us on this day to celebrate this milestone, when we have a fully functional Parliament.

Reflecting on our history, this country and our Parliament went through a lot of trials prior to independence, shortly after independence and the years that followed, where Parliament could not exercise its mandate to the fullest.

It is against this background that I wish to take this opportunity to thank the gallant sons and daughters of this country who made enormous sacrifices to restore the sanctity of Parliament on the basis of which Parliament has been able to legislate and deliver enormous development for this country. It is through this Parliament that we have been able to legislate for democratic governance.

We have achieved immense successes in terms of effective representation of our people. We have also achieved immense successes in terms of growing accountability. Above all, we have achieved a lot in terms of economic progress as we are now on the way to achieving middle-income-status. It is, therefore, my humble submission that we give this Parliament the consideration it deserves in order to continue delivering its mandate.

I wish to support this motion and also appreciate the leadership in this country that has given Parliament the latitude to deliver its mandate to its fullest. I wish to also appreciate the various Speakers that have provided sound leadership on the basis of which Uganda has taken the steps and the milestones it has reached today in terms of overall development.

5.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (TOURISM) (Mr Godfrey Kiwanda): Madam Speaker, I rise to support the motion moved by Hon. Wilson Muruli-Mukasa to congratulate the Parliament of Uganda on this milestone of having achieved 100 years of service as the Legislature.

I came here in 2001. Madam Speaker, you have been my Speaker – as the Deputy Speaker then and today, the Speaker of Parliament. I have seen the tempers and flares in the House. 

I would like to congratulate Members of Parliament and you, Madam Speaker and the colleague speakers you have worked with like the Rt Hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi – who was my Speaker in the Seventh and Eighth Parliament and whom you deputised.

I would like to thank Ugandans for trusting the Parliament of Uganda. We have seen you receiving very many petitions from the public and that is a vote of confidence. When you see members of the public bringing their petitions – moreover, petitions which may not have been meant for Parliament but they still bring them here – that is a vote of confidence to this august House.

I would like to call upon Ugandans to understand our role as Members of Parliament. Ugandans’ expectations of a Member of Parliament are at times too high and very difficult to fulfil. That is why you see the turnover becoming higher and higher.

Today, we have less than 25 per cent of Members of Parliament who have made it to the 11th Parliament. This is because our voters do not understand and their expectations are too high for the MPs.

We would like to thank you, Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, for the way you handled the trying moments of this House. I have seen trying moments in the Seventh, Ninth and 10th Parliament. I have seen that even after having such trying moments, we come together. I would like to congratulate you, honourable members. That has kept us and earned us respect among the people of this country. Congratulations - (Member timed out.)

5.05 
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): It is my honour to stand here to congratulate you, Madam Speaker and honourable members of the 10th Parliament, our Leader of Government Business, the Leader of the Opposition and everyone for this wonderful achievement of 100 years of existence of our Parliament.

I would like to once again thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing us to say something on this day. Allow me to also thank Hon. Muruli-Mukasa for moving this motion.

As we congratulate ourselves today, I know it is not the length of time or years only that we are celebrating. We are celebrating the achievements that we have been able to reach because of the wonderful stewardship of the Speakers that have been here. We are very thankful to God that today the head of Parliament is Hon. Rebecca Kadaga; so, we congratulate you. 

Our Parliament is a reflection of best practice and we are happy to be part of it. Personally, I am happy to be part of the Tenth Parliament. The Parliament of Uganda is a reflection of inclusion, gender sensitivity, political representation and democracy. It is very popular and this has attracted many people to contest for the position of Member of Parliament.

I have seen most of the good things. I have been both a backbench Member of Parliament and a Member of the Executive; allow me to say that where I am, I enjoy the support of Parliament. Thank you for supporting my sector and the development of this country. 

My only call is that as leaders, wherever we are, we should use all the wisdom and knowledge that we have acquired to unite our people. Our messages and the words that we speak in and out of Parliament should enhance unity among our people. It is very important that we forge unity in this country, irrespective of the different views we hold. We need to embrace political diversity.

Madam Speaker, allow me to thank you again for allowing me to use this time. I would like to thank all the Members and also to congratulate them for reaching this day. Thank you.

5.09
MS NAOME KIBAAJU (NRM, Sheema County North, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the importunity. I support the motion and join my colleagues in congratulating the Executive, you and the Members, on commemorating 100 years of existence. The journey has been long, so I would like to thank all of you who have contributed to the various debates.

Madam Speaker, in a special way, I would like to congratulate the women Members of Parliament because they were not represented here before but they are now here in great numbers. I have seen them debate issues; stand for themselves and their fellow women.

Madam Speaker, while we congratulate ourselves, we represent the people of this country. Complaints have come in; we have achieved but a lot still needs to be done. Some of the complaints, which will be a challenge to you in the next House, where I think you will be the Speaker, are that Members of Parliament come unprepared, they discuss unresearched matters, and most of them are absent. 

The public is especially concerned that ministers are constantly absent from this House. Whenever they are called upon - bear with me because these are the complaints we get from the public and I believe that it is our duty, as we celebrate 100 years, to discuss these matters.

In a special way, I would like to thank you for steering this House. I have been in Parliament for the last 2 years; I have watched you sit in that chair and exercise fairness, professionalism, patience and resilience. I cannot thank you enough. I admire you and want to thank you for being the Speaker that you are to the people, Members and in a very special - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have a half a minute to conclude.

MS KIBAAJU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank you for what you have done. I was reminding you of one incident when some mad man fell on me in Parliament. People made fun of me - I had just joined Parliament – and they made videos and circulated them all over. I thank you, Madam Speaker, because you did not castigate me; you comforted me. Thank you. You are the Speaker and you will be the Speaker (Applause)

5.13
MR CLEMENT ONGALO-OBOTE (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I feel privileged, proud and honoured to stand here on this momentous day when we not only celebrate and commemorate 100 years of this Parliament, but this is also the first day of the next 100 years of this Parliament.

Madam Speaker, when you took us through the list of the Speakers of this Parliament, from Griffin, Patel, Rugumayo, Butagira, Yoweri Museveni, Wapakhabulo, Francis Ayume, Edward Ssekandi and finally yourself, what struck me was that each of those Speakers determined how the parliaments that they presided over would be remembered. 

When we think ahead about how this Parliament will be remembered in 2121 when the Parliament at that time will be celebrating 200 years of existence, our strength that will be celebrated will depend on the strength of the Speaker that we will elect.

Honourable members, we stand at crossroads. We are faced with a very big challenge in the election of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker that will steer Parliament as we begin the next 100 years. I would like to implore you that history will look at us and judge us very harshly if we do not make that choice with care and concern for the future of this country and the future of this House.

I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for your stewardship of this House. You are the only Speaker I have known ever since I joined Parliament. I am proud and privileged to have served under you as a backbencher and chairperson of a committee. I became a chairperson of a committee when I knew very little about how to chair and steer it. However, through your guidance, sympathy and motherliness, you made me the strong chairman that I am today.

This is what I hope that this House will look at very carefully, as we think of where we want to move this House in the next 100 years. I am proud to be a member of this House at this time and I hope – (Member timed out.)

5.16
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, Moyo County West, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we commemorate 100 years of Uganda’s Parliament, I would like to pay tribute to all the past leaders and Members of Parliament, as well as the LEGCO Members; both those who are living and post-humously, those who have passed away. 

From 1921 to 1962, Parliament was sitting in Entebbe and thereafter, it was transferred to the current KCCA Hall. In 1962, it was transferred to where it is right now. I feel proud and happy that I was born in 1962, exactly the year Parliament was transferred here. I feel honoured to be part of this history.

Madam Speaker, I thank you in particular for working hard in order to ensure that there is East African Community integration through sports. Since 2011, the Parliament of Uganda has been winning trophies in volleyball, netball, athletics and so on and so forth and you have been the one leading this team to wherever they have been going, that is in Bujumbura, Dar es Salaam, Nairobi and so on. You have worked hard for the integration of the East African Community through sports.

Madam Speaker, Article 119(1) of the Treaty for the establishment of the East African Community provides for the partner states to promote close cooperation among themselves in culture and sports, with respect to the promotion of all sports and cultural activities in the East African Community.

I would like to report to you that in 2017, the theme for the Eighth East African Community games that took place in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania from 1st to 11th December 2017 was, “Integrating Citizens and Strengthening Inter-Parliamentary Relations through Sports”. You were number one on that delegation; I have the record here. Congratulations to you, Madam Speaker.

What happened there? In athletics, men got gold and women got gold. In tug of war, women got gold. In walking race, it was silver. In netball, it was gold. In football, it was gold. In golf, it was gold. In women golf, it was also gold. 

Therefore, I thank Parliament, through you, Madam Speaker, for continuing with the integration process of these Community Member States through sports. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us have Hon. Macho, Hon. Lyomoki and then I will go to Hon. Centenary for the centenary. (Laughter)

5.20
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I thank the mover of this motion. I celebrate, together with other Ugandans, our Parliament for having made 100 years.

Whereas we mark 100 years, there is a big question which you deliberated on well, when you gave the country the names of the Speakers who have steered this House. 

I am proud to be part of the history to celebrate 100 years. For the celebration that I am part of, thanks go to you too as the driver of the Parliament of Uganda when we are celebrating the 100 years.

I thank you that I am born at the border between Kenya and Uganda. Sometimes, I cross from Busia Uganda to Busia, Kenya to go and enjoy with my colleagues who are Senators in Kenya and have nyamachoma. The brand you have built for us as Parliament of Uganda always makes me very proud. 

Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for the brand you have built for this Parliament; the brand that has brought unity among all the three arms of Government; the brand that has made Parliament be a voice of the voiceless; the brand that has made Parliament to be the voice of the grassroots’ people. That makes us to be one of the best Parliaments in not only East Africa, but in Sub-Saharan Africa and Africa at large.

Therefore, I thank you. I also thank the staff because a brand is made with a group of people. With that brand, that is why I keep praying to God day and night to allow the brand that Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga has built in these 100 years to continue. I think when it continues, our Parliament will continue making a name.

Madam Speaker, through that prayer, I will pray with action that I am one of the people who will vote for you in the 11th Parliament. In fact, if you do not contest, some of us will drag you to courts of law because of the good brand you have built for the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.

At the same time, regarding the welfare of Parliament of Uganda in the 100 years; I think we lead by example in the East African Community. I pray that this should continue because when leaders are comfortable and happy, they lead their people very well.

Therefore, I thank the mover of the motion, the ex- minister, for the fact that you have done the best thing. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have Hon. Lyomoki; then Hon. Centenary - He is the minister; he is still a minister. (Laughter)

5.23
DR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers Representative, National): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this motion. 

We mark this milestone as Parliament in a special way, given the contributions by honourable colleagues who have testified to the strength and goodness that has come out of the various seasons that we have passed through as Parliament.

Many times, we can celebrate a milestone when things are not doing well but I thank God and I thank you, Madam Speaker, for presiding over this particular moment, when the House is proud of the progress that has taken place in systems and various areas. 

I joined you here, Madam Speaker, about 25 years ago and at that time, Parliament was weak. We did not have assistants; we did not have many things. I have seen, in the last 25 years, Parliament growing up to this level.

I really want to thank you as being part of the people who have made this Parliament grow. Madam Speaker, you have enormously contributed because in the last 25 years, I know what has been taking place; to the extent that even as we start the new century – the next 100 years – you have been prepared because we already have a new chamber which is being worked on to house the coming Parliaments.

Madam Speaker, you have stood the test of time, even the way you presided over this time of the COVID-19 pandemic, it was good. Most of the institutions could not continue but as Parliament, we continued in an arrangement that has stood the test of time.

I thank the people of Uganda, especially the NRM Government, for having allowed us - special interest groups - to be in this House. This Parliament, I think, is the only Parliament in the world that has special interest groups; to the extent that some of us would maybe never have been in Parliament. 

In 1996, I was enjoying myself outside the country doing a master’s degree, when I got an angry email from workers, demanding that I come back and that if I do not come back, I should never have come. 

I had never thought of being a Member of Parliament and so, I had to come. When I did, I have had to remain around for the last 25 years. You can see that I continued with the work, which I had not thought I would do. I would like to end on a good note. I have – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude. 

MR LYOMOKI: I have seen colleagues expressing a lot of fear that a storm is coming concerning the Rt Hon. Speaker. However, I think it is a good way because there are only two schools of thought, which is a vote of confidence. Some say that the Rt Hon. Speaker should remain as Speaker while others say she becomes Vice President. To me, it means that there is a vote of confidence. No one is questioning the fact that the Speaker has presided very well.

Therefore, I am very proud of you that we have had a Speaker who has presided over this season and whom all of us have enjoyed working with. We only ask you to pray that God allows you to take up one of those positions. You never know, it might end up like the current situation in Tanzania. (Laughter)

Do not fear. Pray and ask God whether to remain or take up the other one. You never know what God wants. Thank you. God bless you.

5.27
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to be part of the deliberations commemorating the first ever centenary celebrations of legislation of the Parliament of Uganda. I am humbled to be here.

First of all, I would like to thank you for the good leadership you have offered. When I was listening to the genesis of this Parliament from a court somewhere in Entebbe and now to almost a brand-new chamber that is going to accommodate about 600 Members of Parliament, I look at steady progress especially that which is associated with a mama. I was raised by a woman and I am proud of mothers here who have also given us an opportunity to be confident in whatever we are doing. 

This Parliament has been faced with many storms; the military invasion of the chambers and the numerous attempts to overthrow our Constitution through various amendments, some of which are not even necessary. We have tried our best under your stewardship to ensure that the will of the people is protected and respected.

This can be manifested through the attrition rates. The attrition rate of Parliament is a reflection of inclusive leadership because this is the only institution of Government, which is so attractive that everybody wants to come and be part of. This means that whatever happens here is very attractive to the citizenry and they all want to be part of these processes.

Perhaps, I would advise that as we celebrate 100 years, our separation of powers is still wanting especially because the Executive is still interested in medalling in the affairs of the Legislature. They should stick to their arm of Government. It is not by mistake that this Government is constituted of three arms. Therefore, each arm should be respected and allowed to conduct its business with all the due respect and immunity it deserves.

Uganda has come from far. Even when we are talking about – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we should do this business for today.

5.30
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank God that I am among those celebrating this occasion today. I would like to thank all the Speakers of Parliament, Members of Parliament and technical staff who have served this country from inception of Parliament to date.

The Parliament of Uganda is a people’s Parliament through its various activities. In 2018, you introduced the Science Week. I am a member of the Committee on Science and Technology. Members must have seen innovators coming here.

Following that, Parliament passed the Innovation Fund. Just recently, we moved around to see what the fund was doing. We saw that different innovators have put that money to good use. 

The Parliamentary Week is a very good idea. It engages the public. I took off time once during one of the Parliament Weeks and watched the way people were electing their speaker. Later, they were in the House. I watched them on the screen debating contemporary issues. That motivated them. Most of them later went to vie for leadership positions at various levels back in their districts.

I would like to thank you for your hard work, leadership and lobbying skills. I remember that in the Ninth Parliament, when I joined, there was no parking. Members normally parked in the open and our vehicles would be vandalised. Madam Speaker, you planned for this parking where all our vehicles are parked safely. 

It is because of your skills that this Parliament was able to host the recent Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference (CPC). There was another that Parliament of Uganda hosted in the Ninth Parliament and all that is because of your lobbying skills. That brings credit not only to you but also the Parliament of Uganda.

I would like to thank honourable members for being supportive to each other. I remember once, I went with colleagues to my village irrespective of their political shades. They accompanied me to my district where the honourable minister testified that there is no radio reception. I was there with Hon. Ssemujju, Hon. – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: That is an important point; you have half a minute to conclude.

MR NAUWAT: I was there with Hon. Kitatta and others. We passed on information to the people, updating them on Government programmes and also talked about Female Genital Mutilation (FGM). We had been talking about it but they were not seeing its seriousness. However, when they heard from other Members of Parliament, they realised that Parliament is one. I pray that this continues.

The issue of taking Parliament to the people should be reignited. When you once went to Moroto with honourable members and came back, you were able to update the country about the concerns of the community there. This was to the attention of Government. Some of the issues were consequently addressed. Thank you.

5.35
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I am here to support the motion. I must say that I am also very happy to be part of this celebration. 

For once, I would like to be the devil’s advocate. As we start the next 100 years, we need to be more honourable in terms of the way we join this Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, I must say that today when we talk about some of the laws, they are so weak that there are people who rig their way here and stay. Even when court throws them out, they virtually go scot-free. In the coming 100 years, our laws should be drafted in such a way that if you are thrown out because you have rigged or done something bad, you should pay back our salary and emoluments. That will make it strong and difficult for people to manipulate their way here. 

There are people, for instance, who still come to this Parliament because they have been supported by security agencies. That should not be the case; people should come here because of the will of the ordinary people. Because of that, I think, as we begin the next 100 years, we need to start with stronger laws that will ensure that this House is respected and we are more honourable. 

Some people think that we are honourable because we are already here. However, in terms of our actions and how we came here, we should not even be honourable. That is my point and I think we need to look at it. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.37
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I take the Floor to support the motion moved by Hon. Muruli Mukasa.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to congratulate you for being in the Chair when we are celebrating 100 years of legislative work in Uganda. I would also like to congratulate the members of the Tenth Parliament because we are here to celebrate this historic day. 

Madam Speaker, when you read the message from the Secretary-General of the Commonwealth, I was touched because Uganda is respected because of its deeds or whatever we do. All these 100 years have gone all the previous Speakers in that Chair who managed to steer the House and Uganda kept moving on until we reached this age. 

I would like to congratulate all those first Members of Parliament - men and women of substance who kept Uganda going. Now at 100 years - for the Members of Parliament here and those coming in, what is the role of a Member of Parliament? That is what you should look at. 

To be able to carry out the role of a Member of Parliament, you must have strong leadership in the Chair. You must be able to do your work as a Member of Parliament - legislate, pass laws and play the oversight role. Make sure that you stand strong as Members of Parliament and check Government to ensure that they are practising democratic laws and human rights. Those are some of the things you should do. 

When you pass these laws, look at the people who elected you to come to Parliament because they are the ones who brought you here and the laws should be in their interest. You should look at what Ugandans want and that is what you are going to be remembered for. 

In talking about all these things but the most important thing is the people who brought you here and your role as a Member of Parliament. Look at what is very clear; oversight – (Member timed out.) 

5.40 
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister, my good friend, Hon. Muruli-Mukasa, for the motion. I rise to support it.

We commemorate 100 years at a time when all efforts to debase Parliament have been in the offing. When you look at the composition of Parliament, you will agree that the challenges of one becoming a Member of Parliament have been met more by the mobilisers out there than the actual politicians who would come to put across issues to do with the population at hand. 

Madam Speaker, it poses a challenge. Even as we talk, the public has confidence in Parliament as an institution based on the individuals or people in Parliament. I will give an example. When I joined Parliament, I had the benefit of serving on the Public Accounts Committee and the public would wonder whether Parliament would deal with issues pertaining to corruption. However, whenever you chaired, Madam Speaker, the public had the confidence that we were determined to fight corruption. 

At one time, I was thrilled by your firm stance on ensuring that some of these Public Accounts Committee reports get on the Order Paper. There was talk all over that these serious reports would never see the light of day and would never get on the Order Paper because the mafias had infiltrated Government. 

Madam Speaker, you presided over very controversial reports such as the Dura compensations. At the end of the day, their recommendations were adopted by Parliament; so, I would like to thank you for that. 

As we commemorate 100 years today, the public out there is looking towards seeing parliamentary resolutions move from being advisory to Government to being mandatory. What is the essence of us sitting here as Parliament and only making advisory resolutions to Government? I am of the view that recommendations or resolutions of Parliament arising out of the Auditor-General’s report, for example, should be mandatory to Government but not advisory. 

I think they arise out of the Appropriation Act. When we appropriate money to Government, we appropriate by an Act of Parliament. Therefore, any recommendations arising out of the Auditor-General’s report from Parliament should be binding to Government, which must implement them. Short of that, I see a challenge. The public out there will have a lot of confidence in the individual presiding over the House but they also want to see their recommendations implemented. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. I thank you. 

5.44
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. By just looking at me, you already know that there is a bit of history associated with me. Therefore, I will request right from the start that the technicians controlling the microphone be mindful of senior citizens.

Indeed, today is a day to celebrate because of where we are. That is why they say that sometimes we do not have to look backwards to know where we have come from because if we are to apply history to what we are discussing today, we would not be using the word celebration.

Madam Speaker, the British Colonial Government put in place the first LEGCO in 1920 and the first Parliament sat in March 1921. However, what was the composition of that Parliament and what was the purpose of that Parliament, how relevant was it to Ugandans?

Madam Speaker, that is why when you look back, sometime you have to rethink whether we are in the celebration mood or we are in a condemnation mood.

I would like to say that it is good the Lord has taken us that far. I would like to chop up our history concerning Parliament into three. Let us forget about the pre-independence segment of this Parliament because there was nothing relevant as far as our country was concerned. Your colleague, your predecessor- I think he was British called Robert Coryndon, he was also the Governor at the time. He was getting instructions and information from Whitehall and bringing it to the Legislature made up of seven British citizens, which was the Parliament of Uganda then. Therefore, Madam Speaker, you wonder; what are you celebrating?

Secondly, of course slowly by slowly, the membership improved and I believe that that is when the pressure for formation of parties and struggle for independence started. I pray that this Parliament one day documents the role that the Bataaka in Buganda played. It seems to be lost in the history. They played a critical role in the formation of pressure groups that made it easy for us to brave through the pressure for independence.

Madam Speaker, the post-independence Parliament definitely has been able to lay the foundation for democratic development which many of us are products of that effort. We need to thank our forefathers, the late Milton Obote, Benedicto Kiwanuka, Ssemwogere who is still alive who actually negotiated our independence. We did not have to shed blood.

The people in the LEGCO had a heart of Uganda. They were willing to sit down and negotiate and I think that is the spirit we should never allow to get lost in as far as our politics is concerned.

Madam Speaker, I remember the earlier Parliament with a lot of pride because it did not lead us to shedding blood in order to get independence but instead, our independence was properly negotiated although I do agree that the management of the unfulfilled agenda was not properly done and that of course, culminated into disasters that happened in 1966. Those are issues that we regret but of course, we have had so many fractures associated with our history.

Having the military junta of Idi Amini completely wiping out legislature, crippled Uganda because then nobody was there to plan for the development and democracy so everything collapsed. We thank God that the post Idi Amini era was able to put in place some structures, democratic institutions, political parties and the dynamisms of the NGOs that has burst force the multiparty democracy.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that a day like today, we should have invited the former Clerks of Parliament- if Edward Ocwo is still around, Tandekwire, Francis Butagira; they should have been here. We should have all celebrated this very historical event this particular day. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to leave just one message. We are moving to the Eleventh Parliament; let no body go out of this Parliament thinking that Parliament has contributed nothing to the development of our democracy, economy and so on.

Madam Speaker, I was here right from the making of the constitution. I must say history has proved men wrong. I am sorry to emphasize that. Because when I entered the Sixth Parliament- we could not sit in Parliament, we were too many so we had to sit in the Nile Conference Centre. 

We had the British structured Parliamentary chambers, too squeezed for hundreds of members. A chamber was built for just a few members. If you remember by 1961, I think there were only 78 members and they might have reached 100 in 1962 but I am not sure. You can imagine that structure of Parliament is what I found. 

We remained with that structure until by God’s grace we got some woman who told the people who were actually encroaching into our own premises. You can imagine, you have to borrow your neighbour’s home to accommodate your children when other people are occupying the extension of your home.

This woman behaving like a woman should behave, who cares for her children said, “Excuse me sir, this is part of my building can I have it because my children are crying?” Madam Speaker, the tenants who occupied the North Wing of Parliament were policemen with guns but they had to leave because it was a demand of your rights and then the eastern side was occupied by the Judiciary. I remember one of the ministers – Sam Njuba, had an office in the eastern wing.

This woman humbly went to the ministry and said, “Excuse me, this seems to be part of my building…” and my children, at the time, were carrying their files on the streets to come to Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, who does not know that the Attorney-General’s Chamber had to move from the Eastern Wing, which is now part of Parliament, the Northern Wing - Parliamentarians really, can’t you see the power of innovation that came to this Parliament. 

We were able to transform from the British character to our own African culture. We marry many women, we have many children, create space for them- a woman showed that. Not only did we do that, we came when we had only five floors, one floor was constructed and now we have six. How did it come about?

Many of us had our vehicles vandalized on the streets and we had a revolution. We had to create parking in the basement. Who does not know? Who has not been to that basement? This basement has been with us since the British time but nobody ever thought we could make use of it.

Now really members, do we know what we are talking about? This Parliament and the leadership that be has really transformed the Legislature not only in terms of legislations, speaking English and so on, but even structural development. Parliament is dynamic. We have even changed the mission and the vision of the current Parliament. Some of you may ask what it is. If you have not read it and you are a Member of the 10th Parliament, please read it before you leave. It talks of a transformational Parliament and a pro-people Parliament. We had to change our vision. What are we looking at? 

The First Deputy Prime Minister and I were in Arua to conduct Parliament there. Some of you went to Karamoja although I was not there when the entire Parliament planted trees there. It is already a pro-people Parliament and that is already documented. All these things are in our Parliament strategic development plan. 

I would like to congratulate the 10th Parliament. You have done a great job. I hope the 11th Parliament will recognise the enormous work done for example, the infrastructure, which has been put in place and get to know that we are not just Members of Parliament - as some of us think that we are just there to pick money, yet some of us have never picked any money. 

Before some us came to Parliament, we were already multi-billionaires but when we came here, we became paupers although to me, that does not matter. I know that I have added a brick to the development of this country and so, I do not care about what I have lost. 

Definitely, we have done something together. We will remain strong. Together, we transform Uganda. Together we will stand united. God bless Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, senior member, for that submission. 

5.57
MR ABDUL LATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A lot has been said. I am also going to concentrate on the 20 years I have been in Parliament since I am also celebrating 20 years. 

We must thank you, Madam Speaker, for what you have done to improve the welfare of Members of Parliament. I recall that whenever we would be about to travel, honourable colleagues who were with us in the Seventh Parliament, would first be cleared by the Office of the Prime Minister. Remember how we used to get our payments? We would go to Bank of Uganda and get money in cash. That is where Parliament has come from. 

When it comes to religious affairs, the time we came here, there were no prayer rooms. However, out of your good leadership, Madam Speaker, we, together with our colleagues, the Christians, managed to get prayer rooms. This has helped us to conform to our motto, “For God and my Country.”

Finally, I know, throughout the 100 years, we did not have any other female Speaker other than you. As we begin another 100 years, where I believe none of us will be present, let us allow the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga to lead us so that we can begin the new phase with a lady Speaker. 
Thank you very much.

5.59
MR FRED TURYAMUHWEZA (FDC, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is a pleasure and a good opportunity for me to make a statement on this 23rd Day of March 2021, on the occasion of celebrating 100 years of legislation in Uganda. 

I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for being there for the Members of Parliament especially on matters concerning our voters. We have a lot to learn from this history as we celebrate 100 years of legislation. So, we have to acknowledge the achievements and challenges faced as we reflect on the way forward. 

Indeed, we have registered legislative achievements culminating in the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution, which we are using to carry the country forward. That was great work done by Parliament. 

This Parliament has defended the Constitution to ensure that assumption of leadership positions from local government to the presidency is through elections, the quality of elections notwithstanding. 

In Uganda, as in many other developing countries, voters, many of them living in poverty, expect their MPs to deliver development to their constituencies rather than demanding that they play an effective role in terms of legislation and oversight functions. 

Therefore, as we celebrate 100 years of legislation, we should continue yearning for accountable legislation to promote sustainable good governance. 

I would like to suggest that apart from legislation, could Parliament create a budget to help in making physical memorable installations in every region of Uganda as part of the celebrations towards making 100 years of legislation in Uganda. 

Lastly, our Parliament should establish a system for fast-tracking the mutual responsibility of consulting and sharing information with voters explaining our role rather than spending time on day-to-day hand-outs that are being witnessed in this country. 

I support the motion for the 100-years’celebration. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.03
MR ABACACON GUTOMOI (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion moved by Hon. Wilson Muruli Mukasa on achieving these 100 years of legislation in this country. 

I would like to thank you for bearing the fruits of this 100 years’ celebration with the honourable colleagues. This is a very rare opportunity, which we have to welcome. We know the past and the current situations and we can now plan for the future better. 

We have achieved a lot as the honourable colleagues have enumerated. That is no mean achievement. You have been adding more to what your previous colleagues did; I believe you added the highest values. From what we have discussed, seen and known, we did not have anybody of that magnitude. It is, therefore, important that we celebrate it. 

We are celebrating at a time when we are no longer sitting in the Chamber but rather in this big tent. This is another thing to celebrate too. 

I have one thing to ask you to present. When I walked out, I met a group of petitioners from Akokoro. These are from Acamcabu Village, Ayeolyec Parish, Akokoro Sub County in Apac District. 
They are here to follow up on a petition written to you on the 10 March 2021. They are still praying that since they petitioned this Parliament for a third time and this is the fourth time, their case should be reviewed.

They were chased from their own land and they were not compensated for their property. They are just on the streets in Akokoro. They are not allowed to farm on their former land.
Madam Speaker, I think it is a challenge for this House to address this case. I beg to lay this paper on the Table for your attention.

I wish you successful deliberations and hope you come back to your seat. When I invited you for a prayer service with my family when I got an accident, you ably went and did a wonderful thing. Your name has been left on the record in my family, constituency and my clan. Thank you and may God bless you.

6.06
MR HAROLD MUHINDO (FDC, Bukonzo County East, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this privilege and honour to be part of the team of legislators that are celebrating the 100 years. I, therefore, support Hon. Muruli Mukasa’s motion.

One hundred years is a long journey. We are part of the team and the system for a journey that was started by those that are living and those that are not. They made tremendous contributions that we will keep on counting as achievements. It is, therefore, important that we continue being proud of these landmarks that we take as building blocks because block by block, we have been able to build this that we are celebrating.

However, history will make a record that we are also part of those who dismantled what we had built. A colleague mentioned that there is a very wonderful Constitution that Parliament made for this country. However, we are also the ones that have started looking at the different parts of the Constitution to rewind what had been made. How I wish that while we move forward, we respect what is good for the country and leave it the way it is. I want us to look at legislation in posterity.

We have a method of selection of legislators. It is unfortunate that the process has been commercialised and, therefore, does not give the opportunity for every Ugandan to be part of the legislators that will make the next 100 years. It would be important that this Parliament and the Government looks at how we can have a method of selection that does not encourage this kind of commercialisation of politics in this country –(Member timed out.)

6.10
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to join my colleagues in congratulating us as the Parliament of Uganda, including all those whose feet have stepped in this House as legislators or civil servants in a bid to offer a service to this country. 

We cannot deny the fact that we have achieved as an arm of Government. While it is good to thump your chest for achievements you have made, we should look at being excellent. We can only do better if we look at where we are weak and seek to strengthen our weak points. 

Madam Speaker, you sent us on assignment as the Committee on Human Rights and we just returned from Gulu on Thursday last week. It was very disheartening that as we went to have lunch in one restaurant, we were met by a team of young people who had also come to have lunch and the comments and opinions that they expressed about Parliament were very disheartening. 

They did not know who the Member of Parliament was. They said, “We hear Members of Parliament are here having lunch here. Now they are broke; they are looking for money. They are just coming out of campaigns. They are exchanging money because of the campaigns of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker.” It hurt me and I think we need to work at correcting the image of Parliament in the eyes of the public. 

This can only be done from what we do and say. What we brood in this House reflects on the opinions of the public out there. We are looked at as a House of traders – for anything to work out there, there must be an exchange of money or something. That needs to be corrected if we are going to continue on a trajectory that will make us proud and walk with our heads high on the streets of this country.

I also note with concern that the roles of Parliament are slowly being eroded in the eyes of the public. The public is viewing Members of Parliament and the Legislature as something else that is not provided for in the Constitution. We have become ATMs, sponsors of various projects and programmes, and all kinds of things in the eyes of the public. It does not matter how much a Member of Parliament will excel in this House; if they do not act as an ATM, they have not performed.

Our public relations need to be heightened so that we are viewed differently and Members can have time to concentrate on their work.

On the issue of accountability, we are looked at as an institution that upholds accountability. I have a been a chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee and I would like to say that we need to add more strength in the way we treat the reports of the Auditor-General and reports from other accountability institutions. The country is looking at Parliament. For what fails out there, they look at us as a solution. Thank you.

6.14
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a Parliament, we have walked such a long journey. Before we even talk of 1921, talk of 1884 as Africa; we had a situation where some people decided to sit in Berlin, Germany, to decide on how to partition this great land. In 1902, Uganda was declared a British protectorate. The Legislative Council came on board around 1921. In 1945, we had the first Africans joining the LEGCO came on board around 1921. In 1945, we had the first black Africans joining the LEGCO, for our situation here. There is a lady who I am told of; Hon. Lubega. I do not know where she is. I do not know whether she is here in Kampala –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Florence is in –

MR AOGON: Hon. Florence. Madam Speaker, I do not know what, as a House, we shall resolve today. These are part of our strong history but we have not done anything to reconsider them. We have historicals of this House; people who have been the face of Parliament in most of these legislative assemblies.

Madam Speaker, for a person like Hon. Aggrey Awori and many - to name but a few – what are we going to do to such people, so that they are remembered for the mark that they have left in this House? It is something that we need to consider. 

Away from sharing the history – because everybody has talked about it – allow me to talk about some proposal that I have. Firstly, I would propose that we create a special committee on libraries, archives and museums; a committee that will help us to carry out oversight. We are talking of issues of enforcing legal deposits. 

For instance, UBC, our neighbours here, are supposed to keep the audio and video records. There is a lot of material that people are supposed to be keeping for us as an institution. However, are we sure that these materials are there? Sometimes, people own offices. When they are ejected or leave offices, they leave with this material. How do we protect this information?

Today, we moved around this museum of Parliament. Without the team here extracting what we had there, what would we have for this tour? It would be a challenge.

First of all, I want to appreciate you. I think it was around 2018, when our commission decided to sit and say, “Let us have a Parliamentary Museum”. Otherwise, we would not be having anything. By the way, that is another thing that is so big to count in your name because we would not be having a museum for Parliament. I think it is high time that we have institutionalised – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please close.

MR AOGON: Every institution needs to have a strong mechanism of maintaining history, in terms of having all these records.

Madam Speaker, our laws are very weak in terms of keeping this information. We need now to revisit all the laws, like now the Historical Monument Act, which needs to be reviewed. The Legal Deposit law needs to be attended to, if we are to have something that will help us.

Individuals are struggling to keep awards, for instance, footballers and athletes who get awards want to keep this as individuals but it is very difficult. How I wish people learn to institutionalise this kind of thing; it is much better.

Madam Speaker, I want to say something on sensitisation. Ugandans do not know the value of keeping history. Like now, you have seen challenges in Tororo. When we want to sort out a problem in Tororo, we run to London and ask the “Londoners” to give us information. We do not keep information; we do not keep records. We do not value monuments. 

This is something that we must, as a country and a House, attend to. Our people who are here in the museum of Parliament need to be strengthened. We need to pay them well and give them strength in terms of money. We need to strengthen the museum of the Parliament of Uganda because this is a source of our history.
 
I want to thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are in no man’s land, where we are now leaving 100 years and going for the next 100 years. It is better for a man to walk after it has rained, so that somebody can trace their footsteps properly, other than move, when it has not rained. Otherwise, it would be difficult to know where you have gone when you get lost.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I think we enacted a law on monuments and museums. I am not sure how it is being implemented. Hon. Aogon has raised a very important point. I think our Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry should take an interest in the implementation of that law. There could be something we are missing.

6.19
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to make a comment on the day of commemorating 100 years since this Parliament started.

Madam Speaker, I wish to add my voice to my colleagues and the mover of this motion, appreciating the achievements that this Parliament has made in the last 100 years. I also recognise that in the 100 years, we have not only made achievements; there are mistakes that have been made, which are still happening now and which we ought or have to correct.

I want to thank you and agree with my colleague members of Parliament that it is indeed important, beside what we do here, to extend Parliament to our communities.

I had an opportunity of inviting you to my constituency, Madam Speaker. From the day you were there, the constituency has changed. If you could go to Busara Secondary School, which you visited, you cannot believe the road, which you passed through. The Government has provided over Shs 15 billion, to tarmac that road and it is still going on to 63 Kilometers. For that, I want to thank you, Madam Speaker. If a Speaker alone could visit and we get that achievement, what would happen if Parliament visited?

However, Madam Speaker, I wish to recognise that in the 100 years, there are periods which this Parliament must regret, for example, the period when this Parliament was suspended from 1971 to 1979. It is a period which we do not appreciate at all. There is a period, where the Head of State was at the same time the Speaker. That did not move well with the independence of Parliament. 

We also need to recognise that after 100 years today of legislative activity in this Parliament, we can celebrate these years, when we have a Member of Parliament who cannot walk because he was mistreated, injured, tortured in this House and is moving with crutches. Today, Hon. Nambooze is still moving with crutches. Hon. Zaake cannot turn his neck. He was beaten and injured while doing his work in this Parliament.

Madam Speaker, in the implementation of the laws we make in this Parliament, we still hear of a Chief Justice “stealing” a file of a colleague, Justice of the Supreme Court, trying to implement the laws that we make in this House. This is unfortunate. The next Parliament and the Government must ensure that in the next 100 years, these unfortunate events must not resurface, such that we can build this Parliament and strengthen its purpose and mandate towards ensuring good governance.

We have not had an opportunity of coming here to Parliament or somewhere else, celebrating a President handing over power to another President peacefully. It has not happened, yet we make laws here, day after day. What we only hear are, “Elections have been rigged. A candidate wants to go to court. He is cuffed and detained in his home; he cannot have an opportunity to file court documents.” It is very unfortunate!

However, the 100 years have not been in vain. The achievements and steps we have made give me confidence that we can do better. I want to thank you.

6.24
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): I want to thank Hon. Muruli-Mukasa, my good friend, for the motion and I stand here to support it.

Madam Speaker, I also want to thank the people of Kasilo County for having made me part of the 100 years because for 20 of the 100 years, they have kept me as their representative. I want to thank them for that wholeheartedly. The good and bad have happened but we celebrate the good and build on the good things that we have seen and learnt lessons from the bad things that happened over the 100 years.

Madam Speaker, you did a very great thing to invite Members of Parliament since the Parliament of Uganda started. The President made a commitment that he was going to give a handshake to former Members of Parliament. To date, the President has not fulfilled this.

With the background and experience I have, I know that every financial year, the Parliamentary Commission meets His Excellency to discuss the budget of the Parliamentary Commission. May I appeal, on behalf of the other Members of Parliament, that you remind His Excellency about that pledge.

As I sat here, I saw a message sent to me by some former Members of Parliament. One of them is among the first women legislators, Hon. Frances Akello from Teso. She needs a Government hand.

We are celebrating today. If it weren’t for COVID-19, it would have been the right time to invite all the former Members of Parliament who have contributed to the Legislature and the development of this country.

Madam Speaker, please, take that appeal from the former Members of Parliament to the President so that he fulfils the pledge he made. You are the one who brought him and he made the pledge. They are waiting.

I really wish that what we started regarding the Parliament radio station be fulfilled. As we mark 100 years, we would switch on the Parliamentary Radio. Some colleagues may not be aware that we have a fully equipped radio station. However, to date, Government has not given us the frequency. Why? Three to four years down the road, it is lying idle and yet, it is a fully fledged studio. How I wish that today, that would happen such that as we mark these 100 years, we go on air. 

Rt Hon. First Deputy Prime Minister, you are a member of the Parliamentary Commission. Can we see this happen? We would like to see the Parliament Radio go on air. 

It is not a coincidence but God’s blessing that as we are marking these 100 years, we have a woman Clerk to Parliament, Ms Jane Kibirige. Also in the leadership of Parliament, we have the Leader of the Opposition, who is a lady. We have you as the Speaker of Parliament. It is not a coincidence.  These things work because God has planned them.

I have been to a number of Commonwealth countries. I would like to thank you for the message that you read from the Secretary General.  They keep asking me why the Speaker does not have an official residence. (Laughter)

In all the Commonwealth countries, I have been to, we are hosted at the Speaker’s Parliamentary residence. I am not just speaking for you.

The Clerk to Parliament used to have a house near the Ministry of Public Service. I do not know what happened to it. If Bank of Uganda can have a house for the Governor and the Deputy Governor - there was the official residence for the Inspector General of Police (IGP), which houses Interpol now; the Chief Justice and the Deputy Chief Justice have official residences. Why doesn’t the Speaker who is number three in hierarchy have an official residence?

The President and the Vice-President have official residences. The last house was where the former Vice-President; Paul Muwanga resided in Kololo. What happened to those houses? I do not think those houses were sold. We must dig into this and find out what happened. As we move into the next 100 years, these issues should be looked into. That is how we shall be able to strengthen it. 

We do not want to look for the Deputy Speaker or the Clerk in scattered places. You may want to have a quick meeting. Why doesn’t the Prime Minister have an official residence? These are key leaders. Why should we be shy to provide? 

I would like to see the next Parliament move towards that. People should not be scared about the public. The percentage of the budget for the Parliamentary Commission is 1.2 per cent of the national budget. In Kenya, their budget is 5 per cent, South Africa, it is 6 per cent, and in Tanzania, it is about 4 per cent. Ours is only 1.2 per cent and people make a lot of noise. If we remove the development budget, it is even much less than that. Therefore, this should be looked into by the 11th Parliament.
 
As I conclude, there is the issue of archives. The other day, when you announced that we would celebrate today, I went to look for some information from our Library. I could not access some of the Hansards. We need to start our electronic archives. Why can’t we do it here? We have the ICT Department.

The other day, we were in Uganda Revenue Authority. The Ministry of Works and Transport is now digitising all the forms of registration of vehicles in Uganda. We have done it with titles in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. Why can’t we do it for Uganda? That way, we shall not be able to lose the history of this country.

I would like to wish the Parliament and people of Uganda a happy celebration, for marking these 100 years. I wish you the best and pray that the Movement Government lives to do what it proposed. It says that a third of the positions in this country is for women. We want to see that in practice and not only in words. Thank you.

6.31
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to join honourable colleagues in commemorating these 100 years of legislature in Uganda, by starting from where Hon. Okupa stopped; about the residence of the Speaker.

While touring the picture stands that were displayed, I came across a picture where at the bottom, it was written - I cannot recall the individuals who were there but it talked about the Speaker’s Lodge somewhere in Mengo. I am trying to connect to what Hon. Okupa said. Maybe, it existed only that Parliament has never interested itself in that particular lodge or residence.

The pictures spoke volumes. It brought afresh my social studies (SST) memories. Some of the pictures were some of the things we were taught in SST, while in primary school; that is to bring out the relevance of some of the things that we were taught as pupils and students in history. It is not in vain that some of these things are taught to our children.

Therefore, to make it a point that you have provided for a museum in the new Chamber under construction, that is visionary. I would like to recognise that as part of your contribution in the establishment of Parliament.

We cannot talk here without appreciating the past leaders; the former seven members of the Legislative Council and others who followed until independence. I would like to take this opportunity to recognise my predecessors from Ayivu; 

    1. Late Hon. Gaspero Odaa,
    2. Late Hon. Bada Nyanya,
    3. Late Hon. Dick Nyai,
    4. Hon. Drani Dradriga,
    5. Hon. Bakoko Bakoru, and
    6. Hon. Margaret Angufiru, who I replaced, among others.

They served this country as Members of Parliament and therefore, had a hand in all the developments that we see.

Madam Speaker, it is wrong for the public out there to castigate Parliament knowing that there is nothing that functions in this country without the involvement of Parliament. It is important that we put it to the public that whatever they see happening there has been “cooked” in this august House before it is realised as development or as a service. 

Allow me to congratulate you, Madam Speaker, and the members of the Tenth Parliament. Under your stewardship, I have personally celebrated the 50 years of independence of this country and received a medal for that. All the Members of Parliament that have served this country have also got medals. Under your stewardship, Madam Speaker, I have also been part of the organising committee that hosted the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference. 

Therefore, I join honourable colleagues in congratulating you and this august House in changing the face of this Parliament physically and by taking it to the community. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal mentioned here that you were in Arua and what you did was memorable. 

It is this Parliament that also granted 15 cities. From independence, we have known Kampala City but now, moving forward, we have 15 additional cities. All these cannot go unnoticed and we credit you for steering these developments in this Parliament. I thank you. For God and my country. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the question of medals, originally the plan was to decorate the members of the Eighth Parliament. However, I felt that it would not be fair to decorate only the Eighth Parliament when there are other parliaments on whose shoulders we stand. Therefore, I took the decision that we should decorate everybody who was still alive and those that are dead would be decorated posthumously. Thank you. 

6.36
BRIG. GEN. FELIX KULAYIGYE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank Hon. Muruli Mukasa for this motion. I personally thank God for being part of this history. I also thank the Commander-in-Chief who nominated me to be elected and the UPDF that elected me to represent them in the Tenth Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you in particular for having given me the chance to lead the security committee for the CPC. It is part of my CV now and I salute you for having had the confidence in me. 

I have a personal tribute to you. In 2016, there were some elements that wanted to pull me out of this House and, Madam Speaker, you stood your ground and they lost. I salute you for that contribution. 

I would like to salute the people of Uganda for being resilient even when Parliament was in trouble. Members have only talked about the Amin time but we also had no Parliament between July 1985 and some months of 1986, when the UNLA overthrew the President a second time. 

I was lucky to have entered this House, first, as a staff in the NRC, when I would accompany the Chairman of the NRC as a private soldier. It is gratifying that I am back in this House as a Member and I have seen quite a number of developments that you have spearheaded as Speaker. We cannot ignore the development Parliament has undergone, thanks to your stewardship, and we salute you for the innovations that you have made.

I appeal to the coming parliaments - First and foremost, I join Hon. Mwiru in requesting that the recommendations of the Auditor-General be made binding on the individuals that have been named. That is the only way we can fight the thieves that people have baptised as “corrupt” people; it is stealing and not corruption. These thieves must be dealt with and the Government money recovered. That is when the resolutions of Parliament will then be relevant to the history of our country. 

Secondly, I request that the coming parliaments promote public accountability. If we have allocated money to an MDA, let us not stop at the paper accountability. Let people show us what they have done with this money, particularly the projects we finance. If money has been allocated, you who is heading that MDA should show us what you have done in terms of what exactly is on the ground. That will improve service delivery. 

Lastly, this country ought to have a value system. We are talking about the public turning Members of Parliament into ATMs. It is the value system in the country – quid pro quo. If people realise that it is serving your country, whether there is money or not, then they will not look at Members of Parliament as ATMs. 

I salute everybody and wish you the best in the celebrations. God bless Uganda. 

6.40 
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke North County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion. Allow me to start off by congratulating you as the sitting presiding officer of this Parliament. I also congratulate your predecessors in office, sitting Members of Parliament and all those here before us. 

This Parliament has depicted or maintained our model of being a God-fearing country - for God and our country. We have held the National Prayer Breakfast for very many years. If it was not for the advent of the COVID-19 pandemic, I am sure we would have held it last year. We have been having the Ramadan futur every year for the last 10 years but of course we missed for the obvious reasons of COVID-19. 

Madam Speaker, you have ensured that all the special religious days are recognised in this House and that is very important because nothing happens without the support of the Almighty Allah. 

This Parliament is one that has special attributes. I think it is unique in the whole world. It is a true representation of the people of this country; different people of different shades and characteristics are all recognised in this country. I do not think there is any other parliament which has got these special attributes like the Parliament of Uganda. This has given the opportunity for the hitherto marginalised people to have their voices heard. 

The legislation which has been surpassed – this is a true pro-people legislature. Under your leadership, the Equal Opportunities Commission was operationalised in a constitutional provision and the gender budgeting became a model for all the parliaments of the world.

Madam Speaker, this Parliament has recognised the important biological role of a woman by setting up a day-care centre to help those mothers who have –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Conclude. 

MS BBUMBA: This Parliament has recognised the important biological role of a woman by setting up a day-care centre to help the breastfeeding mothers feed their children. 

A number of constitutional provisions have been operationalised but there are some yet to be operationalised, for instance the one for setting up the Kadhi courts. This one is very important for the Muslim faith because there are many legal issues pertaining to the Muslim faith, which cannot be adequately attended to in these other courts. 

One of them – Madam Speaker, you remember that we passed here Islamic Banking but it has remained on paper because we have not set up the Kadhi Courts. I would like to pray that as we enter the second centenary of Parliament, this is taken into consideration and those other constitutional provisions that have not been operationalised. 

Let us do our best to operationalise them; congratulations. There is no success without challenges. They have been there, but I will talk about you because you are the one I know. The way you have managed these challenges; I want to say that you are a special woman - congratulations.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much.

6.45
MS AGNES TAAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to congratulate you and every one upon this day. I thank whoever has contributed to my ability to stand here as part of this august House.

Before, I continue, I heard Hon. Syda mention something that I cannot ignore but high light a little bit- the issue of the breast-feeding centre. How I wish this was replicated in other work places. I have had an opportunity of being a mother working out of Parliament and a mother in Parliament. It was a good opportunity for me to work as a Member of Parliament and a mother using the breast-feeding centre.

Madam Speaker, I wish to draw your attention to the poverty levels in our country. As Members of Parliament, there is need for more time to scrutinise policy statements and the budget so that we really focus our little resources to improving lives of Ugandans.

This has been a very big challenge. We have Ugandans who cannot afford to pay fees and this turns to us Members of Parliament. You find a village with over 300 people but not able to pay a community contribution of Shs 100,000 or Shs 200,000 for a borehole to be constructed, or even repairs of Shs 50,000. This speaks much about our population. I wish that we would focus more on how much we can engage Government to take in our inputs in the budget. 

Most of the time, I feel dissatisfied by that process. When we are in committees, there is very little time. They say no, just confirm and we go and yet we are actually leaving out- 

Sometimes, the recommendations that you make - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Just conclude.

MS TAAKA: The public servants will take the notes, go back but nothing changes. This has affected even our roles as Members of Parliament. Because of the negativity, that we get, the new people who stand as Members of Parliament, go out and promise what Government is supposed to do outside the roles of Parliament. 

This has shaped our roles as Members of Parliament, bringing a very big workload to members and we have ended becoming enemies of the public because of the failure to achieve those targets. Let us scrutinise the loans that we pass, the oversight role, how much impact has these loans brought in the lives of Ugandans? Then we shall celebrate our roles as Members of Parliament.

6.50
MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to begin by thanking the minister for bringing this motion and I would like to say that I am in support of it. I would like to acknowledge and appreciate the role of the previous and current Members of Parliament as we commemorate 100 years of the existence of our Parliament for the contribution, they have made which has brought us this far.

In particular, I would like to recognize your contribution to this House, Madam Speaker. In terms of the Legislature of Uganda, you are part and parcel of the Parliament of Uganda and you are a household name as far as Ugandans are concerned.

I also want to say that having been here in Parliament, we want to appreciate your contribution especially in ensuring that we attend and handle matters that pertain to the livelihood of Ugandans- 100 years of Parliament of Uganda is good enough. We have come far. We want to thank God for that.

However, as it has been reflected, a growing concern is about the debate of Parliament. For me, compared indeed to the previous debates, I think we need to improve on our debate on issues of Parliament. 

I want to say something that might be a bit sticky. It is about qualification of the people who are elected as Members of Parliament. Many times, just because the law provides that a Member of Parliament should have a minimum qualification of senior six, there is a belief by some negative forces that Members of Parliament are senior six leavers. 

I think after 100 years, Madam Speaker, it is high time that we revisited the provisions of the law especially Article 80 which provides for the qualification of Members of Parliament. I think it is in order that we raise the qualifications of Members of Parliament in terms of education to have a minimum qualification of a degree. It will improve on the image of our Parliament and the quality of debate but as well as our interactions with the rest of stakeholders not only inside our country but outside as well.

The role of Parliament provided for under Article 79 is to- Madam Speaker, I was quickly refereeing to the provision of the Constitution for Members of Parliament; to make laws for the good governance, development of the country. 

However, a senior six leaver may not be somebody who can be able to meet this demand. This also translates to the lower legislation that we have delegated to the councils in the districts and the subcounties.

I think we need to improve on our qualifications by revisiting the law and be able to amend it so that we have higher qualifications at all levels at the centres of governance; from Local Government up to Parliament. That will enable us to improve on the standard of debate and quality of the laws that we make. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.54
MS JUDITH ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to support this motion. I would like to first thank the past Speakers of this Parliament. Let me also thank the past staff of this Parliament, the Members of Parliament who served in the past and also the Commissioners of this Parliament plus all the other relevant people who worked tirelessly in the past 100 years to make this Parliament what it is now. 

One of the widows whose husband served in this Parliament came to me last month. She told me that when they were called to receive medals by the President as representatives of those who served in this Parliament, the President made a pledge to give them a reward. Up to now, that pledge has not yet been fulfilled. A case in point is one of the people who served in the Constituent Assembly, the late Vincent Odongo who comes from Kole District. That is the person whose wife came to me and told me about the presidential pledge. 

I feel that those who served in the past Parliaments, whether they are alive or dead, should be rewarded because they made a great contribution to this Parliament and this is what we are celebrating. 

A lot has been discussed on how Parliament has been moving but I would like to re-echo some of the things that have been mentioned by honourable members; that Parliament’s image has been badly tainted and the respect that Parliament used to have has greatly diminished. 

I have few recommendations to make; that let Parliament, as an institution, remain independent as it is one of the three arms of Government and let its image be fully protected from social media and the general public. We are not walking with our heads up in this present Parliament because a lot has been said about Members of Parliament on radio, television and social media. 

In one of my recommendations, I request the Government to do civic education to our people so they can know the roles of their leaders as well as their own roles as the people who vote for their leaders. 

Lastly, I would like to mention our building. Could it receive a face lift? If you could get some money from Government - After 100 years, some of these buildings are looking bad on the outside although they are beautiful inside. Could we see a new building of this Parliament? I beg to submit, thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Concerning payment to the old Members, His Excellency the President asked the Parliamentary Commission to design two scenarios as to how that money could be raised. The Commission did its work and we submitted our report to the President. I have been waiting for implementation. You are right, however, that we need to remind him. It is not that we have not been following up.

6.58
MS PAMELA KAMUGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to congratulate Parliament and Ugandans upon reaching 100 years of legislation. 

On behalf of the people of Budaka and UWOPA, I would like to thank you for enabling me to be part of this history. For the people of Budaka, they elected me as their leader and for my colleagues, I would like to say thank you for entrusting me to lead you as your chairperson of UWOPA. 

I would like to join colleagues in thanking the past parliaments who sat and thought about creating a very special seat for the women. Madam Speaker, as a woman, I congratulate you. You are the Speaker of this House may be because of the affirmative action that was taken and decided on by the past Parliaments. I would like to say I have been admiring the way you steer this House. You have inspired us, we are very proud of you and we look forward to voting you back as the Speaker of the 11th Parliament. 

Honourable colleagues, it is my prayer that we continue seeing the best and only the best in the Rt Hon. Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga. May we continue putting her in that seat. I congratulate all Ugandans. Thank you.

7.00
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate you, all the Members of Parliament and Uganda upon this achievement. Progress has been registered, although with hiccups here and there. 

I would also like to support the positive remarks given by most Members of Parliament; that without Parliament we may not have laws made. We have laws because Members of Parliament are here to make laws.

Let me concentrate more on the challenges we face as Members of Parliament. Much as we are here to debate and much as I would rate people who were in the ‘60s or earlier as not having been as learned as we are now, we are very many Members of Parliament. Our number does not allow us ample time to debate. For example, Hon. Taaka was contributing but her time was up before she could finish. Sometimes they say we are not good debaters but it is because we are very many and many would want to contribute and so, it becomes a challenge. 

I would also like to say that much as we congratulate this Parliament, it still looks very ugly. We benchmark the Commonwealth Parliamentary practices. Although we have a multiparty Parliament, we also have the UPDF as part of this Parliament. Why can’t they just resign their positions, go and also contest and come here? This has made this Parliament look bad. 

One of the things that is positive about this Parliament is outreach; taking this Parliament to the people. It has, however, not taken strong root. I wish it could come back so that our people get to know better. 

If we go to our people, the electorates, to find out about Members of Parliament, you do not get positive answers because we have not delivered the way it should have been. Look at health. Visit any health facility and you will see how people struggle. 

People are very poor and the service delivery is poor. There are no agricultural extension workers where our hearts are. How can they talk positively about us? They will never support us positively. That is why the voters’ turnup was so poor. There is a lot of positivity but also negativity, which we need work on together.

Madam Speaker, I want to thank you very much. In as far gender is concerned, we have moved a lot. That is why you are there as our heroine, role model, and when you go to girls’ schools they always say, “I want to be like Hon. Kadaga.” This is a very positive aspect of the Parliament. 

We have challenges. We cannot debate everything here but we need to take stock of the challenges in this Parliament, especially the ministers who frustrate us a lot. People have not come out to say this but they frustrate this Parliament. Much as we come up with issues to be deliberated, our resolutions are never handled and sometimes when we need a response to certain things very quickly, they are never there to help us. Thank you. Congratulations, Members.

7.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Madam Speaker, I would like to join other colleagues in thanking the minister for moving the motion to celebrate 100 years of Parliament as an institution. This is the third arm of Government whose services are key in the development and socio-economic transformation of the country. I would like to join colleagues in congratulating you for being the sitting Speaker when we celebrate the 100 years. 

A lot has been said and I do not want to repeat myself. I want to concentrate on the role of Parliament. We have four roles but as the population grows, we need to strengthen the oversight role. As many colleagues said, we are faced with a challenge of resources but many reports, especially from the Auditor-General’s office, come out and we do nothing. From the Ministry of Public Service, I would like to see the role or that function of oversight being strengthened. 

We have just come out of elections and as many colleagues said, MPs are being perceived as taking over the role of local governments. I would like to request the Parliamentary Commission to have a programme on sensitising the masses about the roles of MPs because it is becoming a big problem; someone comes and promises heaven on earth and you find yourself being bogged down.

The other issue is the image of Parliament. We are now in a multiparty dispensation. The image of Parliament has been upheld for long - many of us used want to be like some MPs - but as it stands, the image is being –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Use half a minute to conclude.

MR KARUBANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have seen incidents within the House and even outside. As we enter the second century, that is, the Eleventh Parliament, we should make laws which protect this image for posterity, so that those coming parliaments will have an image that will be as good as it has been. Thank you, Madam Speaker. Congratulations for being the only woman Speaker and indeed, your record speaks volumes.

7.10
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to congratulate you and our honourable colleagues, members of the Tenth Parliament. It is not an easy thing to be a Member of Parliament. I congratulate the members of this august House who have had the opportunity to celebrate the 100 years of Parliament as sitting Members of Parliament.

Our roles are clear in the laws. Unfortunately, our roles as Members of Parliament have been greatly misunderstood and our image eroded. Through your guidance and good stewardship, I kindly request that you help this House, especially the incoming Eleventh Parliament, to clarify the roles of a Member of Parliament to the public. 

As Members of Parliament, we are building roads, schools, pumping water, building churches. We are being impoverished. We are giving out money day and night. When they see a Member of Parliament, they see a bullion van, a moving cash machine. When you do not give them money, it is a crime. It is very stressful, disturbing and annoying for a Member of Parliament to receive 800 calls and out of them, 795 are demanding for money.

We need to educate our people on what our roles are. People are going to die of stress over matters which they would ordinarily not be working on. We are required to lobby for the development of our constituencies; in doing so, we have acquired schools, electricity and so many other things, but be that as it may, we are still required to give.

I am calling upon you, Madam Speaker, through your stewardship, to develop a mechanism to educate the public that Members of Parliament are there to connect with the state, to make laws and achieve all the other roles as enumerated in the law. Thank you.

7.14
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by thanking the minister for moving the motion and also thank everybody who is here, for participating in this historical occasion of celebrating 100 years of legislation; that is from 1921. 

Madam Speaker, I do not know where you were –(Laughter)– to be presiding over now; would you have planned before if you were aware? Definitely, no.

Madam Speaker, I think as we celebrate we should not go back. Otherwise, if I hypothetically asked: we celebrate 100 years before somebody started it. If you say, “Why did the British start Parliament here? Is that an issue now? Had we been asked before, would it have been possible? Was Uganda there at that time as a country? 

We should consider some of these issues like when you go to Jinja and see River Nile flowing out of the lake, the water has, for all these years, been flowing north and draining into the Mediterranean Sea, you could not ask why? Why couldn’t it flow to the east or west? We could not ask what was wrong.

A lot of water has passed under the bridge. Here in Karuma, you cannot stop it. If you drive to Karuma and stop at the bridge, you see a lot of water flowing. It is not anybody’s making. Since we were not asked whether we wanted the first Parliament to be created here or not, I think we should not even be bothering about it. The fact that it happened is what we are celebrating.

I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for not only witnessing or participating in presiding over this motion, but you have been conducting this Parliament for many years now. I want to thank you for that.

I also want to say that this is the time not to point fingers at the three arms of Government. The time is very little. I would rather want us to talk on positives, which I want to talk about. 

I personally want to appreciate each of the three arms of Government for their performance. Parliament makes laws, among other things. The Judiciary interprets these laws and how to make them work. 

The Executive locks you up. The Judiciary says, “This man or woman should go for three or four months” and you are taken to Luzira or elsewhere. Altogether, this performance is fruitful and brings stability in this country. That is why there is stability because the three arms are working together. 

This is not the time to say, “This arm has done this; this one is letting us down.” I think this is not the time. We are actually trying to celebrate what has accumulated over 100 years, which we are now calling Parliament because we do not have time for criticism. I think we should thank each other and thank Parliament for what they have done so far.

I want to thank the 10th Parliament for raising high the standard of this House. Somebody was talking about A-level but I have seen and found that the standard of the House is very high, especially in debating.

These members of the House are living in a world of technology. They know a lot; they know everything. Whatever happens anywhere in the world, they know. Even here in the country, they know. This is a free place. Whatever you say here; everybody who wants to hear can hear. 

You have no way of stopping people from listening to what you are saying in the country. Anybody can tune into your channel. Finished! They hear. If I do not come here, I listen when I am in the house. Everybody who talks; I hear.

If the public hates you, they can hate you correctly because sometimes, you are careless. Whatever you say here, you do not control yourself. You do not even bother whether you are hurting other people or not. That is not fair. You must have control and also take care of yourself. You cannot just say, “To whom it may concern.”

At least, I know you have raised the standard. You do not even think this A-level issue. For me, the standard of the House is very high and I think majority of you are graduates, except you may not be able to know how to use it. (Laughter)

Therefore, I would like that you change a bit. There is a lot of information we know but we should use it properly; use it in our favour. Do not make people use it against us; use it in our favour.

Madam Speaker, this Government has even brought freedom of speech. People speak freely here and there. Who stops us from speaking? We speak freely but how many people do we hurt? Do you know or whether you please people or not?

Sometimes, this is what we think. For me, S.6 is good because poverty levels are still high in the country side. When people with S.6 certificates come here, they get the opportunity to study by going to UMI and Makerere.

I came and studied law in 2006. (Applause) Initially, I had an O-level certificate. I sat for O’ Level in 1966. Our O’ Level was marked in Cambridge. I joined the army based on that O’ Level qualification.

Before I even lost elections in 2006, I was studying A’ Level by correspondence. I used this correspondence result and went to Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB) and it was equated to A’ Level. I went to Makerere and they allowed me to study Law.

If you block those with A’ Level qualification, you are blocking many people who may even be brighter than you. It is only that they did not get a chance because poverty would not allow them.

Therefore, if you arrive here in whatever vehicle that brought you; allow others to use their own vehicle to also come. (Laughter) It is a place for everybody. Once they come, they will know what to do with their future. This attitude of “when I get everything, then the rest can go to hell” is not fair.

I was talking about freedom of speech –(Interjections)- I am not reading but just referring to what I want to say because I do not want to say everything. I was advising you to be careful about what you do. Therefore, I must also guide myself. I should not contradict what I have said. Be careful not to hurt everybody because you are a Member of Parliament. I was saying that Government allowed freedom of speech and a lot of chance for people to go into elections. There are regular free and fair elections for those who want to be elected.

Therefore, we should thank everybody who thought about the 100 years of Parliament to be celebrated today. Everybody who participated, from that time to now, should be thanked. We appreciate it.

Madam Speaker, I also appreciate you. They have already thanked you. If it were to be turned into money, you would be very rich now. (Laughter) I would like to thank you for the good work done.

There is stability in this country, which I must talk about. Regular free and fair elections are because of stability. This has even helped us to develop our country. How do you prove that there is this stability? Just ask yourself why 1.5 million refugees would come to Uganda when they have their own country. It is only because there is peace here. 

On behalf of the Executive, I would like to thank everybody who has appreciated what has been done. I would also like to appreciate the cooperation of everybody who has contributed to our achievements to help the Government to reduce on poverty so that we soon go into the middle income class.

Madam Speaker, I think I have spoken last. I hope I have not hurt anybody. Even if I hurt anybody, part of it could also be possible. What can we do now? If you have hurt me, I hurt you also. (Laughter)

I should stop and thank honourable colleagues for the attention and the minister for the motion. Madam Speaker, thank you for bringing this here for remembrance. If this Uganda was not created a protectorate, I think we would not even have this First Parliament. That is why I said that let us just forget that. 

I support the motion. For God and my country.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Honourable members, 49 members have contributed to this motion. You will appreciate that because of the historical significance, we had to concentrate on that so that we make this mark for the centenary celebration.

In closing, I would like to thank Sir Robert Coryndon, our first President of the Uganda Protectorate and Speaker, Clerks and staff over the year. 

I would like to thank the:

    1. Rt Hon. Sir Griffin Bowes,
    2. Rt Hon. Narendra Patel,
    3. Rt Hon. Edward Rugumayo,
    4. Rt Hon. Alex Waibale,
    5. Rt Hon. Francis Butagira,
    6. His Excellency Yoweri Museveni and Rt Hon. Al-Haji Moses Kigongo,
    7. Rt Hon. James Wapakhabulo,
    8. Rt Hon. Francis Ayume, and
    9. Rt Hon. Edward Ssekandi for the work done over these last 100 years.

I, therefore, put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House do resolve as proposed by the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to inform you about something that our Corporate Planning and Strategy office is doing to produce the legacy report for the Tenth Parliament to highlight Parliament’s performance and facilitate continuity of Parliament business. There is an online tool, which has been sent to your emails for you to give feedback, experiences and recommendations for the betterment of the Eleventh Parliament. What do you think needs to be done? Please, check your emails.

I urge you to participate in this exercise. Contribute before 31 March 2021. We do not have many days. 

Honourable members, the House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. I hope the committees have had time to harmonise whatever they wanted to so that we go straight to our Bills when we convene tomorrow.

(The House rose at 7.32 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 24 March 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 
