

Wednesday, 15 March 2017

Parliament met at 2.10 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish to warmly welcome you to this sitting. It is with profound shock and sadness that I wish to inform you of the sudden death of our colleague, hon. Cyrus Amodoi Imalingat, Member of Parliament for Toroma County, Katakwi District. 

His death occurred in an accident last night in Kitigoma, Buikwe District on Jinja Road. This is indeed a sad moment for the Parliament because just about a month ago, we lost the honourable member for Moroto District. 

As human beings, we do not have overall control of our lives neither can we question the decisions of the Almighty God on our destiny. Therefore, we would like to commit the soul of hon. Amodoi, to divine intervention. This accident is reported to have caused the death of other 30 persons. We pray for those who are hospitalised and wish them a quick recovery. 

On behalf of the Parliament of Uganda and my own behalf, I wish to register utmost condolences to the family of hon. Amodoi, the families of all the other bereaved persons and the entire nation for such a great loss. 

Honourable members, let us rise to observe a moment of silence for hon. Amodoi and also for those departed.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Peter Ogwang who is our Parliamentary Commissioner, together with the Clerk to Parliament are making all the necessary arrangements for the final send-off of our colleague. The body is in Jinja Hospital for further management and the post-mortem, by now, I think should have been done.

Subject to whatever adjustments and in consultation with hon. Amodoi’s family, I am giving notice that the late hon. Amodoi’s body will be brought to Parliament for public viewing and also for our tribute motion on Friday, 17 March 2017. We will inform you in due course of all the other arrangements once they have fallen in place and hon. Peter Ogwang is directly working on our behalf.

Honourable members, let me take this opportunity to call on the Minister of Works and Transport, the National Road Safety Council, the Uganda Police and all the stakeholders to step up vigilance and sensitisation on the safe use of roads so that the carnage that is occurring on our roads due to motor accidents is avoided. 

In a special way, I would like to request all honourable members that wherever you convene these public meetings and rallies that you address, try to sensitise the population on the safe use of our roads. We cannot afford, as a nation, to continue losing our people in motor accidents.  

The negative social and economic consequences occurring because of such deaths on the entire Uganda is a great loss to endure; even the families that get affected by these accidents never recover. Let us do something about our community mobilisation to try and reduce on the road carnage. The police have done some two operations which they have tried to use for sensitisation - there is Tembeya Salama and Fika Salama. Those are some of the initiatives that can help us support this move to reduce carnage on our roads.

Also, as representatives of the people, let us try and do something for mobilisation – the drivers, the road users and all of us so that we can make our roads safe. It is not good news for this House but it has happened. 

As I said earlier, tomorrow, we might be closing the normal sessions of Parliament but we will have a special sitting of Parliament on Friday. Since honourable members will still be around, let us come back here and pay our tribute to our fallen colleague. Thank you.

2.16
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance.

Mr Speaker, right from 2013 December when we received power in Madi Subregion, power has since then been very unreliable. The major challenges are:

1.	The voltage is very low; 
2.	The unreliability is very high;
3.	The cost per unit is very high; 
4.	The poles fall down whenever it rains.

Mr Speaker, my prayer to the Government is that the voltage be increased, we need assurance on the reliability, replacement of the old and the weak poles right from Gulu because we have been connected from the main grid in Gulu and we need clarification of the various charges that people are paying. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.17
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Arrangements have been laid before the Committee on Natural Resources and even before this Parliament on what Government is doing in order to increase voltage by making sure that we construct as many dams as possible. 

Hopefully, when our programme is completed, we shall see an increase in voltage at that time. I have taken note of the concern from hon. Jesca Ababiku and I will be working very closely with the Ministry of Energy and Minerals, to make sure that the people of Adjumani are served.

2.18
MR APOLLO YERI OFWONO (NRM, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to draw the attention of the House on an urgent matter in Tororo Municipality.

In 2016, a businessman of Asian origin, Malik Zain, of Zain Enterprise, was dealing in hardware and construction materials. He defaulted on payments to suppliers, manufacturers and industries in Tororo. This man pretended that he loves Tororo very much and on all his vehicles’ was written the words, “I love Tororo”. However, the man has disappeared. People have already raised a complaint. He left some assets behind but the liability is more than the assets.

Therefore, I call upon the ministries of Internal Affairs and Foreign Affairs to bring this man to answer for these charges. Thank you. (Hon. Member rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you should not start soliciting information.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I would like to advise hon. Ofwono Yeri that this is a vivid police case. I hope statements were made. We have to work with the police to help the people. Somebody has flipped the people he has been with in Tororo, for whom he professed the love on his cars. They fell in love and accepted what he told them. 

I hope a case has already been registered with the police. Otherwise the police can work with Interpol and get this man from wherever he can be. Let the statement be registered with the police and then we will swing into action. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In the modern world, there is no place for criminals to hide. If you commit a crime, there are ways of tracking. Therefore, let us engage those systems to help those people who have lost their things.

2.21
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance that I would like to bring to the attention of this House. There is panic in the Capital City and areas including my constituency because on 4 January 2017, St Balikuddembe Market formerly known as Owino Market, was put on sale by a warrant of court arising from a suit between St Balikuddembe Market Stall, Space and Lockup Association and dfcu Bank over an overdue loan of Shs 4.8 billion plus execution costs. 

It is said that the market leadership borrowed Shs 4 billion from the bank to purchase and redevelop the market, but has since failed to pay back Shs 2.8 billion, which has now been raised by the bank as surcharges, to Shs 4 billion. 

Mr Speaker, the point of concern here is the fate of the over 50,000 vendors trading in this market, putting into consideration that KCCA has just reclaimed Nakivubo Park Yard Market, which had been accommodating many of our traders. With an environment that shows that even this market is due for sale into the hands of another party, people are worried the new owners might not allow a market to continue in this area.

Owino Market or St Balikuddembe Market is the biggest market in the country. We all trade there. It would be very bad if those people are dispersed the next day when we have not even prepared a place to relocate them. Therefore, the matter I am raising is whether Government is aware of this and what they are doing to save the market. It also defeats our understanding when markets are sold off. We do not know whether the Government has disposed of the interest in land or the market because these are two different things. 

Mr Speaker, I, therefore, beg, on behalf of the people of Uganda and in particular the vendors of St Balikuddembe Market, that we be given assurance from the Government on whether they are considering bailing out the traders to save the market.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Government is aware of this case and I am particularly aware of this case. I worked very closely with the leadership of Owino Market, Mr Kayongo Musajja and others, when I was a Minister of Microfinance. I received documents. 

It is true that they went to dfcu Bank and secured a loan but it was not guaranteed by Government. However, we are now faced with a problem which involves a lot of people, like hon. Nambooze has stated here.

A petition was made before the President and we have not yet secured a response from him because it involves money to bail out the traders. I am going to get back to the President because he is the senior Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and draw his attention to this matter which touches a big number of people. Of course, bearing in mind the timeframe, I will be informing this august House, Mr Speaker.

2.27
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. On Monday, I went to Standard Chartered Bank at Lugogo Forest Mall to do some transactions. From Standard Chartered Bank, I crossed over to Kamwe Forex Bureau. However, while walking across the forex bureau, I saw five suspicious men standing in a corner. I went into the bureau and alerted them thinking they had a security guard. They looked on and those suspicious men were still in the corner.

After my transactions, I walked towards my car and two of the five men walked towards me and got into a car which was parked close to mine. There was a KK Security guard and I asked him who those people were. The guard told me those people had been chased away but they were still hanging around and he thought they were robbers. I never entered my car. I went across Jinja Road to look for policemen and that is how I survived being robbed on Monday. 

In today’s Daily Monitor, I read what happened to the lawyer of KCCA and it is the same thing that was going to happen to me. This could happen to anybody. My appeal to the Ministry of Internal Affairs is that they should set up a police post near Forest Mall and Shoprite. They should have both policemen in uniform and those in civilian clothes patrolling the place. Otherwise, the robbery is on the increase due to poverty which is biting.

Mr Speaker, when I joined Parliament in the Eighth Parliament, the Parliament used to give per diem in foreign currency to members of Parliament who were travelling so that it could minimise people walking to the bureaus to go and look for money as they plan to travel. Therefore, if the Parliamentary Commission can revise the means of paying per diem to Members who are travelling, it could minimise the dangers.

Otherwise robbery is on the increase. When I read today’s paper, there had been about 10 cases of robbery since January and these are cases all over town where there are banks. Therefore, police should be vigilant and have people to monitor and look around to save lives of Uganda. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. We have the Parliamentary Commission, which is responsible for our welfare and our being here. Wouldn’t it be procedurally okay if we devise other means of addressing the Parliamentary Commission about issues that affect us than bringing these issues here in the plenary?

Mr Speaker, we have been misunderstood by the public on several occasions. When we raise issues to do with our welfare in the plenary, people think that we just think of ourselves and nobody else. Wouldn’t it be very kind of you to guide us to address the Parliamentary Commission without raising issues of “national importance” when in fact we are talking about issues affecting us as members of Parliament? Can you guide us?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The point made has two parts: the first part is the one that affects any citizen of this country about the robberies. That is the framework we had agreed with the Member to raise. However, the one that went to the Parliamentary Commission was not part of what we had agreed and could have been handled differently. 

Matters to do with the Parliamentary Commission should be handled by the Parliamentary Commission and there are ways of dealing with that. We are in the same building and the Speaker, who is the leader of this House, is there. Access the Speaker or the Clerk on those matters such that it is handled since they are specific administrative issues and  this  can be sorted outside here.

However, issues of personal security of people whether they are members of Parliament or citizens of this country, I think this would be the place to raise it. Thank you so much.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin by congratulating hon. Wamanga-Wamai for having survived the robbers and also to advise that next time you see people who look suspicious, call the police. I know you have a phone. Find a way of calling the police immediately so that you save another Ugandan from being robbed because from your explanation, you said you saw the men who looked suspicious but you proceeded to go and draw money. You left them there and you survived but probably another person did not survive. 

However, I would like to assure colleagues that the police have tried. Kampala is a city where people do business and there have been a few cases here and there. However, if you were to compare to other cities, there are only few places within - you know at the suburbs of Kampala where you even fear to move with your golden necklace but generally speaking, police have tried working with private security, private sector to make sure that Ugandans do their business in Kampala.

That does not mean that I will not communicate to the minister in charge to beef up –(Interruption)

MR MUGUME: Mr Speaker, we have 76 Cabinet ministers in total. Is it in order for the Government Chief Whip to keep her ministers and continue to answer all the questions being raised by the Members? The Government Chief Whip has continued to answer all the queries and we are not getting the answers. Is it in order? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, who answers on behalf of Government is a responsibility of Government and the Executive to handle. It is not a matter for the Speaker to rule on. Whatever the Executive decides on how they are going to do it, as long as issues raised in Parliament are captured and handled, we should be satisfied. We do not care who answers what as long as answers are given. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for your wise guidance and my apologies to the honourable member, for having responded quite properly to the questions, probably which he would have wished that we do not answer. 

I was concluding by saying that the fact that we have some protection in Kampala, as I have told you, does not mean that I am not going to liaise with the ministry in charge to make sure that we beef up monitoring and security especially to the key areas like banking areas so that the people who use those facilities have confidence that they will transact their business safely. I will pursue this with the minister in charge.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, the Government Chief Whip should have used the question raised to guide us properly. We know, through the Administration of Parliament Act, that the Government Chief Whip Office is one of the key pillars of the institution of Parliament. We are also aware and the Government Chief Whip is aware that there is the principle of separation of powers, which we must all comply with.

Therefore, the Government Chief Whip should concentrate and focus on whipping the back benchers and leave the whipping of the Executive to the members of the Executive because she is the pillar of the institution of Parliament. Therefore, while you have been doing it successfully and people have not challenged it, it is important that we go back and read the key role of the Government Chief Whip. She is being over loaded and is now whipping the back benchers and the Executive and we do not know where she belongs. She is messing us up on the principle of separation of powers.

Mr Speaker, I would like this matter to be put on record and the Commission must take it up and clearly define the role of the Government Chief Whip. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa took the Oath of Allegiance and the Oath of Office of a Member of Parliament, having been elected the woman representative in Parliament for Kiboga District. She then got appointed the Government Chief Whip; we were notified of that appointment. She then became a Cabinet minister and took oath of a minister and the oath of secrecy and the other oaths that accompany them.

Therefore, the brief that we know as Parliament according to Administration of Parliament Act is what is in the Act; that is what we read. However, the brief that has been assigned to her as Cabinet minister, we have not read. I have not been party to it and I do not know what other assignments the Appointing Authority gave her. 

Probably, that is part of what she is doing here – yes, you have no way of knowing it because it is a brief from the Appointing Authority and I am not going to interrogate that, honourable members. Let the Member do - if there is objection, it should come from the people she is purporting to whip and not from us.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. My condolences on the passing on of our brother, hon. Cyrus Amodoi.

My point of procedure is related to the Rules of Procedure for this Parliament. This book is the ‘Bible’ of this Parliament and talks about how business should be conducted here and everybody is aware about that. 

My first point is - Members can look at the screens in the Chamber. The information on the screens influences what we do in the House. The information includes the number of MPs, MPs signing in and quorum, among others. However, my problem is on quorum.

When I looked at page 24 of the Rules of Procedure, the word “quorum” is defined and yet what the screen is telling us does not match with what is in the rules. 
Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for the screen to display something, which is contrary to the Rules of Procedure of Parliament in terms of quorum? If you calculate, those numbers do not give us the quorum of this House as specified in the rules.

Secondly, the Rules of Procedure also define the roles of the party whips –(Interjection)– it is here. The other time we had a tough exchange of words with the Speaker. The roles of the chief whip are for the party whips and not the ministers –(Interjections)– if you are performing the role well, you should then be appointed Prime Minister.

Actually, I once told you in the canteen that you deserve to be the Prime Minister of Uganda and not the Government Chief Whip, so that you can use your expertise properly. 

Mr Speaker, is it therefore right for us to ignore the Rules of Procedure, which clearly define the roles of the chief whip, the party whips, the ministers and the Prime Minister? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have ruled on that and I will not repeat myself. Those that have ears have heard. (Laughter)

2.42
MR GODFREY KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, my deepest condolences to the Teso community for the loss of my brother-in-law, hon. Cyrus Amodoi. 

I rise on a matter of national importance in regard to your people in Kasese, specifically Bukonjo County West, where I come from. 

As you may be aware, Bukonjo County West borders the Democratic Republic of Congo and there is a community, Mpondwe Lhubiriha Town Council. In commercial aspects, it is one of the leading borders in our country in terms of revenue. The tradable items there are fish and eggs.   

The President directed that our law enforcement systems should follow up on immature fish. There are people who are mishandling that directive in a sense that, first of all, it is very hard to determine maturity of the fish and, therefore, there is some indiscriminate impounding of fish. 

Mr Speaker, your people in Bukonjo County West are at a loss because they borrowed money from banks and money lenders and as a result, they are losing revenue because of that directive. Shocking of all is that when they impound fish, the UPDF turn around and bring the same fish to the market for sale. That is something that is disturbing me. 

My prayers are:

    1. There should be a thorough, credible, believable and independent investigation;
    2. The law enforcement people especially the military say that alongside impounding, there is an order for shoot-to-kill. I find that tragic because the Constitution is very clear. Article 22 (1) talks of protection of right to life.

I do not think a legal transaction in terms of premature fish should determine whether someone should lose their life. Therefore, if that order exists, it should be withdrawn immediately; and 

    3. Compensation should actually be made especially if it is verified that fish was impounded and yet it was not supposed to be impounded -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is the urgent matter that you would like to raise?

MR KATUSABE: The urgent matter is the withdrawal of the shoot-to-kill order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you now raise that urgent matter so that it can be dealt with? What do you want to address because you are now addressing the House? 

MR KATUSABE: The order should be withdrawn, investigations should occur and compensation for our loss of revenue should also be made –(Interjection)– in a way, it has been perceived at home as political persecution and yet you know how volatile our community is. This is why I have an interest in this. 

I have been struggling. I received that a month ago and it is something that is trying to disorganise our community. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we get any response to this, the procedure we used to entertain these questions – they are actually supposed to be questions and not statements. They are questions under Rule 39 and I read it the other day but I will read it again. 

“39. Notice of Urgent Questions
(1) 	A Question shall not be asked without notice unless it is of an urgent nature relating either to a matter of public importance or the ar­rangement of business. 
(2) 	Questions without notice shall only be asked with the prior leave of the Speaker.”

Honourable members, when you are given the opportunity to do this, it is because the matter you want to raise does not fall within any other provisions of our rules. So, the avenue is created immediately after “Communication from the Chair”; that is why it does not appear on the Order Paper. We house it there because it is urgent. However, when you rise and start raising matters that are of long time ago and are normal issues that have been going on and you are using five, six or 10 minutes to do it, then you are not asking a question.

We need to help this House so that we can move properly. I can see honourable members enthusiastic about strict enforcement of the rules.  Some of these things do not actually qualify but because the ministers have let us down on “Questions for Oral Answer”, that is why we have used this to allow Members to ask these questions. Sometimes if you use the rules to ask questions and it is submitted through the normal processes, sometimes years go by before they are answered. 

Let us stick to this, so that the issues that are urgent are dealt with promptly and the people who are affected get to know that these matters have been handled properly. That is how we should proceed with these matters.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I have visited Mpondwe Market so many times and I have seen the business and I have seen the Makayabu. “Makayabu” is one of the words the traders dealing in immature fish use to mean the salted fish, which they sell there. They salt fish and take it to DRC. 

Mr Speaker, some of the people who are involved in the illicit business of immature fish are armed. Furthermore, some of the people who are on the waters pretending to be trading in fish are robbers. Therefore, the enforcement team has to be prepared to deal with such teams. I have seen enforcers being injured by the people who are trading in immature fish and I have even disarmed some of them. I now call upon my colleagues –(Interruption)

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My point was very clear and just like any other human being, I have feelings. I am talking about orders to shoot-to-kill and by the way, a week ago, we lost lives. If life cannot matter in this country, what else? 

Therefore, Madam Government Chief Whip, I beg that you retract the statement because I am not talking about bandits or robbers but I am talking about someone in the market. Is it in order, Mr Speaker, for my honourable senior colleague to begin scandalising a tragic and yet very important point that I raised on the Floor? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you now have the matter clarified, please respond. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I was just informing my colleague that sometimes when we are in operation and you are confronted by somebody who is equally armed, you apply appropriate force. In case there were innocent people who were injured, my apologies and condolences to them.

However, I would like colleagues to understand the difficulties in enforcement; there is no popular enforcement. It will always be resisted. Therefore, before we call for calling it off, let us sit down and try to find the best way, which will save our natural resources. 

Our lakes are getting depleted, we are losing money and whenever we come up to do enforcement, statements come up to stop enforcement and thus people continue to catch immature fish. You asked how we determine the immaturity of the fish; it is well established in Statutory Instrument No. 33, which talks about 21 inches for Nile perch and 10 inches for Tilapia. Our enforcers have measuring tapes and those who do not have tapes improvise - we have taught them that two Bic pens are equivalent to 21 feet. 

Therefore, concerning the determination of immaturity and sizes of fish is not a problem because it is well-stipulated in Statutory Instrument No.3 and even in the Fish Act. Please, support the enforcement so that we can rejuvenate our lakes so as to acquire more money.

However, we will check on the enforcers to ensure that they do not use excessive measures, but please support the enforcement.

2.54
MR MBABAALI MUYANJA (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, on Monday this week, while in my constituency I came across an 18-year old young man and he was diagnosed with Hepatitis B. When this patient was taken to Masaka Referral Hospital, there were no vaccines. 

Mr Speaker, we are all aware that this disease has been on mainly in the East and the North, but it has now crossed to the South and there is need to have the vaccines in this region as soon as possible. 

Honourable members, I have learnt that this disease is not only sexually transmitted but it is also transmitted through handshakes, kissing among others. Therefore, this matter is urgent and needs immediate action. Much as we are fighting HIV, the infection rate has increased to 7.3 per cent and there is need to urgently address the issue availability of vaccines in the country so that Ugandans get vaccination against Hepatitis B.

Mr Speaker, I would like to know what steps the Government has taken to avail vaccines to Ugandans. I rest my case.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, sorry about our 18-year-old boy. The Minister of Health has given us a statement regarding the same at least three times as far as I can recollect. Probably, we need another update to find out how far Government has gone in getting prepared to handle this disease. I will inform the Minister of Health to brief us about this. 

However, for this particular case, I think the Minister of Health has to ensure that vaccines are sent to Masaka immediately, where a case has been identified.

2.58
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. You recall that when His Excellency was in Dokolo, the issue of Hepatitis B was raised and the minister was tasked to explain why vaccination was not taking place throughout the country. The minister had convincing reasons why it was not happening.

However, I am very concerned and I am sure all members of Parliament are concerned, particularly those who come from the 39 districts where the prevalent of Hepatitis B is known to be very high. 

My concern is that whereas we have been able to go through the first vaccination and in some areas the second vaccination has been done, right now we do not have vaccines for the third dose of the vaccination. 

Mr Speaker, we had, through strong lobbying with the Ministry of finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Budget Committee allowed the first trance of Shs 10 billion through supplementary in the year 2013/2014, if I remember. That money was downloaded in full and was utilised. 

However, we were told there were some technical difficulties - I think the kits were bought. We went back and again lobbied for Shs 11 billion in the second supplementary and we were told later that out of the Shs 11 billion given through the supplementary budget, only Shs 3 billion was given to the ministry. 

As I speak, Mr Speaker, and you can speak to any district hospital of the 39 districts; we do not have vaccines for the third dose. I would like to ask the Ministry of Health why the balance of Shs 9 billion was not used to supply the vaccine, which is most needed at the moment. 

If the problem was with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, then they should tell us why they would do a thing like that because it means the money we have used to do the first and the second vaccination is useless. If we do not do the third vaccination, it means that the entire population will have to start again from the first dose vaccination and that would be very expensive for the country. 

Mr Speaker, this is a very serious matter that concerns the health of our people and it is also causing death. I would like the Ministry of Health together with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to explain to us why we should be subjected to this kind of problem at this time. I know my sister the - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we have had this debate and the last time we were here, we tasked the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to get the money. 

When the issue of the Shs 3 billion was raised and why the balance was not released, the explanation on the record of this House was clear: that when they dispatched the first Shs 3 billion to the Ministry of Health, they did not account for it to trigger the release of more money. That is what was said here. Has that changed? Where are we on this matter of Hepatitis B and its vaccine money? Minister of Finance, where are we on this issue because it keeps coming back? That means something is not being done properly. 

3.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, regarding the issue of the supplementary of Shs 11 billion which was approved here, the ministry, as you have said, gave an explanation. We released Shs 3 billion. 

Currently, the stand is that we are working with the Ministry of Health to ensure that the people who got the two doses get a third dose and get it in time. We shall come back here tomorrow, together with the Ministry of Health, and give a statement to this House.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers from St Johns High School, Mukono. They are represented by hon. Betty Nambooze and hon. Peace Kusasira. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)  

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.03
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table two ministerial policy statements namely:

i) 	The ministerial policy statement for Lands, Housing and Urban Development - Votes 012 and 156 for the financial year 2017/2018. I beg to lay –(Interruption) 

MR OYET: Mr Speaker, I rise on a procedural point. Rule 14(10) of our Rules of Procedure clearly states the functions of the Government Chief Whip and I know this House is guided by the Rules of Procedure. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to know whether the Government Chief Whip is performing the work of the Leader of Government Business or her function, which is clearly stipulated under Rule 14(10)(a) to (g). 

There is nowhere the rules state that the Government Chief Whip, in any way, can perform the function of the Prime Minister, who is the Leader of Government Business. I therefore would like to be guided Mr Speaker; under which rule is she operating, representing and performing the functions of the Leader of Government Business? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First of all, honourable members, it is not the responsibility of the Leader of Government Business to lay a ministerial policy statement. I have never seen the Rt Hon. Prime Minister standing there to lay a ministerial policy statement because it is done by the sector ministries. That is the rule. 

Therefore, when you start interrogating the responsibility of the Leader of Government Business, it could be a shot in the wrong place. However, since you are very schooled in the Rules of Procedure, could you tell me what it says about a Cabinet minister? This is because the Member who has risen to lay the document on the Table is a Cabinet minister, approved by this Parliament in the Appointments Committee and sworn in as such. 

Now tell me in the rules where it says only certain Cabinet ministers can lay documents - Please I am still following up with the honourable member for -   

MR OYET: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I respect your counsel. It is very clear that laying of papers on the Table of Parliament is done by the sector ministry, not the Chief Whip. This stands unless you get a written communication addressed to you instructing the Government Chief Whip to perform the functions of the responsible ministries or the sector ministers. 

If this is done, then it should actually be you, Mr Speaker, to inform the House that you have letters from the Leader of Government Business instructing the Government Chief Whip to perform the functions of the sector minister in the absence of the sector ministers. 

We should not be taken for granted; this House, under your leadership, is guided by the Rules of Procedure and if we cannot respect the Rules of Procedure, then this means we are bound to do anything outside the procedural methods before this House. 

Mr Speaker, I still pray that you guide this House and the Cabinet on how they should proceed. We should be informed of those decisions. I am a Member of Parliament in my own right and I must be aware of the performance and the role of the ministers responsible for the different ministries. If we proceed without such guidance, then we are almost actually getting to the level of a village meeting. The Parliament of Uganda is an august House; I would like to restrain myself to that but we need to be guided on how we can proceed. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is the nature of how we conduct ourselves and how we air out our concerns that can make us look like a village meeting or not and not the rules. The rules are clear. (Laughter)

3.06
MR GASTER MUGOYA (NRM, Bukhooli County North, Bugiri): Honourable members, I would like to give an honest legal opinion, which is subject to the decision of the Speaker. I initially had the same opinion like my brothers’ but as an active member of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, I synchronised these rules and I would like you to critically look at Rule 8. It says, “In case of any doubt and for any question of procedure not provided in these rules, the Speaker shall decide, having regard for the practices of the House, constitutional provisions and practices of other Commonwealth Parliaments in so far as they may be applicable to Uganda’s Parliament.”

I also would like to add – and this is what you taught me at the Law Development Centre, Mr Speaker. You said that established rules, customs and usages form part of the laws, rules and regulations applicable to any establishment, organisation and any state agency. I have nothing useful to add, given that humble interpretation of the law. 

My brothers, let us accept that there is a lacuna in our law that we must cure. However, that lacuna is not too injurious to the extent that it may cripple the actions and omissions of this Parliament. Thank you very much. (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You truly were a good student –(Laughter)– and specifically the law that you quote is a provision of the Judicature Act, if i could go a little longer to explain. 

Honourable members, let us deal with substantive issues please. What is the issue of substance here? I have told you that the rules only talk about the Government Chief Whip in relation to the function of the Government Chief Whip. The rules do not say that the Government Chief Whip shall be a Cabinet minister. These rules are silent about the Government Chief Whip being a minister.

The situation before us is that the Government Chief Whip is also a Cabinet minister. We, therefore, need to understand both situations; the rules talk about the Government Chief Whip but the one that we have is a Cabinet minister that sits in Cabinet. There is a history to this.

Before the multiparty dispensation, we used to have a Minister for Parliamentary Affairs –(Mr Fungaroo rose_) - listening is an art. Hon. Okot Ogong served as Minister for Parliamentary Affairs. To do the coordination roles, it requires sitting both in the Parliament and in Cabinet. There are gaps that may not be handled – 

MR FUNGAROO: Mr Speaker, I know that you are good lecturer and you are respected world over. However, when it comes to the rules that govern this House, we do not base ourselves on the lectures we receive from the classrooms but on the Rules of Procedure. 

This House has ever been suspended when these ministers were not there to answer specific queries or to give assurances – I am the Chairperson of the Committee on Governance Assurances. Is it, therefore, procedurally right for us from today onwards to assume that the Government Chief Whip [MR GUMA: “Point of order.”] Procedure is superior to order; you cannot order me to - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of Order; and I will explain how you have misunderstood that as well. Let me explain this to you, honourable member, for purposes of clarity. When a point of order and a point of procedure are raised at the same time, the point of procedure takes precedence. It does not mean that when a Member is raising an issue of procedure and violates the order of the House, he cannot be called to order. If we interpret it that way, it will lead to absurdity.

All I need to do is rise on a point of procedure and make a mess of the House because even the Speaker cannot call me to order. The law could not have anticipated and imported that kind of interpretation, even from the more senior legislators in this House. Let us take the point of order.

MR GUMA: Mr Speaker, you are the Speaker of this Parliament and you are the custodian of our rules. We all do not have to necessarily agree with you; however, for purposes of governance and administrative functions of Parliament, you remain the Speaker and your ruling is final. Is it in order for honourable members to make the administration of this Parliament ungovernable and challenge your authority? Even when you are speaking, Members are standing up and others making noise; do they want to make this House a market? Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, I was trained under the support of a very senior and intelligent judge and he used to say this of judges - because a judge can slap you with contempt of court when you misbehave in Court. He told me that great judges do not have contempt. Therefore, in relation to the proceedings of the House, great speakers never have contempt.

It is up to the Member to see that he has exhausted all possible expression of - and then succumb and say, let us now do things properly. I will not plumb anybody with contempt or something of the sort but the rules are clear. If you disagree with the ruling of the Speaker, the procedure is also there.

Otherwise, we may now have to do other courses to alert Members on how you challenge the decision of the Speaker. You certainly do not do it by two Members standing up and becoming almost potentially in a state of something that is not understandable. The rule says that if you don’t agree with the ruling of the Speaker and 40 Members stand, they can cause a review of the Speaker’s ruling. It is certainly not two Members, please. That is my guidance on this subject. You either live with it or you do the things that people normally do. [HON. MEMBER: “Guidance.”]And guidance is not part of our Rules of Procedure because we are being strict on the rules. I cannot take a point of guidance; procedure takes precedence. 

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, it is past 3 o’clock. Today is Wednesday and we are supposed to have Prime Minister’s time, the time given for us to raise matters, as you rightly guided. The procedural point I would like to raise is from what has transpired. It seems our Government Chief Whip is over-performing and the Front Bench is complacent and taking advantage of her over-performance that she now has to answer questions for all absentees. 

Because of that, it is becoming fashionable that because she can explain this and that, we, as members of Parliament, are about to miss the original intention of having the Front Bench – why different sector ministers are constituted in their numbers and sectors.

Mr Speaker, we depend on your leadership of this Parliament to prevail on the Front Bench and not to just use the Government Chief Whip as the shock absorber. The sector ministers must be here to speak for their sectors and we cannot always have delegated functions to our good chief whip. 

I can see she is being overstretched; she is explaining for absentees and it is not only today. Many times, Members have raised this issue and because she is able and multi-skilled and multi-talented, they are taking advantage of that.

Mr Speaker, I would like to depend on you and we should really depend on you to prevail on the Front Bench to play their role. Now that it is Prime Minister’s Question Time, we can’t say that the over-performing Government Chief Whip can answer during Prime Minister’s Question Time. Mr Speaker, I request your procedural guidance.

MR ABACANON: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. The Member he mentioned that the Government Chief Whip is over-performing yet the impact is not felt. Is he in order? Thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is a very educated opinion of the honourable member. In his assessment, the Government Chief Whip is over-performing. I cannot rule him out of order on that one. (Laughter)

Honourable Members, for the Speaker, once the House is constituted and we can do business, we always do business. Let us do business, please.

The information that we have is that the Prime Minister is not here and we will now just continue with the business that is on the Floor. I made this announcement yesterday that we might have to dispense with the Prime Minister’s Question Time to enable us finish the business that is before us. 

However, we don’t even seem to be using the time properly. Let us use the time properly now, honourable members. If you want more about ministerial policy statements in regard to how they are engineered and who lays them, you can again look at Rule 135 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

3.27
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I would like to first of all apologise that today being Wednesday, we had a special Cabinet meeting in Entebbe and most of the ministers, including the Prime Minister, are still held up in Entebbe. 

I was tasked to come and deal with the issues as a minister and that is why I rose to lay ministerial policy statements on behalf of the ministers, who are still held up in State House, Entebbe. I beg for your indulgence, honourable colleagues.

I now would like to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries – Votes 010/121/125/142/152/155/160/501-850 – for the financial year 2017/2018. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture that. Honourable members, you know that this of course goes to the appropriate committee and you know that we receive the budget proposals by the first of next month. That means that given the sequence of this -

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is something we need to clear on the record. There is no financial year called “217/218”. (Laughter)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I am laying on the Table; that means there is something I have laid on the Table, which has been submitted -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What have you laid on the Table? 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I am laying on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for the financial year 2017/2018. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture that.

Honourable members, I was saying that by the structure of what we have now, by law which we passed here, by the first of next month, we should be receiving the budget. I am saying today is 15th March and it is the deadline for ministerial policy statements. 

By our operations, we have allowed two weeks for the alternative policies to be brought to Parliament so that they can be handled. By the structure of things, it seems that the budget that will come on the first – the first being the day that Parliament does not sit and the next sitting day of Parliament, therefore, being around the third – will now have to be handled together with the ministerial policy statements and then the reporting and processes will go on. 

Therefore, if we should rise tomorrow, the other side of the House have to have received all the statements so that we avoid any further delays, so that they can prepare the alternatives and also submit appropriately. Therefore, I am urging the Government that today was the deadline and if we are unable to receive all – I see only one or two here; there should have been a heap of the policy statements there. 

In the event that they are not there now, tomorrow, Parliament is going to go on recess and if those policy statements are not there, then your budget has hit a real difficulty. It is a real difficulty, not just an anticipated one. This is because all the processes will have been delayed by three weeks and you don’t want that. Next statement, if it is there.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I examined what we are doing as well as the consistency between what we are doing now – laying policy statements and laying budget estimates after – and I have found some inconsistency in the two. The fact of the matter is that the policy statements should ideally have come after the laying of the budget estimates. What assurance do we have that the figures we have in the policy statements now will be consistent with the budget estimates that we are yet to receive? (Applause)

Mr Speaker, as it is, there is a lacuna in the law. That is why sectors are experiencing this problem because they do not have the proper ceilings within which to present their policy statements and that is why we are going through this problem. 

Right now, I understand Cabinet is discussing the budget. As far as Government is concerned, Cabinet has not approved the budget and yet we are receiving policy statements here. This is inconsistency. I do not know how we are going to handle this problem but I think it is a serious problem in the law and we need to amend the law to address it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let us say that that law itself – we did it in haste and there have been challenges with it. One of them that I keep pointing out is the one on bringing the Appropriations Bill before we supply the figures. Those are some of the things that need to be harmonised. Practically, this is what we have.

That is why the Budget Committee will sit to make this harmonisation in case there are variations and conflict of figurers between what is being put in policy statement and what is in the proposed budget, that is where the harmonisation will be done so that we are facilitated for this budget and then we see how to actually revisit the whole Public Finance Management Act and harmonise all these other things so that the sequencing is done properly.

It was very okay when it was in the Budget Act then but changes have been made, many things have been brought forward so that by the time the President is giving the State-of-the Nation Address and we are going to the budget, the budget is already passed by Parliament by 31st May. We are still trying to adjust to those changes and make them work. However, let us just see what we can practically do to facilitate the process. We will receive the statements and then we also move to deal with the budget when it comes and the committees will move accordingly. That is why it is very important that all the ministerial policy statements should come in. You can even see the form in which they are coming. We are not used to receiving those- but proceed –

3.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Rev. Fr Simon Lokodo): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Ministerial Policy Statement for the Presidency which includes:-

    1. Votes 001 - Office Of The President including Internal Security Organisation
    2. Vote 002 – State House
    3. Vote 107 - Uganda AIDS Commission
    4. Vote 112 – Ethics And Integrity 
    5. Vote 159 – External Security Organistaion for the Financial Year 2017/2018. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands refereed to the Committee on Presidential Affairs.

3.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Ministerial Policy Statements for the Financial Year 2017/2018, for the Ministry of Internal Affairs covering the following votes;
    1. Vote 009   –   Ministry of Internal Affairs Headquarters
    2. Vote 120 -  The National Citizenship and Immigration Control
    3. Vote 144  –   Uganda Police Force
    4. Vote 145   -   Uganda Prisons Service 
    5. Vote 305   -   Government Analytical Laboratory
    6. Vote 309 - National Identification and Registration Authority.  I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for purposes of facilitating Parliament. 

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, in line with the submission of Chairman of Budget Committee, there is a departure from the Gazetted Budget Framework Paper, which we were all given as Members of Parliament and the now pronounced 10 per cent budget cut positions by the President and even as we receive the policy statements, it will be very difficult for us Members to reconcile and relate. 

Mr Speaker, can the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development give us an amended Budget Framework Paper to the effect that we get to understand what the 10 per cent budget cut across the board mean? That seems to be the problem with the line ministries. They do not seem up to now to have come up with that reality. That would help Members of Parliament to start reconciling. I am sure it will also be a challenge for the Budget Committee but also Members need to know how our different sectors are affected much as I support the 10 per cent budget cut. 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development, would you like to help with this situation?

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, you remember that we submitted the Budget Framework Paper here and Parliament made recommendations to the Executive and approved the Budget Framework Paper.

What remains is to receive the policy statements, which in fact, Mr Speaker, notwithstanding the comment of the Chairperson of Budget Committee, we have already communicated to different sectors their ceilings. They know them as they submit these ministerial policy statements and it is according to the law that we are doing this.

Mr Speaker, Parliament will be informed of what we have done with the recommendations on the Budget Framework Paper as we submit the budget on 1 April 2017. Therefore, Parliament will be informed about what actions the Executive has taken on the recommendations made and we shall take it from there. However, as far as we are concerned, we are following the law and I think we are on track despite the hiccup of today.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Any other policy statements? Can I say again that tomorrow we should receive all of them? There are about 20 remaining. Next item.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we need the House properly constituted to be able to take decisions. Please, this is hardly the time to leave this House.  

Honourable members, you will recall that we called clause 2 yesterday and the amendments were read by the Chairperson. We are at the stage of adopting that amendment or rejecting them. That is where we were and I was going to put the question on the proposed amendment by the chairperson of the committee. If there are any amendments on what is being proposed by the chairperson, this will be the time to deal with it. Otherwise, I will put the question to the amendments as proposed by the Chairperson.  Can I do that?

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. There are to comments that I would like to make on the amendments proposed by the chairperson of the committee. 

The Chairperson proposes to increase the threshold in clause 2 (a) (b) from Shs 40 million to Shs 100 million; meaning from two thousand to five thousand. We think this threshold is very high. It leaves out very many people who can do long-term things. The one of shs 40 million is a sufficient amount of money so that somebody declares when he or she is transacting this money rather than raising the bar to shs 100 million.

The second comment is on obtaining a written approval which was clause 2 (a) (v); “a written approval from the Central Bank before establishing a correspondent financial institution relationship”. The relationship we are talking about here is within the institution. It is not right that within the institution itself, you first seek a written approval from the Central Bank. That would be very cumbersome because this is between the management, not the two institutions. It is not necessary, in our opinion, that an internal process should first seek authority from the Central Bank to take a decision within the bank.

If there were two institutions, that would be fine. Therefore, I would like to propose that the chairperson reflects on these two amendments and the House moves forward.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, Uganda, by and large, is a cash economy. What this means is that there are various transactions that we do in terms of cash. The existing law requires commercial banks to report to the Financial Intelligence Authority all transactions of Shs 20 million and above - (Interjections) No, Shs 20 million. What this means, honourable colleagues, you could have gone to the bank yesterday trying to transact in the range of Shs 30 million to Shs 50 million and the bank asked you to declare the source and the purpose for which the transaction is intended. 

The bank’s argument is that transactions of this nature are very many and the required reporting on all these transactions is too demanding. They pray we make an adjustment to the effect that all transactions of Shs 100 million and above be the only ones required to be reported to the Financial Intelligence Authority whether they are suspicious or not. Mr Speaker, this clause does not only deal with suspicious transactions but all transactions. That is why we are proposing we adjust it to shs 100 million in order to reduce the number of transactions.

Secondly on financial institutions, our view is that the minister may have to look at his justification again. Financial institutions are not a department within the Central Bank. Financial institutions include commercial banks, microfinance institutions, SACCOs among others.

Therefore, our proposal is not intended to address the issues happening within Bank of Uganda but to strengthen control by the Central Bank on all our financial institutions. 

Therefore, Mr Chair, I beg the House to support our proposal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The proposal is to the minister because it looks like the frameworks you are arguing were different. Would you like to now clarify on the issues I raised previously? You said the threshold was to capture the money that was deposited. Which one should attract communication to the Financial Intelligence Authority? Instead of the existing Shs 20 million, they are now saying it should be Shs 100 million because all transactions are cash transactions. Therefore, it has nothing to do with the other issue you have raised. This is whether 20 million or Shs 100 million - They want to say Shs 100 million.

MR BAHATI: Our view was to spread the net wide and we think if we raise the threshold to Shs 100 million, it would create a loophole where somebody would break it into Shs 20s million to be below the threshold. Our opinion is that Shs 100 million will be too high. You will leave out very many people. We would beg the House to make a decision on this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what about the second issue on transaction requiring the approval from the Central Bank? The explanation is different now. It is not a department within the bank but rather a financial institution seeking written consent from the Central Bank.

MR BAHATI: Since then, I have seen the amendment in that aspect. In fact, it is talking about cross border corresponding banking and other similar relationships. I think the chairperson seems to be getting the right context. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. Honourable members, the only outstanding issue now is how much money in one transaction you can deposit to attract the issues of source monitoring and things like that. The minister is saying we stick with Shs 20 million as it is in the law. The committee is proposing that Shs 20 million is burdensome and we should take it to Shs 100 million. If you are depositing Shs 100 million, then they should ask you where you got it from. That is where the debate is. -  If we have to debate it, go ahead but if WE have to vote on it, I can put the question.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, with the wave of inflation we have been experiencing, Shs 20 million is nothing. In fact, it is half of the salary of very many public or civil servants in Uganda. It is just peanuts. We shall be over monitoring the system and killing the finance sector in this country. Therefore, I would like to support the proposal by the chairperson of the committee.

MR BAHATI: I see the mood in the House and I would like to concede that we go with Shs 100 million

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, on the proposals made by the chairperson of the committee for the amendment, there is now no counter amendment. Can I put the question to the proposal made for amendment by the chairperson of the committee? I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3 agreed to.

Clause 4

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 4(3) by deleting the word “five” and substituting the word “ten.” The justification is that cognisant of the seriousness of the offences for which the Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2013 was enacted, there is need to have these records in custody for a period of 10 years and to be consistent with the Financial Institutions Act, 2004.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the committee?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 7(4) by deleting the word “financial” appearing in the fourth line of the clause. The justification is that the word that is defined in the Bill is “bearer negotiable instruments” and not “bearer negotiable financial instruments.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is a clear correction on the record. I put a question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, given the debate that we had yesterday on the issue of having the Uganda Anti-Money Laundering committee vis-a-vis maintaining the board, I wanted to propose that this clause be deleted so that we maintain the board of the anti-money laundering and then this can be sorted out in the regulations. 

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, from the arguments of yesterday and also from the objects of this Bill in regard to compliance with the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) requirements, as a committee, we think that as a win-win situation, we maintain the board as it is provided for in the Anti-money Laundering Act, 2013. 

At the same time as a compliance requirement with the FATF we also provide for an independent committee that is responsible for the implementation of the Anti-Money Laundering Act and then the board deals with the governance issues of the Financial Intelligence Authority. I beg to submit, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What then happens to the team headed by the executive director? Implementations? What would be the role of the chief executive of the Financial Intelligence Authority?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, if I may refer to the Anti-money Laundering Act, 2013 that established the Financial Intelligence Authority and henceforth the executive director, the functions of the executive director are clearly spelt out in section 29 of the Anti-money Laundering Act, 2013 as:

    1. “The executive director shall be the CEO of the authority and shall be responsible for the day today affairs of the authority.
    2.  In the performance of his or her duties, the executive director shall be accountable to the board for all decisions made on behalf of the authority in the exercise of its powers and in performance or its functions.”

Mr Chairperson, why we are praying that we have both the committee and the board, there was an issue raised on independence of the Financial Intelligence Authority (FIA). We feel the concerns of the standard setters can be addressed by having a board that is responsible for all governance issues including hiring and firing of staff while the committee clearly deals with the national coordination of activities in regard to implementation of this law as far as combating of money laundering and terrorism financing is concerned.

MR BAHATI: If you look at the Principal Act on the functions of the board – it means that if we create this committee in a way we are creating two centres of authority and if you look at the functions of the board, function No.1 says, “The board shall be the policy-making organ of the authority.”

If you look at the functions of the committee, to develop an Anti-Money Laundering and Counter Financing of Terrorism National Strategy which is actually part and parcel of the policy making of the organ. On issues of this nature, you would not want to create conflicting authorities within one institution.  

Therefore, we have changed our mind on this clause and I wanted to request the chairperson of the committee to reflect on the proposal of the committee vis-à-vis the institutional development of this institution, and also the fact that the reporting mechanism will have a problem; you have a committee and a board advising the minister, you unnecessarily create two institutions that are conflicting in one way or the other and yet, this is an area where you want precision and to be sure that the work that we are doing is done in the right way.

Mr Chairperson, it is our opinion that we do away with this clause. 

MR NAMBESHE: If the committee chairperson could concede to that proposal on the functions of the executive director with the excessive powers to hire, fire, suspend and appoint, I would propose that those powers be transferred to the board. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There was a debate on that yesterday.

MR MUSASIZI: There is an issue that I would like to raise for the House to answer and we could borrow from your experience as having been the presiding officer in the Chair when the 2013 Bill was considered. 

My question is, why was this Bill returned to us for reconsideration hardly after one year? The answer is that there were issues that were raised, which were deemed that if we do not address them, still our law would not meet international benchmarks.

I am sure it is upon that background that Cabinet, in its wisdom, formulated this amendment Bill with one of the objects to establish the Anti-Money Laundering Committee. 

Should we go ahead and make the decision without addressing some of these concerns that were raised, I am sure that when the next valuation takes place in April, some of these issues will again be raised.

It is upon this that the House should make a decision. I have given my opinion but decision making rests with the House and, therefore, I will not be held responsible for – (Interjections) - that is it exactly. 

I pray that this House sees what we see as a committee and makes provisions that meet international benchmarks. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this issue was debated and concerns were raised. This Bill is not for the committee but for the Government. It has gone through Cabinet and the minister has requested that particular part to be withdrawn. They were in Cabinet this morning and we cannot say where he has got the authority from but he has said that it should be deleted. 

The original instruction, therefore, to have clause 16 has been withdrawn. I now put the question that clause 16 be deleted from the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause, 16 deleted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, have you withdrawn the new proposal that you were making?  I see it in the report and is there no more amendment from you on this particular area? Okay, then let us go back to the other clause. We are on clause 1.

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do I put the question? We deferred it because of its definition nature.

MR MUSASIZI: We have a new proposal to amend section 21 in the Principal Act as follows: Section 21 of the Principal Act is amended by adding immediately after paragraph (q), the following new paragraph-

“(r) to supervise, monitor and ensure compliance of this Act by all accountable persons in consultation with respective regulatory authorities.”

The justification is to bestow the authority the mandate to supervise, monitor and ensure compliance of the Act by all accountable persons.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposed amendments. If there is no objection from the minister, can I put the question to that amendment? Honourable members, the committee is proposing the creation of a new clause in the Bill to accommodate the provisions made in relation to the amendment of section 21 of the Principal Act in the terms proposed by the chairperson. If we are agreeable, can I put the question to this? 

I put the question to this new clause that is proposed by the committee in the Bill that will now be new clause 17. We have deleted clause 16 so that will still be clause 17 because we have to report that it was deleted and then the rearrangement will happen. I put the question that the new clause 17 be part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, we propose to insert a new clause to amend section 24 of the Principal Act as follows: Section 24 of the Principal Act is amended in subsection (1) –

1) 	By substituting for paragraph (f) the following: “(f) Subject to sections 28, 30 and 32, appoints, removes and suspends the members of staff of the authority in accordance with the human resource manual.”
2) 	By inserting the following new paragraphs immediately after the paragraph (f) to read as follows: 
“(g) 	Review and approve the budgetary estimates of the authority.
(h) 	Review and approve the strategic plan of the authority.
(i) 	Consider the annual reports of the authority and report to the minister on any matter appearing in or arising out of such reports.”

Mr Chairperson, the justification is that these are additional functions we are giving to the board.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, where are you reading these things from? Mr Chairman and honourable minister, we have a report that is before us and signed, how do we harmonise because in the report it is saying repeal section 24?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, you will note that our original intention was to repeal section 24 in the Anti-Money Laundering Act of 2013, which provided for the board and its functions. However, now that the board has stayed in the law, the amendments are intended to give it its due functions to strengthen its mandates. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the initial position of the committee was to delete section 24, which relates to the board. However, from the debate of yesterday that has changed and we would like to retain the board. I am now just seeking confirmation from the committee whether this is a new position they have taken after the debate from the House informed them that the House was not likely to remove the board. Is it a new situation that has been adopted, can I confirm from a member of the committee at least?

MS KATALI: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I confirm that we took the decision after yesterday’s debate, we discussed these adjustments today and this is the position of the committee. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let me read it again for purposes of clarity on what we are about to do because in yesterday’s debate, the House indicated that they would like to retain the board. The committee went and discussed and in the event that the board was retained, they now propose enlargement of the functions of the board. So, it is comprehensive and this is what they are proposing in section 24 as an amendment. 

Section 24 of the Principal Act is amendment in subsection (1)
    1) By substituting what was initially in paragraph (f) now they are saying “(f) Subject to sections 28, 30 and 32 appoints, remove and suspects the members of staff of the authority in accordance with the human resource manual.”

Other functions of the board

2) By inserting the following new paragraphs immediately after the new paragraph (f) to read as follows:
“g) 	Review and approve the budgetary estimates of the authority.
(h) 	Review and approve the strategic plan of the authority.
(i) 	Consider the annual report of the authority and report to the minister on any matter appearing in or arising out of such a report.” 

That is now the new position that has been proposed. Is it acceptable members and can I put a question to this amendment.

MR WOBOYA: I was wondering whether we can insert the function of appointing. I thought that should be for the board?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What we are reading is for the board, to appoint, remove, or suspend. I put the question.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I am a member of the committee but did I hear you referring to the human rights manual? Or should it be human resource manual? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Did I say human rights? 

MS KAMATEEKA: You said human- 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I said human resource manual. Since you are a chairperson of human rights, everything now sounds like human rights. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Did I say human rights? Okay then let the records be corrected to say “human resource manual” not “human rights manual”. Thank you, chairperson. 

Honourable members, are these amendments now acceptable to the House? Can I put the question to this amendment as proposed by the chairperson? 

( Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, these amendments would now constitute an insertion of a new clause in the Bill, which is now clause 18. I now put the question that a new clause 18 stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, agreed to.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, we propose to insert a new clause by amending section 38 of the Principal Act as follows: Section 38 of the Principal Act is amended by inserting immediately after Section 38 the following new section:

“38A Exchange of information by competent authorities. Competent authorities may exchange information and provide international cooperation both upon request from and spontaneously to foreign counterparts in relation to possible or confirmed money laundering or terrorism financing and any related to activity.” 

Mr Chairman, our justification is to give the competent authorities the mandate to exchange information and to provide international cooperation both upon request from and spontaneously to foreign counterparts. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairman, you are going to read the amendment again for purposes of the record because they need to transcribe it, please.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is 38A Exchange of information by competent authorities. What is the provision you are proposing? 

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, the provision we are proposing is to insert a section called 38A in the Principal Act, which reads as follows: “Exchange of information by competent authority. Competent authorities may exchange information and provide international cooperation both upon request from and spontaneously to foreign counterparts in relation to possible or confirmed money laundering or terrorism financing and any related activity.”

The justification- 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The justification was received. Is it “terrorist” financing or “terrorism” financing? 

MR MUSASIZI: It is “terrorism” financing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, it is “terrorism” financing? 

MR MUSASIZI: Yes. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. 

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am learning legislative drafting from you. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Chairman, I would like the chairman to clarify on how we shall define these competent authorities. Is it defined in the law? What constitutes competent authorities?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is “competent authorities” a term that is known in the law? Or do we have to define it? 

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, the Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2013 defines “a competent authority.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is okay, if it defined in that one. That is what we are asking. 

MR KATUSABE:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. I was thinking that sharing new information is very important but we need to qualify the information. In that case, is the information referred to political or financial? I would propose that we qualify that by saying “sharing relevant information” and not just keeping that open, which would probably distort the real essence of the Bill. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you, honourable colleague. If you read the clause, which has been proposed by the chairperson, it says somewhere “in relation to possible or confirmed money laundering or terrorism financing.” Would that probably satisfy what you have in mind? Or is that the relevancy in relation? 

MR KATUSABE: Thank you, minister. We are looking at theory in that particular section and then practice. In theory, there is no difference between theory and practise but in practise there is a difference between practise and theory. 

I would encourage this House that we try to look at the definition or we introduce new information. If we are introducing information, we have to qualify it. What the minister has just alluded to originates from the upper section of that point. Therefore, Mr Chairperson, I would request that you encourage us into adopting “relevant information” after all it does not distort the context. Thank you. 

MR MUGOYA: It is unfortunate that he left the Floor before I could make my humble submission but in legislative drafting, we look at the object and intent of the particular law we intend to put in place. 

What is the intention and purpose of this law? Critically, look at the proposal by the committee vis-a-vis the Government. Under section 38, it states, “Competent authorities may exchange information and provide international cooperation both upon request from and spontaneously to foreign counterparts in relation to possible or confirmed money laundering.” That is object number one. 

It also goes further to say, “…or terrorism financing and any other related activity or incidental thereto.” I am adding my own words for emphasis so this is one self-sustaining provision, as proposed, because it cuts and brings out the intent and purpose of this law that we are amending. 
Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The concern of the honourable member is what kind of information is required. If you read the whole section, that information is the only one that is in relation to possible or confirmed money laundering or terrorism financing and any related activity. That is the information; so, it is not relevant but specific information in those areas.

“Relevant” would be ambiguous. What is relevant and what is not relevant? Who determines the relevant or the irrelevant? However, the information they are talking about is in relation to possible or confirmed money laundering or terrorism financing. That is the kind of information they are supposed to be sharing. 

MR OGUZU: Thank you, Mr Chairperson.  I have looked at similar provisions of this kind of information in countries like Mauritius and Switzerland. In those countries, if you make a request for information on anyone regarding things, a court must prove that terrorism or money laundering has taken place in the country that is making the claim, before they release that information.

I am worried that this particular provision may infringe on the privacy of people. You may find that the request is just made and our competent authority avails this kind of information to whoever has ill intentions. We may need to tread carefully. I see a situation where capital flow here is going to be affected because people want it as a protection. If I am going to have my information, I would not want a situation where it is just released, unless there is a proven case of terrorism or money laundering by the court and this one does not really address it. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Chairman, in addition to that, we all agree that there is need to share information especially in relation to terrorism. If you do not make the request a process and lay out procedures of requesting for such information, then, we will be giving our people a law that is prone to abuse. The word “spontaneous” worries me very much and I have been trying to understand it; is it out of sudden impulse. Somebody just suddenly says that this might be a transaction related to terrorism and starts giving out information.

We need to be careful not to write a law that will endanger our people. I would, therefore, suggest that a certain procedure for asking for such information be established and that if you are to give out information about anybody, even that person has a right to know that information is being exchanged about him or her.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, we are talking about sharing information on money laundering and terrorism financing. To suggest that you need to share with the suspected terrorist information about him or her would be asking Government for too much; it would kill the whole case. (Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Chairperson, a suspect remains a suspect whatever the offence is. Maybe you want to say that if I am suspected of terrorism, I am guilty even before anything is proved against me. I would like to give you an example - I have ever been charged with terrorism – (Interjections) - yes. I have ever been a suspect of terrorism - at police I was a terrorist but when I reached court, I was charged with another offence. 

What we want to fight against is abuse. This is because any of you here can be a suspect, with or without any cause - you can be a suspect. We want to fight abuse of this law and that is why we want to put there barriers; things that can stop anybody from abusing the law.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, hon. Nambooze, for the information. This is sharing information between two authorities; somebody has transferred money from a certain country and it is a bit suspicious. You are just sending a signal to another country that, “Please, look at this and follow it up.” It is not that somebody is going to arrest you. It is just sharing information for purposes of follow up and investigation. However, if you have a proposal, since we are at committee stage, you can go ahead and propose and we look at it
PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to provide some information related to the issue that is being addressed. I know that Case Law; the court interpreted and addressed that issue in respect to the question of disclosure. I understand that there is need to disclose but there is also need to protect the investigation process, as the honourable minister is saying.

For my own understanding, it is at the stage when the criminal investigation turns to a detention nature, which violates personal security, integrity, among others, which is a human rights violation. It is at that stage that you can talk of disclosure. The sharing of information at the stage where the minister is talking about is still too early in the investigation process, which should not trigger the concern that the honourable member is raising. Thank you.

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think that to allay the fears of hon. Nambooze – when she was suspected, she did not deposit any huge amounts on any of her transaction accounts. However, what we are talking about now is that the person that has transacted huge sums of money, that is the one that will be leading to suspicion.

If you deposit money, then suspicion that arises is that, you are either financing terrorism and they follow you up. They will not meet you on the street and they suspect that you are a terrorist unless you have deposited a huge amount of money in any of the financial institutions.

MR OBIGA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I think the fears expressed by colleagues about this particular provision in my view, are issues would best be covered by the regulations, which will be issued under this provision. You are not going to be able to provide in this basic law as to how one should go around getting information and exchanging it. 

Secondly, when it comes to issues of inter-country cooperation, there are protocols. When these protocols are all laid here, you would address those issues. Otherwise, the issue of competent authority and the issue of the relevancy of information are adequately covered here. My proposal here is that we let the regulations cover these concerns.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. To me, if you disclose to someone you are suspecting that I am getting information from the other side – if the suspect is in Butaleja, he will run away to Amuru. Therefore, I think it is not good to disclose. It should just be information. We should not make a law that cannot be enforced. We should not disclose information. Let it be authorities; maybe Government of Uganda and another government (x) but not to include a suspect. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, can we now process this? Hon. Nambooze, can you clarify on the issue? However, let us take this. The law we are dealing with is anti-money laundering. Therefore, it cannot be anything else. It has to be about money that you are trying to clean. Okay? 

Secondly, we already have a provision in the Act relating to requests for mutual legal assistance. Where we require legal things to happen, there is a procedure for that. What is being proposed here is the preliminary thing; in case something happens. If huge sums of money have crossed borders and are sitting with somebody, what do you need to do to get information about that particular transaction? It is about money laundering, really.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Chairperson, I cited an example of when I was charged with terrorism just to show that any person at any one time can be a suspect. I did not mean that my issue involved money. 

However, on this particular matter, now that the minister has alluded to regulations, I think it would be safer if it is captured, “… in accordance with the regulations as shall be laid out by the minister”. Let us capture that in the law.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, if the drafters find no problem, we can add, “… as will be prescribed in the regulations”.

MR MUGOYA: The best way we can do it, Mr Chairperson, is we must have a specific provision providing for the manner in which the provisions of this Act will come into commencement. If not, we can proceed further and have a specific schedule prescribing the manner in which these relevant provisions of the law could come into force. However, we cannot put it specifically under section 38 as we shall be trivialising it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: For this particular law, the provisions in relation to regulations were made broad; the authority is broad. If you look at section 141; regulations, “The minister may, upon advice of the board, make regulations as may be required for carrying into effect any of the provisions of this Act.” Therefore, any of the provisions would be covered if there is need for a regulation to explain something.

MR KATUSABE: Mr Chairperson, the worst sin in legislation anywhere in the world is ambiguity; making legislation amorphous or shapeless.

Mr Chairperson, I wonder why you are struggling to get my humble submission that “information” is too broad. Any information that needs to be –(Interjections)- I suggested a while ago that we put “relevant information” so that it can read, “Competent authorities may exchange relevant information …” Do you take that, Mr Chairperson?

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairperson, are we getting ourselves into creating discretion on somebody or some entity to determine what is relevant and what is not relevant at that point? Why can’t “information” remain “information”? 

In addition, it may not necessarily be true that it is a known practice that the worst sin in legislative drafting is ambiguity. Otherwise, we would not have reasons for interpretation. Some ambiguities are good and deliberate. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In fact, in drafting, there is something we call “constructive ambiguity” where it is deliberately intended. For example, when we were negotiating the Rome Statute, when it came to the question of amnesty, there was strong lobbying that you should not accommodate amnesty in the provisions and the things like that. Countries were not agreeing. As a result, the people who were drafting decided to adopt what we call “constructive ambiguity”. In other words, you do not limit or prohibit but you do not allow. You leave it somewhere there. However, this does not fall in that category at all.

Honourable members, if you put “relevant”, it does not read well with the rest of the provisions because the information they are talking about is in relation to a specific matter. It is defined in the provision. The information they are talking about is in relation to possible or confirmed money laundering or terrorism financing and any related activity. 

Therefore, it is not about relevant information that somebody is going to sit somewhere and say this is relevant or not. It is in relation to possible or confirmed money laundering. There is no ambiguity here; it is very clear.

MR KATUSABE: I am about to concede but before I do that, I would really be interested in who exactly determines the process or systems or confirmed money laundering. Who determines these? 

Mr Chairperson, I raised this point yesterday that when we subject this Bill at this point in time, it falls short of basic legislative standards. This Bill does not, in any way, help us to recognise the scope and range of rights, duties, obligations, responsibilities, accountability and enforcement mechanisms and procedures. That is where I am coming from, Mr Chairperson, that is a lot of -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let me read for you a provision that is already in the Act; section 107(1) of the Anti-Money Laundering Act: “A competent authority in Uganda may make a request to a competent authority of another state for legal assistance related to a criminal, civil or administrative investigation, prosecution, proceedings or enforcement of court orders in accordance with the law applicable in that state.” 

That is the drafting style that has been adopted and this is consistent because it is saying, “Competent authorities may exchange information and provide international cooperation both upon request from or spontaneously to foreign counterparts in relation to …” It is very specific, there is no ambiguity here.

MR KATUSABE: For steady progress, I concede but we shall do some in-house cleaning with the chairperson. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I should not be communicating from here but I do not know how long they will sit there. In the Distinguished Stranger’s Gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of 25 officers from the Kenya Defence Task College led by the Commandant of the college, Maj Gen. Ngewa Mukala. They are here on a study tour under the auspices of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces and they have been interacting with Members of Parliament representing the Uganda People’s Defence Forces. Please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. Thank you.

MR OGUZU: Mr Chairperson, I was still concerned over issues of privacy. The provision of this law, as it reads now, is that our competent authority can request and give. However, the challenge is that they can be able to give information even when there are no confirmed cases of terrorism and money laundering. How do you protect such individuals from misuse of the information law? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The principal call is on reasonable suspicion. They do not just go. If there is reasonable suspicion – in this country, you can be arrested if you are committing, you have committed or you are about to commit. Even when you are just about to commit an offence, you can be arrested. Therefore, if there is reasonable suspicion, they can make the requests but not baseless.

MR MUHEIRWE: Mr Chairperson, the clause is talking about relevant information not any information whether required or not. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can we move?

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Chairperson, I would like to plead with my colleagues that we allow for a procedure, as shall be laid down in the regulation to safeguard against abuse. I beg my colleagues, especially the chairperson of the committee, to concede.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, they should because like I read, section 141 is not restrictive. It allows for regulation so putting it here does no harm. It basically says, on any of the provisions, a regulation can be made. Therefore, mentioning it will not be fatal. Can someone draft it? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, she can work with hon. Oboth since they are neighbours to draft something.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it neighbours in the House here or you have other information? (Laughter)

MS NAMBOOZE: Hon. Oboth is my constituent so, he is quite in order to say that he is my neighbour.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Sometimes, explanation is important. We do not like to assume things. I think it is just an addition. Just open the comma and put the issue of the regulations. Hon. Oboth, are you ready to make a suggestion?

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Chairperson, we are proposing that we amend clause 38(a) to read, “Exchange of information by competent authorities. Competent authorities may exchange information and provide international cooperation, both upon request from and spontaneously to foreign counterparts in relation to possible or confirmed money laundering or terrorist financing and any related activity subject to the procedures laid down in the regulations.”

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, as a committee, we are okay with the proposal by hon. Nambooze.

MR KANIA: Mr Speaker, I would only remove the word “procedure” because I think it will be advantageous to apply the regulations in total rather than just to the element of procedure. That will give you more calorie if you talk – I am therefore proposing for the deletion of the word “procedure” in her amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What would it read like? 

MR KANIA: It will read, “Competent authorities may exchange information and provide international cooperation both upon request from and spontaneously to foreign counterparts in relation to possible or confirmed money laundering or terrorism financing and any other related activities subject to the regulations made thereto this Act.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I now put the question to that entire amendment? I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the new clause 19 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 1

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 1 as follows: By inserting immediately after paragraph (b) the following, “Committee means the Uganda Anti-Money Laundering Committee established - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We rejected that one.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, “competent authority” is already defined so I am going to (3). We propose to insert immediately after paragraph (c) the following: “Financial group means a group that consists of a parent company or any other type of legal person exercising control and coordinating functions over the rest of the group for the application of group supervision under the core principles together with branches and/or subsidiaries that are subject to anti-money laundering or countering the financing of terrorism policies and procedures at the group level.”

“International organisation means an entity established by formal political agreement between a member state that has the status of an international treaty, its existence is recognised by law in its member country and it is not treated as a resident institutional unit of the countries in which they are located.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we deal with those two because they are new definitions and then we go to the next proposal?

Honourable members, there are those two definitions of defining “financial group” and the second one is “international organisation”, which were not defined in the Bill but those terms have been used in the Act. Is that okay? 

I would like us to process these two and then we go to the other one because these ones are related. Is there any proposal? Can I put the question to this amendment? I put the question to this amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, in paragraph (f), we propose to delete the words “family member or close associate” appearing in paragraph (b) and substituting with the words, “related person”. 

We also propose to insert a new paragraph (h) immediately after the definition of “requesting states” the following: “Related person means an associate or close relative of the person.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am glad that this is a very sensitive legislation and all the members of the UPDF are fully represented in the House. (Laughter) I think you should take judicial notice of that. 

Having said that, I wanted the chairperson of the committee to again define the word “associated”. He is defining a term with a term. Thank you. I would like Parliament to take note of what I had earlier said.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What the chairperson is trying to do is to capture the use of the word “family member” and “associate”, which are used in the Act. Instead of leaving it like that, he is trying to use only one word to refer to those many. For example, instead of “family member” or “associate”, you just call them “related person” and it would cover all those other words.

Therefore, he is trying to simplify the use of many words in the definition.

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. We need to get a clear position from the chairperson of the committee. Are these dictionary definitions or are they as they relate to the Bill? (Interjections)– I am not yet done. 

The reason I say this is basically the enforcement of law. When we pass this Bill into law, it will have the force of law. In this particular Bill, the range and scope of the force of law is not clear. We have definitions, the preamble, declaratory statements of intent and now we are making definitions. Are these definitions that relate to the Bill or Oxford and Cambridge definitions? I would like to hear that from you, Mr Chairperson. Thank you.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, I would like to thank hon. Katusabe, my close ally whenever I am here with Bills, for raising the issue. Our definition of “related persons” is clearly defined in our Financial Institutions Act, 2004. Therefore, we are trying to achieve consistency in the definitions that exist within our laws. 

In addition, from the accounting perspective, we defined “related parties” to include all relatives, friends, in-laws, among others. Therefore, the words “related parties” is broader and captures what this law is intended to achieve. I pray that the honourable member supports our proposal as a committee.

MR MUGOYA: Mr Chairperson, I would like to support what hon. Musasizi is saying. Black’s Law Dictionary, 2nd Edition, defines “related persons” as, “A phrase used to cover general usage and meaning of human beings such as heirs, children, spouses, creditors, beneficiaries and any others having property right in or a claim against a trustee estate, estate of a defendant and protected person.” It gives us wide latitude of a definition that we intend to cover. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we proceed, honourable members? I put the question to those two amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Money Laundering (Amendment) Bill, 2016” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

5.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Money Laundering (Amendment) Bill, 2016” be read the third time and do pass. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Money Laundering (Amendment) Bill, 2016” be read the third time and do pass. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)onourable ember

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister, the chairperson and honourable members. (Applause)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LEADERSHIP CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Has this report been presented? I do not think we can handle the Committee Stage of this Bill right now. Can we handle another item instead of this Bill?

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF THE HOUSE TO INVESTIGATE SERIOUS ALLEGATIONS OF TAX EVASION IN THE STEEL SECTION IN UGANDA

5.10
MR GASTER MUGOYA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Mr Speaker, before I proceed, I would like, as a matter of procedure, to seek your permission to allow me present, before you and the honourable members, a motion for a resolution of Parliament to investigate serious allegations of tax evasion in the steel sector in Uganda. I so pray.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please proceed with the motion.

MR MUGOYA: Much obliged. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I am moving under rules 47 and 48 of our Rules of Procedure to present before you a motion for a resolution of Parliament to investigate serious allegations of tax evasion in the steel sector in Uganda. The motion reads:

“WHEREAS Uganda currently has about 12 steel mills with a production capacity of more than 500,000 tons of steel products annually and more than 23 other steel manufacturers and importers and;

WHEREAS Government has initiated a number of policies aimed at protecting domestic iron and steel mills against unfair competition from cheaper imported iron and steel products such as the imposition of import duty on imported steel and iron products in Uganda from COMESA member countries as provided for under the laws of Uganda and; 

AWARE that Article 17 clause 1(g) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda imposes a duty on all citizens to pay taxes and;

FURTHER AWARE that Parliament has enacted a number of tax laws such as the Income Tax chapter 340, the Value Added Tax chapter 349 and the Excise Tariff Act chapter 338 as well as the East African Management Act, 2004, which variously impose tax obligations on persons, natural and artificial, operating in Uganda and;

NOTING THAT section 3 of the Uganda Revenue Authority Act establishes the Uganda Revenue Authority with the mandate to assess and collect taxes as well as accounting for all revenue to which the tax laws apply and; 

ALARMED that whereas the steel sector has potential to greatly contribute to the development of the country, this is not the case because of the chronic and systematic tax evasion prevailing in this sector;

FURTHER ALARMED that a number of companies in the steel sector evade taxes through:
    a) Non-invoicing of local sales, 
    b) Non-invoicing of export sales, 
    c) Partial invoicing, 
    d) Misclassification and under declaration of imported steel products in order to evade tax and,
    e) Under declaration of Pay As You Earn 
    f) Invisible financial transactions
    g) Non-invoicing of scrap deliveries and supply of finished steel products as a payment of scrap supplied without documentation and 
    h) Failure to remit workers’ contributions to NSSF and poor record keeping and concealing of transactions and documents;

RECOGNISING THAT in order to finance the Budget, Government needs to collect all taxes due to it from all taxable sources and taxpayers in Uganda and;

COGNISANT OF THE FACT that Parliament is not only the voice of the people but it has, as one of its core mandate, the duty to oversee and monitor Government programmes and policies;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that it urgently investigates allegations of tax evasion in the steel sector in Uganda.” Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is the motion seconded? The motion is seconded by hon. Bigirwa, hon. Nambeshe and hon. Odonga Otto. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR MUGOYA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I have summarised the justification by presenting to this august House material facts why I would seek for this resolution.

Mr Speaker, the steel sector in Uganda has had numerous but also unprecedented serious and different allegations that mainly point to non-invoicing of both local and export sales, partial invoicing for both local and export sales, misclassification of imported steel products, under declaration of Pay As You Earn and invisible financial transactions.

Honourable members, all the above allegations point to one resultant effect: tax evasion of all forms in law. Allow me therefore, with precision and certainty, to highlight the above tax evasion allegations.

Mr Speaker, the study recently carried out by Uganda Revenue management with the objective of understanding the steel manufacturing sector specifics in a bid to facilitate and improve delivery in the sector revealed the following: most of the companies, details of which are herewith enclosed and at the right time, I will lay the same on the Table, conceal proper records and do not issue receipts or partially issue the same.

Mr Speaker, non-invoicing of local sales and partial invoicing through input and output ratios make it difficult for Uganda Revenue Authority to know the extent of the finished products and therefore it leads to under or mis-declaration, which leads to tax evasion hence the cogent desire and need for this august House to investigate the actions, inactions and omissions of the companies in the steel sector.

The economic intelligence report, which we also have in our possession and which shall be laid on the Table, shows that the majority of the companies in the steel sector import finished products and disguise them as raw materials in a bid to avoid payment of import duty and other taxes incidental thereto.

Under declaration of Pay As You Earn 

As movers of this motion, we discovered that the Ministry of Internal Affairs and particularly the Immigration Department and Uganda Revenue Authority failed to work as a team on the sector players to ascertain the actual number of expatriates working for each player and their various contracts submitted by expatriates during applications for work permits. 

I have also summarised the issue of invisible financial transactions. 

Government agencies responsible have failed to use other parameters like power consumption, consumables and other raw materials to confirm input/output ratios and therefore, Government agencies have wantonly failed to request for documentary evidence on how finances obtained through loans were received, pay back schedules and fund utilisation.

Due to the above omission, players in the steel sector have smartly resorted to formation and execution of inter-company transactions like the one between Roofings Rolling Mills Limited and Roofings Limited such that URA is unable to ascertain who is the importer and who is the exporter in this particular case.

In a nutshell, therefore, the effect of all the above actions, inactions and omissions is that the genuine manufacturers in the steel sector in Uganda are suffering and it is more probable that they may close shop so that Uganda becomes predominantly a country of importers with very negative consequences for job creation.

Tax collection has already suffered. The current economic intelligence report and the letter of His Excellency the President dated 17 January 2017, addressed to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, indicates that in the year 2013, Uganda lost Shs 300 billion through tax evasion in the steel sector alone.

From 2013 to 2016, Uganda lost Shs 1.2 trillion in tax evasion to this steel sector alone. It is therefore our considered opinion and humble prayer that in the able wisdom of this august House, this motion be allowed in totality. I so pray and submit as such.

Allow me to lay on the Table the documents that I mentioned above to enable this august House to take a decision. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What documents are those? Mention them one by one.

MR MUGOYA: We have a letter dated 17 January 2017 from His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda addressed to hon. Matia Kasaija, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. It has a lot of information that is very useful for this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the letter.

MR MUGOYA: We also have a document that has been bound and it contains two reports from URA management. In this report, we also have the economic intelligence report merged together. Actually, they are three reports in one in regard to this very matter of tax evasion in the steel sector. I beg to lay these three documents. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those reports.

MR MUGOYA: We also have the justification that summarises the contents in the documents that have been laid.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Let us have the seconder of the motion.

5.23
MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Mr Speaker, I rise to second the motion for a resolution of Parliament to investigate serious allegations of tax evasion in the steel sector in Uganda as has been moved by my colleague in accordance to rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure.

As a country, we are suffering and many times we have mentioned that our economy has declined. We are suffering with allocating resources in the different sectors of the economy. We are suffering by having less to allocate for service delivery because we have, amidst us, companies that are actually evading tax and thus depriving the country of a lot of revenue, which would have been very important for the development and service delivery to the various sectors in this country.

The steel industry in Uganda has been evading tax and one of the ways has been by having uninvoiced local sales. It has been found out that uninvoicing local sales in the steel sector has greatly affected URA in having the right information that is used for capturing revenue.

It is very difficult for URA to know how much an institution or a company has made at the end of the day, which has eventually led to these institutions giving wrong returns to URA.

Secondly, uninvoicing of local sales gives misleading figures in the income statements, which is not right as it results in misleading information in accounting.

The steel sector has also gone ahead to give misleading information by way of having misclassification and under declaration of steel import in this country. You are well aware that steel comes in different measures and when there is under declaration of the type of steel that has been imported, it is very difficult for URA to know and to attach the right price to that particular steel.  

Therefore, the issue of giving wrong classification of the steel that is being imported has deprived this country of a lot of revenue. This is why we are saying that there is need for the steel sector to be investigated.

When you under declare imports, what does this come to? It is important for us to verify steel products at importation prior to delivery at the taxpayer’s premises. 

Therefore, URA should be in position to consider having its own weighbridges at Mombasa and at all other major entry points to ascertain the actual quantity of imported steel that comes into and also leaves the country.

Alternatively, URA needs to enter into an MOU with RVR to enable sharing of information because if URA does not have this information, it becomes very difficult for them to know how much quantity goes out and comes into the country.  

At the end of the day, we have situations in the steel industry where there are different income statements and figures presented because what they capture is different from what is on the ground.

Mr Speaker, it is very paramount for steel industries to be investigated because if we do not take charge of this situation, we will have a problem. We do not know the processes that these goods go through and eventually, we fail to know the actual output. If these vices have not been checked well using the approach of input and output ratios, this country will continue registering a lot of losses. 

Honourable members, there is need for uniform application of custom procedures in terms of codes on imported items that are common to the industry such as live gates and ceramic nozzles.

Mr Speaker, as a country we are desiring to reach a middle income economy by 2020 but if we are going to continue having such an industry evading tax, this will be a dream for us as a country and we will not be able to achieve what we anticipate. It will be very difficult for us to allocate resources and budget properly for our people.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, it is very important for us that the steel industry be investigated because the issue of undeclared returns to Uganda Revenue Authority deprives us of revenue. We will end up having no revenue and less in our national coffers and it becomes very difficult for us, as a nation, to allocate resources. It is therefore very important that this sector be investigated. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, you have all listened to the motion. I now propose the question to this motion for your debate. The motion is for a resolution of Parliament to investigate various allegations of tax evasion in the steel sector in Uganda. That is the motion for your debate and it should start now.

Honourable members, we also have a report that we need to finish today: “Motion for adoption of the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the Standard Gauge Railway and Light Railway.” We should be handling this debate and also finish with that motion since the House is properly constituted. 

Therefore, I will suspend the proceedings for 10 minutes and when we resume, we shall finish these two businesses before we close.

(The House was suspended at 5.32 p.m.)

(On resumption at 5.40 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have now received information that the body of our colleague has been moved from Jinja and is now in Mulago Referral Hospital in preparation for the process that will take place in this House on Friday. Thereafter, we shall see how to proceed because the accident happened on the other side of town but now the body is in Kampala and processes are on-going.                   

Honourable members, when the House was suspended, we had just received a motion for this Parliament to investigate serious allegations of tax evasion in the steel sector in this country. Therefore, the substance of the motion is not to debate the allegations but to debate whether we need to investigate the allegations. If we need to investigate, then we shall take that decision and deal with that investigation. Thereafter, we shall assign the responsible people for that purpose. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the mover and the seconder of the motion on where this leaves Uganda Revenue Authority (URA). Looking at the Uganda Revenue Authority Act, they have the mandate to investigate matters such as this. The mover of the motion was citing reports made by various organs showing that these people were evading taxes. 

Therefore, I would like to be clarified as to why we are not investigating URA instead for not doing its work. Why is it that URA is not acting when the reports are there? How do we move a motion for Parliament to do work that should have been done by URA? 

Mr Speaker, it is not that I oppose the motion but I would like to be clarified on why URA has not taken action when the reports have been made. Instead of investigating these companies, why aren’t we investigating URA right away?

MR BALYEKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to that as Parliament, we cannot do the work of other institutions. It is the mandate of Uganda Revenue Authority to tell the public that we have massive evasions of taxes in a particular area. 

If the mover of the motion wants Parliament to investigate those allegations, that would be the work of the committee in conjunction with URA. However, as Parliament, we cannot go ahead and start visiting each steel factory. These factories also employ many Ugandans and when they say there is tax evasion, it is the role of the ombudsman to collect taxes from those institutions. 

As Parliament, it is not our mandate to investigate taxes and tax evasions because it is the role of Uganda Revenue Authority. Besides, if these people are paying taxes, it should be us to advise URA to double check a particular sector and give us a report.

Mr Speaker, this sector also has a lot of rivalry amongst various factories. I will go on record that in Jinja, we have many steel factories and they have been coming to us claiming that they are over taxed and over audited and yet companies like Roofings are not audited and are not paying their taxes like others. There is also rivalry in that sector. We are entering into a scope where we do not know the alpha and omega of the sector. It should be Uganda Revenue Authority to go and look into this.  

There was also a letter in the media written by the President citing massive tax evasion and asking the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to work with URA to dig this up. I am sure that the mover of the motion has a copy of that letter. Therefore, let us leave people to do their work as we also do ours because it is not the mandate of Parliament to investigate that.

MR NSAMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The steel sector is wide and there are so many players there. I expected the mover of the motion to zero down on the specific players that are evading taxes. When he left it broad, I was left undecided on whether to support the motion or not. 

I would like clarification on whether the mover of the motion is worried that URA, the agency that is supposed to do that work, is conniving with some specific players to evade taxes. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: At this stage, we are not yet doing the debate.

MR MUKITALE: I am not debating. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us do the clarification then we - 

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification. Unfortunately the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not here when we are discussing such an important matter. 

I am supposed to support the motion if we were to debate it on a broader question of tax policy as opposed to only looking at tax evasion. This is because tax policy is not necessarily for raising more taxes. Rather, tax policy can be intended to discourage imported steel to promote local industry and local jobs and avoid that competition in the current spirit of the Government import substitution of “Buy Uganda” to promote Uganda. 

The confusion I see here is that we may end up debating a smaller area of tax evasion as if tax policy is only for promoting tax. Government and tax policy should give latitude to local content and local manufacturers for them not to be victims of the current global Chinese iron and steel dumping, which is being fought in America and Europe. 

Therefore, I do not want us to discuss a motion without that global - Mr Speaker, I would seek clarification to the effect that we look at the broader issues and not take it to be merely a URA mandate because URA will only operate in the latitude and leverage given by the Government tax policy, which comes from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

I can see us entering a very grey area. I am happy that the Speaker was an economist before he became a lawyer. I have a problem and that is why I had to seek this clarification. The right person to answer this is supposed to be the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who I do not see in the House. 

Last week, Government launched import substitution and it should have been the right way to address this matter so that we know what latitude Government is giving to our local content and local manufacturers at this point in time when we have the Standard Gauge Railway and the dams that are using steel in Karuma without local content and we are losing much more money there. 

Therefore, as the former Chairman of the National Economy Committee, as a person who has been helping Government to collect taxes and as an agent for 12 years, we need to broaden this debate so that we can help Uganda for the first time to develop iron and steel industry. If we miss it now, we may never get it.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The motion as it is stated seeks to investigate tax evasion in the steel sector. I would like to seek for clarification from the movers of the motion as to whether the matter they are seeking to investigate was clearly examined in relation to the difference between tax evasion and tax avoidance.

Tax evasion is an illegal activity which can be clearly dealt with by the Uganda Revenue Authority, because it is an entity that is charged with that responsibility. The matter of tax avoidance can be illegal in a sense that, there may be an arrangement within these companies to plan for their tax obligation and they end up in a manner as the movers are stating.

However, if this is a matter to do with tax evasion, it is broader than what the motion is stating. I can say that it is just a tip of an iceberg. Therefore, we need to engage with all agencies charged with the responsibility of ensuring that the tax obligation by our companies, as the laws provide, is adhered to.

I do not know whether at this point in time, the movers have got all relevant information available with them. I heard that one of them submitted that URA requires its own weigh bridges in all areas where we operate. We were in Mombasa with URA recently and we established that there is a scanner at Mombasa that scans all the goods that enter Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania; that is the Northern corridor through Mombasa.

Therefore, I am constrained to support the motion without all the relevant information submitted to this Parliament. My prayer is that, can we ask the movers to provide Parliament with information, especially in terms of figures? If one says that company X has evaded taxes to this magnitude, can you provide us with the source of this information? We then take on URA in this regard. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would personally think that it is not right for any institution to host its own jurisdiction; that is why, when we go to court and any issue arises whether that court has jurisdiction on the matter, the ruling of the court is very obvious. You sort out yourself at an appeal level. Court cannot say that it does not have the jurisdiction.

This is a Member of Parliament from Bukooli who could have opted to tip URA so that he gets his commission. There is a provision that if you notify a whistle blower, you get a commission. However, because he knows that the magnitude of the problem is big, that some individuals probably in URA could be involved, he thought of running to Parliament, a board that URA appears before to try to solicit for help.

He could have brought a petition but he has opted for a motion for resolution that Parliament investigates this matter. This is just one sector; I am also on the queue to bring a motion for tax evasion in the sugar industry. I do not want to talk about cement because I have not yet researched on that. The one of sugar can even cause one to shed tears.

The money the Government of Uganda is looking for to Facilitate UPE and Primary Health Care, among others, is all consumed by individuals who are just smiling all the way to the bank. Can you imagine that sugar is imported into the country and it is sent to private warehouses? From there, they end up in the open market in the name of re-export. Over 32 companies are involved in this syndicate.

The challenge with this kind of motion is, probably URA is also a victim, like steel, hon. Balyeku was informing me the other day. I did not know that he was knowledgeable like that – this one from Jinja. He told me while we were in the canteen that this steel enters as finished products, cut to size, heading straight to hardware shops. However, at the borders, they are declared as raw materials, evading the 25 percent import levy. With that wealth of information, I expected that this would have been the opportunity to have this issue you told me about sorted. (Laughter) 

What I therefore would think – it is in your discretion, Mr Speaker, that you could give codified terms of reference without abusing the powers that URA has under the Act. You could guide the House – we allow and not run away from responsibility. We may now mention the areas that need to be investigated, so that these MPs appear before that committee. I would also like to appear before the committee on the issue of sugar.

Hon. Oboth was just mentioning something concerning cement. It looks like tax evasion is big in the whole economy and as Parliament, we could get bolder and direct – if next week I come and I talk about sugar – we are ready, we have done enough due diligence and have got all the import documents from Mombasa Port. The sugar is entering into Kikuubo yet the URA records show that it has gone to Sudan and Congo.

We could comprehensively investigate trans-cargo and we bring recommendations to this Parliament. By the time URA appears before the committee, we would have saved for this country a lot of money. I therefore would like to say that, let us not run away from it but improve in a manner that this House subscribes to by the Speaker’s guidance. Thank you.

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are we still on clarification? (Laughter) Honourable members, if we are going to debate now I ask the mover of the motion to respond to the clarification points and then we can open the debate. Is that clarification? The way you have started, it is like you are going to debate. For the example, the honourable member for Aruu ended up debating. Can you please ask for clarification from the mover?

MS JOY ATIM: I just want a clarification from the chairperson that he is giving us to investigate the tax evasion by the steel companies. I would like to seek a clarification from him as to whether he has also seen other companies such as Bidco. This is because the economy is really running down and it is not only the steel companies, but others are also doing that.

Mr Speaker, I sit on the Budget Committee and we have seen what Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) does to these companies – steel and tube. URA is subsiding steel and tube as well as Bidco and they are making profits and you wonder what they are doing. Therefore, have you taken interest to check some others other than the steel companies? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is for clarification.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, mine may not necessarily be in the form of clarification, but possibly trying to explain and help as the mover of the motion comes in.

Mr Speaker, I have listened to the arguments my other colleague started with and I am happy I am speaking after hon. Otto because I think we were thinking alike and in the same area. I think when the honourable member brought this matter here, and having scanned though the letter of the President, that is why it is the responsibility of this institution to help this country and the economy. It looks like the departments that are charged with responsibility have failed Government. 

That is why if you read that letter of the President, he is asking; why didn’t URA use the input/output ratios to establish the correct taxes these companies are supposed to pay? That is what the President is asking in this letter written to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Therefore, I think there is a problem with Uganda Revenue Authority. The President is also questioning the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives why these departments in that ministry haven’t taken action on the issue of tax evasion by these steel industries? 

He has now also asked the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development about what is happening. Why is no action being taken? Is it connivance between the tax collectors and the steel companies or what? He went further to say maybe we need to ask an external auditor to audit the steel industry and establish. To me, it was like the President has lost confidence in the departments that are charged with the responsibility. 

I think that is why the honourable member has come in to ask whether a committee of Parliament – whether ad-hoc, finance or Committee of National Economy – can come in as part of its oversight function to help and establish what hon. Balyeku is saying that it could be as a result of rivalry among companies that they are bringing this matter. However, one can also say that possibly people want to stop the debate because there are companies that are always very good and going behind to say, “Don’t allow this to come out because it will expose us.” 

Therefore, can we please allow this House to go ahead to establish the truth of the matter regarding this issue because it is within the oversight role of Parliament. From that angle, I would support for a committee of this House be established to investigate this matters. 

We have just had the issue of the handshakes. We have been told of the issue of sugar and others. Let us not run away from the responsibility to help this country and the economy. You have seen that months in months out tax collections are dwindling down. Why? There must be a reason. Thank you.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I remember the time when hon. Ssekikubo brought a motion to investigate shoddy works at Karuma. He had a lot of information, including a letter that the President had written pointing out the problems that were happening. This House decided to do the investigation. Therefore, I see no problem in supporting an investigation which is going to help Government, especially where the President has written, not once and twice. 

URA and other agencies will be there to help give information on what they have done so far and what encumbrances they are incurring. I don’t think the mover of the motion is penalising anybody yet. He has just identified a problem and we cannot sit with this problem

As I was listening to Members of Parliament saying that maybe we will be going beyond our jurisdiction, I thought that I should give this information because there is something similar that took place in this House and agencies were called to support and give information. That is the information I wanted to give. It may help Members as they debate this motion.

MR BALYEKU: Mr Speaker, the Government Chief Whip is supposed to start debating after you have allowed us to debate. This is because now it is like she is directing the debate for the Members on this side. Is it procedurally right and in order for the Government Chief Whip to do that? 

Mr Speaker, the steel sector is very huge – there are iron sheets, nails etc. She should first also consider what the steel sector is other than giving Karuma as an example. Karuma was just a dam – one entity. We are talking about many factories – local and international components. I don’t think the Government Chief Whip is in order to guide us in the debate that way.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member rose on a point of order, but he has also supplied his ruling on the matter. (Laughter) However, what the Member for Kiboga District, who also doubles as the Government Chief Whip, is saying is that these procedures are not strange to this House. It has happened before and if it happens again, nothing wrong will have been committed. That is what she is saying, citing the case of Karuma and things like that. I don’t think there was any violation. That was an opinion.

Honourable members, can I ask the mover of the motion to clarify those issues and we see if we can debate this matter? Was it also a clarification, hon. Oboth?

MR OBOTH: I will wait for the debate.

MR MUGOYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. To begin with, there was an issue from hon. Nambooze who sought a clarification as to why URA failed to take action even where they had investigated and come to the conclusion that we are tabling before this august House. Actually, what you are trying to tell this House, by necessary and express implication, is that this is a clear-cut case for investigation because we shall have to join all the parties and players in the steel sector and they will appear before the committee that you may propose. 

There was also an issue from hon. Balyeku from the promised land of the Kyabazinga asking whether we have the mandate to investigate tax evasion which to him is solely vested in the hands of Uganda Revenue Authority. I would like to say that there is nothing which is as suicidal as an institution which is duly mandated by the Constitution to abdicate its responsibility that is provided for under Article 79, of the Constitution. Hon. Balyeku, I remember very well on 17 to 19 May 2016, you took an oath here and the oath you took has one basic and primary silent feature - You are purposely here to protect the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which in other terms is a grand norm.

I now proceed to hon. Oshabe. The steel sector is wide. He was with a considered opinion that we zero down to - You said we should zero down to the prayers. Mr Speaker, when I was making my preamble and justification, I clearly stated that I will not give in details the names of the key players and the tax invaders. I mentioned that for two basic reasons: It is also in our rules and in the Evidence Act and for clear and purposeful reasons, that under the Evidence Act, if there is matter which is subject to investigation at a preliminary level, you are not supposed to divulge material facts. So, I never wanted to divulge materials facts and I was acting within the confines of the law that was enacted by this honourable Parliament. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us see if we can have a debate and settle this matter whichever way. However, the intervention will be short because the matter is very specific. We cannot have five minutes debate. We will do two minutes debate. The issue is whether Parliament should or should not carry out this investigation of tax invasion in the steel sector. Someone was saying this House cannot investigate. It uses its committees to do those investigations.

6.13
MR JACKSON OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is the first time that we are seeing ourselves trying to say we cannot do anything about the economy of this country. We cannot help Government secure other funds which are unsecured and that we cannot look at the fact that some people are deliberately avoiding to pay tax. For us to stop the investigation at this stage, we all become suspects – (Applause) – We are either for this Parliament or against it.

Mr Speaker, I thought it would only be left to the Speaker to determine or should we narrow down the terms so that the areas for investigation - because we cannot give this committee this wide spectrum for the investigations. Honestly, unless you are living in another planet, there is something wrong. The money URA is able to get for this country can actually fund this whole budget without dependence on any foreign aid.

Mr Speaker, if any businessman is playing with the economy of this country, let – (Member timed out.)

6.15
MR MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support the motion. Parliament being one of the arms of Government, we are final - I am aware that we all went to school and we have different qualifications here but the shoes we are putting on here is political.

Mr Speaker, in our Ugandan Government where there are politicians, there are civil servants by their side. Therefore, I would like to urge that we should begin by using other Government machineries to begin from a lower point of view and by the time it comes to us, we have all the facts at hand. Besides, if we are not satisfied by any report that comes to our Table and we are suspicious, we have all the avenues. I beg to submit. Thank you.

6.17
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga East County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion that we need to investigate the steel sector. The purpose we are in here is to help improve the performance of Government? Every sector today, is limping. There is no Government sector that we are proud of and yet we are saying that we should have enough money to provide services to our people.

Mr Speaker, we cannot accept to have all these leakages in URA yet we expect to have a performing Government. Sometimes, you wonder whether we are in charge, whether Government is in charge? Why are all the sectors complaining? 

Mr Speaker, I rise to support the motion that this Parliament investigates this sector so that we can see all these challenges and those individuals found culprits will be brought to books so that we can put these things in order. Why would we have Government limping - you go to this agency, there is no money, you go to URA, there is a problem, you go to UNRA, there is a problem. Why can’t we put things right as Government? Thank you.

6.19
MR DANIEL MUHEIRWE (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Mr Speaker, I support the motion. Recently, someone was saying that everybody in Uganda is lamenting. It will be a mistake to be among the people lamenting that taxes are being evaded and yet we are in this House. We were voted to investigate all these challenges where gaps exist so that we can fill these gaps and the economy can move ahead. There are allegations that these people import finished steel under the pretext of raw materials. They only do labelling. There are also allegations that they tried to evade taxes by not making invoices. They make an invoice or even a delivery note saying “samples and complementary”. At the end of the day, they instruct the agent to bank the money without indicating it in the receipt and they share the tax.

Mr Speaker, much as they are saying it is too broad, I actually would like to widen the need to also see furniture, telecom and oil companies that come and put in jericans and say those are raw materials. 

Mr Speaker, even the expatriates- (Member timed out.)

6.21
MR FELIX OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County South, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I stand here to debate this motion because I belong to the Committee on Trade and Industry and we supervise industries in this country.

Mr Speaker, I am not an expert of law; but, you are a lawyer and other lawyers are here too. Tax evasion is illegal and it is covered by Income Tax Law. If you contravene that law, you do not need to be investigated; you are charged in court. Therefore, if any member of the public has any information about tax evasion, he or she has the right to take these people to court, but not have them investigated by Parliament. 

This is a matter of law and the Speaker can also advise me. There is Income Tax Law and the penalties are already there if you contravene it. Therefore, as Members of Parliament, I think we should not go into the area of the Judiciary; where an act of criminality of evading tax is known, the police must arrest the person and he or she must be charged in court.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure with a heavy heart because we have members who have been implicated by URA in tax evasions. Their goods worth millions of dollars were impounded and it was on the front page of the newspapers. They are the ones today speaking loudest of how we should do nothing about it. Are we proceeding well with these kind of people around? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the first statement of hon. Odonga Otto is not within my knowledge. Therefore, whether someone was suffering with taxes, I do not know that. I cannot rule on it, but that information has been made available to the House. 

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, as Parliament, we have dignity and we need to respect one another. The matter we are debating here is about our country. As you are aware, most of the industries are relocating from our country and going to other countries; many of them have closed down. The cost of power is affecting every industry in this country. Actually, our country is bleeding.

Therefore, if we are to debate what is affecting our industries in this country, it must be holistic because it is a very sensitive matter; business is very sensitive. The moment you touch any part of business, you kill everything in the country. I, therefore, appeal to members that as we debate here, we need to know the interest of our country. We need to know the law. I wanted- (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think that any company which is paying its taxes is affected by this. If they are leaving the country, they could be leaving for other reasons but not because they have been harassed about taxes. 

My guidance on the issue is that companies which pay taxes are not part of what is being proposed here. It is companies that allegedly avoid and evade taxes that are targeted. That is the allegation. Even the motion is saying, “Parliament will investigate serious allegations of tax evasion in the steel sector in Uganda”. They have not mentioned companies. Those processes would establish who they are and how much money have been lost.

Therefore, as Parliament, let us handle this matter as it is and see where to put it.

What they are proposing here is to investigate allegations. The allegations are there. They have been in the press and in letters. That is what they are saying. Can we find out whether these allegations are true or false?

6.26
MAJ. GEN. ONESMUS KUTEESA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wanted to point out one thing. Every time we raise something here, the mood is vindictive. I prefer fighting the cause than the individual. What is going on? Whoever was involved, there was some mandate - seek and accept responsibility- some people are saying let us go and arrest them. Before you become vindictive, can we all look at the rules under which the taxes were made and if all the clauses were covered. 

Let us differentiate evasion from exemption. All these should be taken- Look at the whole picture not in a vindictive manner to see who we should arrest. Even if you arrested him, the thing would continue growing on. However, looking at the root cause of tax evasion could be a better way. All this work we are doing here, how much steels is produced in Uganda?  How much of it has been used in the process? How much cement is produced in Uganda and how much of it has gone to the Standard Gauge Railway? Instead of fighting- (Interruption) - I am new to be informed and I am learning. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, my advice to the committee is that it should look for what is going wrong, but not how vindictive they are and which criminal they are going to arrest- (Member timed out.)

6.29
MS JACKLET ATUHAIRE (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I support the motion. However, the mover of the motion made it so wide. It would help the House if we knew which companies are involved. The problem of tax evasion is very dangerous. If you see how much taxes URA has collected this financial year, it has gone down by 15 per cent compared to the previous financial year. This means we are losing a lot in taxes. Maybe it would also help you in this investigation if you knew what exactly your motion is. However, much as I support the motion, go and do these investigations that will help the House to set a precedent for other companies and see how we can deal with them so that they do not cheat the taxpayers. Thank you, very much.

6.30
MR SIMEO NSUBUGA (NRM, Kassanda County South, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank hon. Mugoya for having come up with this motion. Members, this matter should have been investigated yesterday. The problem is very huge; more than you can imagine.

Mr Speaker, I would like to support this motion. I represent a constituency in this august House, which has got what we call a border highway to DRC. On a number of occasions, I have witnessed fuel which comes from Kenya through Busia declared as transit goods to Congo knowing that it is going to attract less taxes, but it ends up here in Uganda; being offloaded in Kassanda and back to Kampala.

Therefore, the problem is very huge. I would like to support this motion and I propose that as a Speaker, you can guide us but we need a select committee to investigate the day-to-day work of Uganda Revenue Authority. As my honourable colleague has mentioned as far as the corrections are concerned, it is below expectations.  I, therefore, support this motion and we should form a select committee of Parliament to investigate this matter. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.32
MR DENIS SABIITI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Indeed there are a lot of problems in the steel industry. There are three main raw materials; iron ore, scrap and then the imported products which only are reformed, painted and sold on the market with very little value added to them.

Now three years ago, most companies dealing with steel were rushing to buy iron ore in Kabale, where it is in plenty. However, as I talk now, there is nobody buying and yet it is all there in plenty. Therefore, there must be something fundamentally wrong and it is the duty of this House to find that out. Even if there was no tax evasion, there would probably be need to revise the taxation policy so that we promote the notion of “buy Uganda, use Ugandan goods.”

I do support the investigations and I would want them widened to look at taxation policies for steel products in Uganda. It is terrible;  my people were surviving on this business three years ago; now the revenue has completely gone down and evaporated and I am sure it is because of the malpractices that are taking place in the steel industry. Thank you.

6.33
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker, because some of the members never wanted this investigation to go on, but you guided the House and the investigations will go on.

Mr Speaker, as an engineer, I know this is not a matter of tax only. It is also an issue of quality of the materials. Time comes when engineers are imprisoned not because of their lack of skills, but because of poor quality steel. When a doctor treats a person and he dies, they say the doctor tried his level best. I would request through you Sir that investigations should not be done only on tax evasions, but also on the issues of quality.

Mr Speaker, I would like to request members; do not try to hide thieves. We are here as Members of Parliament. When I go to Butaleja, they can ask you on health, roads, NAADs and everything else. That is why I believe the committee’s investigations are true. 

There is no smoke without fire. If they are free, the Bible says: ”The truth shall set you free”. If they are doing the right thing, then let them be investigated, but the truth must come out.  I thank you.

6.35
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As I said, I will support the motion from the beginning, and the committee but with a request that we amend and widen the scope of investigation to the tax policy. It is the tax policy, which is disadvantaging the local industries in support of importers, who declare steel as a raw material and therefore pay less tax to out-compete our local manufacturers in an adverse environment. That is the crux of the matter and subject matter.  

As Parliament, if we intend to save the little foreign exchange we get, that is where the debate should be. Therefore, I would like to request that the committee takes that line. Uganda Revenue Authority operates under Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; the industry operates under Ministry of Trade and Industry. They have relegated their responsibility of intra-Government, intra-sector communication. That is why we shall end up dealing with a symptom if we do not redirect the debate. 

Therefore, I would like to agree with the Member of Parliament from Kigezi and as I said, it is either now that we protect the iron and steel MUKO Industry in Uganda or you allow the foreign dumping as we are being swayed from the real subject matter to a chicken and egg case. 

I support the committee, but in the meantime, Parliament does not stop Government from doing its mandate. Can Government  bring before this Parliament, as soon as possible the full details of “buy Uganda, promote Uganda” import substitution, which the President has been singing about, but the line sectors have not helped him to translate it into reality and that is why you can see, we are having this challenge?

Therefore, declaration is the issue; the challenge of partial invoicing and un-invoicing are real issues in taxation.  For us who have been agents know how these companies can choose to use a better way. Even if it was a transit cargo, if there is a problem with your sugar tax policy he would rather bring it as a transit and ends up dumping it here.

Therefore, we need to have the bigger picture of promoting local industries; that is the final solution -(Member timed out.)

6.38
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the proposal by hon. Mukitale, the Member of Parliament from Buliisa. We need to look at this matter broadly in terms of tax policy but also in terms of appreciating the challenges Uganda Revenue Authority faces in its ordinary course of operations as it strives to implement the tax laws, which we enact as this House.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, it is important that we use this motion as an eye opener to help our economy get protected – I come from Rubanda where iron ore in the recent past was the source for bread, butter and school fees.

With the importation of steel, our people no longer derive any income from iron ore. If we look at these matters broadly, we would come up with conclusions that are aimed at promoting our local industries and manufacturers. I thank you.

6.41
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Mr Speaker, I highly support the motion and investigations must go on.

Mr Speaker, dishonesty and insincerity will spoil our economy. We used to have a department in the security circles, the Department of Economic Monitoring. This unit is supposed to monitor economic sabotage, smuggling, cheating and many others. 

In ISO, there was a department of economic sabotage and I recall there was Mr Teddy Ssezi Cheeye in charge of that department. I wish this department can be strengthened so that it can continue to monitor taxes and smuggling among others. I thank you.

6.42
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion that Parliament constitutes a committee to investigate the alleged tax evasion in the steel sector.

All the indicators are very clear that something is wrong; the President has written, the level of tax collection has gone down, the smaller local steel companies are having a lot of challenges. 

Now that a member has moved a motion in the House, we need to support because I remember that when we wanted to investigate sharing of the Shs6 billion by staff from URA and the Ministry of Energy and Minerals Development, some body run to court for Justice Steven Kavuma to stop Parliament from investigating.

The issues being unearthed by the oil probe will help in reforms and where there is a gap in the law, it will come back to Parliament to put into place necessary laws to fix them.
In this matter, we may not accuse URA because collecting tax is not a very simple thing as people always try to devise means of avoiding or evading tax. 

After investigation, URA, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives will each give their positions and the report will come back to Parliament. It is from there that we then take a decision.

I do not think that it is going to hurt any company even if we do not mention the companies now. These companies will be there as witnesses to provide information to the committee. 

The companies we suspect will also give their position so that at the end of the day, we know what is going on and why we are not collecting taxes and we can make reforms. This should also spread to other sub sectors. But let us start from here and-(Member timed out.)

6.41 
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion that we investigate.

Without doing research, we shall never see the problem. This investigation will go a long way in addressing quite a number of issues to do with taxation in this country. 

As we all know, a number of people are using different ways of evading taxes but there is no way you can incriminate them unless you have found the truth. So when we invite them here, I am sure we shall get to know all of them.

The Bible says, “Give Caesar what belongs to Caesar, and give to God what belongs to God”. In this case, if one is supposed to pay tax and they are avoiding so, then that becomes a problem even before God. 

It is, therefore, very important that this investigation is blessed by this House. I am one of those who are happy that we have agreed to investigate –(Laughter)– that is the reality of the matter.

Finally, the one thing that I would like us to be aware of is that people begin to cheat slowly as the rest of us are suffering. Imagine you, the Speaker has paid tax but somebody is not paying theirs and others are looking for ways of avoiding – that is why for me, David Abala, I am saying that we support the motion systematically and –(Member timed out.)

6.47
MR PETER SEMATIMBA (NRM, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion for this investigation and I thank hon. Mugoya for having raised this matter.

I would like to embolden the investigations to recognise that tax evasion cannot be done simply by the one evading. There is usually some complicity with those that are supposed to be working against. 

The investigations should not go for only those that we suspect are evading tax but also those that they are working with to pull it off.

Let me hasten to add that we are going to be investigating allegations and that there is a great possibility that some of those that have been pointed at may end up innocent. Nevertheless, I support the motion and I thank you.

6.48
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): I too would like to support the motion that the investigations be carried out.

Mr Speaker, I would like to raise one particular concern that we are not paying attention to; the material from which these steel industries are making their products. When you are assessed to pay tax, it depends on what material from which you are making your product.

In Uganda, quite often, these companies use scrap metal. They traverse the villages in the north and east among others searching for scrap metal. This is a very detrimental exercise to our communities. 

In northern Uganda, we have unexploded ordnance and when these people are in the field gathering metal; these ordnances sometimes explode causing loss of life and injuries. What do these companies pay these people gathering this scrap metal? And then the companies are not even paying taxes.

We need to scale up the issue of where these people are getting their materials from so that they are appropriately taxed. Those were the matters that I wished to bring to the attention of this House. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to take a decision because it is approaching 7.00 p.m. If the decision is taken to investigate, it will be up to the Speaker to come back with the terms of reference for the investigation to Parliament to approve. It will not be like you approved and people go without guidance on what they are supposed to do.

The technical people in this House are gathering whatever debate is taking place in order that if a decision is taken, then we can come back and say this is the framework under which the investigation can be carried out. The other aspect is who should do this investigation? Honourable members, we have had experiences with select committees and I would like to advise this House not to go along those routes.

We have committees of the House that are well established and, therefore, we have the mandate to deal with the issues that are before us; unless the issue is so unique that it cannot be within the competence of a particular committee, then we can think of taking expertise from different committees to constitute a sectoral committee. However, this particular matter may not necessarily be one of those that are too complex for the House committee to deal with.

Therefore, my guidance concerning these two issues is that should you decide that investigations should take place, it should be the appropriate committee to handle this; but also the terms for the investigation should be agreed upon by the House upon a decision that this investigation should go ahead. 

Therefore, how do we proceed? Can I put the question on the motion on whether there should be an investigation on the allegation of tax evasion in the steel sector in Uganda? Can I put the question and we take a decision on this and we proceed to the next level. 

We should also agree that the investigation would be carried out by the House committee. Is that okay –(Laughter)– let us go with this because if we handled one sector, it could give guidance on what is going on in other sectors so that we do not take a lot of time? We shall also give a time frame given the nature of this work and its complexity within the sectors and people involved, we do not like to squeeze the time so much that the actors are not given time to come before the committee and – Can I put the question to this honourable members? The appropriate committee would be the committee in charge of institutions that handle taxes and that should be the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development because this is the committee in charge of the sector. 

6.53
MS JOY ONGOM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you so much for your guidance. We realise that as a select committee, in most cases when they are given the task sometimes they do not even report. However, there is also that incidence of compromise and that is the select committee. Mr Speaker, in this particular case –(Interruption) 

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Committees of Parliament are created by the Constitution and Rules of Procedure set up by this House. Is it in order for the honourable member to rise on this Floor and allege that at times, committees set up by this Parliament are compromised in the course of doing their work without substantiating?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, many of you have been part of this House for some time. The issue of allegations against committees is not coming for the first time, let us be honest about want we do. Select committees have been accused even if it is not true, but the accusations have been coming not necessarily true because nobody has brought any evidence to say this committee has been corrupted, but those allegations have been there and that is what the member is talking about. Her point is that we should not create unique institution that will be accused of the same thing.

Therefore, is it possible to have the House committee itself which is already established not with the specified mandate to deal with this, but bravely to deal with the issues of the sector? Can we now assign the responsibility so that they cannot say this is specific outfit meant to do this particular thing so that these accusations are avoided?

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, the procedural point I am raising is the effect that in the course of our debate, matters of the national economy were brought in place. The industry of iron and steel is under the Ministry of Industry, the importers are under the Ministry of Trade and the tax collector is under Ministry of Finance. We have a precedent where the committees have worked together even when we had sensitive business like the Public Finance Act. I would like to humbly submit that the committees work jointly given the bigger picture - the bird eye’s view. We have the economy to protect and local industry to promote. However, also to listen to all sides as natural justice provides; we listen to the importers, but of course focusing largely on increasing tax. 

I would, therefore, like to suggest that both the committees of Trade and Industry and Finance work together with National Economy to give us a holistic bird eye’s view. In the meantime, also the Leader of Government Business gives us the Government’s interventions. Mr Speaker, if you do permit, I move that we allow the three committees to do a joint report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we deal with the motion as it is, take a decision then when we draw out the parameters and we agree on them, that is how we will scientifically determine who can be involved in this investigation. Would that be more organised than doing it before the terms of reference? Can I now put the question to this motion? Honourable members, I now put the question to the motion for resolution of Parliament to investigate serious allegations of tax evasion in the steel sector in Uganda.

I put the question for the approval of this motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Tomorrow we will come with the terms of reference and have a short debate to agree on the terms and parameters; we will determine as to who can investigate these allegations. Is that okay, thank you honourable members?

Honourable members, the time is 7.00p.m. but we have some ministerial policy statements that have been brought and so we need to receive them.  

LAYING OF PAPERS

7.00
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry Local Government for the Financial Year 2017/2018 for Vote 011: Ministry of Local Government, Vote 147: Local Government Finance Commission and Vote: 501 to 797 of all local governments. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is referred to the appropriate committee for handling. 

7.01
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): I beg to lay a ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Defence and Veterans Affairs for the financial year 2017/2018. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. 

7.01
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): This is a ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development- Vote 008. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred- 

7.02
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Ministerial statements - (Interruption)

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, there is a matter to do with the period or the financial year because it is very critical. Therefore, Madam Chief Whip, would you like to state the period which Vote 008 relates to? 

MS NANKABIRWA: I thought I have been mentioning the financial year, which is 2017/2018. I beg to lay the ministerial policy statements for the Ministry of Defence and Veterans Affairs for the financial year 2017/2018. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

7.03
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): This is a ministerial policy statement of Office of the Prime Minister- Vote 003 for the financial year 2017 to 2018. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. The remaining policy statements should come in tomorrow, Government chief whip, so that we are facilitated to do- no, this one is not that way. It has to be there tomorrow.

Honourable members, it is now 7 o’clock and I thank you for sitting this long in these numbers. The business that we are going to defer to tomorrow is going to be very specific. Tomorrow we will not be able to handle comprehensively the Leadership Code (Amendment) Bill because of its’ complexity. I have here volumes of what we need to go through. 

Therefore, the time tomorrow will not be sufficient to handle this; in view of the fact that we will go on recess tomorrow and of course with the special request, there will be a special sitting on Friday to pay tribute to one of our colleagues that has passed on. 

Tomorrow there is specific business we are going to handle and the minister and the Members should know that we have to finish with the Standard Gauge Railway report and take a decision on it. There are also other issues such as HIV/AIDS and some urgent matter that we deferred to tomorrow. 

However, the Order Paper will be published early enough for us to deal with it. I am also coming with the issue of the terms of reference for the committee for the investigation on the motion that we have just adopted. Those are the issues that we are likely to handle tomorrow so let us go knowing that will be it. 

7.04
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to inform the House that there is going to be a vigil at the late’s home this evening. I have just been informed now that the body has also left Mulago Referral Hospital and they have finished with the treatment so it is going to the funeral home.

Members, feel free to join us at the vigil this evening at Kyanja along the new Kisaasi Road. We would appreciate it if you joined the family. Thank you. The directions are that you take the Kisasi Road after Kensington junction, leave the one going to join the Gayaza Road and you turn to the right there is a new road called Kyanja Road. The home is just near the road. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, you have that information. For those of you who can make it, let us join the family this evening.  Is there any other issue? Can I adjourn now? Honourable members, this House stands adjourned to tomorrow 2 o’clock. 

(The House rose at 7.05p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 16 March 2017 at 2.00p.m.)

