
Tuesday, 5 March 2013

Parliament met at 2.20 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.
                
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this special sitting and given the situation we are dealing with now, the arrangement in the House will be altered a bit. I will be speaking on some of the aspects later but I think we should allow free sitting for the purposes of today so that we comfortably pay our tribute to the hon. Eriya Kategaya.

Honourable members, I wish to welcome you to this special sitting. For the third time, in this Ninth Parliament, the ugly hand of death has robbed us of another Member. This time it is our colleague, the Rt. hon. Eriya Kategaya. Whereas I have known the hon. Eriya Kategaya and associated with him in various circles, I am not competent to eulogise on this great son of Uganda.

Let it be put on record that hon. Kategaya has given Uganda an illustrious service spanning many decades. He has been one of the core architects among the revolutionaries who have been responsible for ushering in peace, unity and social economic development that Uganda has enjoyed for over 25 years now.

His contribution to the affairs of the East African Community, especially with regard to regional integration speaks for itself. The work he has done for Africa and the world in promoting Pan-Africanism and improving the lives of humanity is exhibited by his works in the international relations and diplomacy.

He will be greatly missed by this Parliament, the people of Uganda, East Africa as a region and the international community as a whole. His wisdom, cool temperament, humility and a permanent smile are great virtues worth emulating.

On behalf of Parliament and on my behalf, I wish to register our utmost condolences to his family and to the entire nation for losing the personality of hon. Eriya Kategaya. I wish to recognise that his family members are seated on the Treasury Bench right behind my seat. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

Honourable members, on another sad note, I would like to inform you of the death of hon. William Nyakatura who represented Bunyangabo County in the Fourth and Fifth parliaments. He served this country diligently as an executive in the Democratic Party, the civil service, Member of Parliament and minister of state.

He was a great lover of his traditions and served the kingdom of Tooro as Prime Minister. I wish to convey our sincere condolences to family and friends and pray that the Almighty God gives him comfort and peace as he rests. Honourable members, in this regard, I ask you to stand with me for a moment of silence.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I received a request from the Rt hon. Margaret Nantongo Zziwa, the Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly, who would like to honour and pay last respects to the honourable member, the hon. Eriya Kategaya.

Hon. Kategaya, as you already know, was a Member of East African Legislative Assembly by virtue of being the minister responsible for East African Community Affairs.

Given our Parliamentary practice, the Rt hon. Zziwa is a stranger to this House even if she was a member of this House before. It is also true, however, that by virtue of her office, she is a Distinguished Personality.

Rule 24(2), paragraph 8, provides for addresses by Distinguished Personalities. By the virtue of the powers conferred to me in rule 7, which provides for the general authority of the Speaker and it states as follows:

“In deciding a point of order or practice, the Speaker shall state reasons for the decision and shall cite any Rule of Procedure or other applicable authority.”

I have also decided that the Rt hon. Margaret Zziwa Nantongo, Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly, will participate in the debate on the motion paying tribute to the late hon. Eriya Kategaya by speaking from the Bar of the House and that is in the area close to the Sergeant-At-Arms; when those brackets are drawn, then they will constitute a bar.

I already see the Distinguished Members of EALA sitting before the Bar is drawn; we will overlook that for now but for next time, it will have to be followed strictly. 

Honourable members, the Commonwealth practice in jurisdictions like Canada and UK allow strangers to address the House from the Bar of the House. One scenario that allows this is when a Distinguished Personality like a foreign Head of State or Speaker would like to address the Assembly.

The second scenario is when a Member is named and suspended from the House by the recommendation made by the committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline under of Rules of Procedure. Rule 82(2) stipulates that if the Member is asked to render an apology to this House, that Member cannot walk into the Chamber of the House; he has to render the apology from the Bar. The Member would speak when the brackets are drawn; that is where the Member renders the apology.

Another situation which allows for strangers to stand at the bar of the House is when Parliament would like to admonish or reprimand a stranger who has violated the dignity and honour of the House. For instance, this could be to reprimand a director of a media house or a journalist whose paper radio would have repeatedly misrepresented the proceedings of Parliament resulting in the loss of its honour and dignity and therefore requiring an apology to be made from the Bar of the House.

These are rules that we should be applying very soon because we have seen some tendency in the recent past where the press people have decided to take issues with Parliament in a rather unfair way. So one of these days, we will have the directors of the media centres coming to give us an apology from the Bar.

Given the stature of hon. Kategaya in the East African Community, it is only right and fitting that the Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly is given an opportunity to participate in this special sitting. Therefore, at an opportune moment, I will call on her to address the House. The Sergeant-At-Arms will draw the brackets and the Speaker will speak from there.

Honourable members, I wish to inform you that in order to allow as many Members as possible to speak, a time of five minutes will be given to each speaker and I request Members to respect hon. Kategaya by not making any unnecessary interruptions. 

I wish to thank you in advance for your expected orderly behavior. I will terminate the debate towards 6.00 p.m. to allow the family organise themselves and place the body ready for the vigil tonight.

Honourable members, I wish to further inform you that Parliament will not sit on Thursday because we will all be travelling to Itojo to give a befitting farewell to the Rt hon. Eriya Kategeya. So after tomorrow, Parliament will be adjourned to next week on Tuesday. I thank you very much for listening to me at this time. 

I have received condolence messages some of which are addressed to the family and others to the Speaker of the House. I should have read the ones addressed to the Speaker but there will be no time because they are long messages and many. I have a message from the Speaker; this, I will read.

The Rt hon. Rebecca Kadaga sends a condolence message to the family on behalf of Parliament. 

“I have with great shock learnt about the death of hon. Eriya Tukahirwa Kategaya who passed away on Saturday, 2 March 2013 at Nairobi Hospital. As one of the Ugandans who recognise and appreciate his contribution to the revolutionary struggle of this country, he was a calm and gentle politician who was very versatile and offered leadership through many situations.

His gentle nature seen in his mild and measured strategic approach to politics in this country is an admiration to very many on the political scene. Having been part of the leadership of this country, Ugandans of all shades will miss him because of those outstanding leadership attributes.

As the head of the family, I know he was looked upon for care, love, wisdom and guidance. His vast contribution was not only to the nation and his family members and friends but all Ugandans celebrate his life and uphold his great legacy. I pray that the God Almighty gives the family the fortitude to bear this loss.  May the Almighty rest his soul in eternal peace. 
Rebecca A. Kadaga 
MP/ Speaker of Parliament.”

I have a message from the Office of the Government Chief Whip addressed to the Speaker as a tribute in honour of the hon. Kategaya signed by the hon. Justine Kasule Lumumba MP, Government Chief Whip and Chairperson NRM Parliamentary Caucus.

I have a condolence message addressed to the Speaker signed by Nelson Ocheger, Deputy Head of Missions, Moscow.

I have a condolence message addressed to the Rt hon. Speaker of Parliament from the Acholi Parliamentary Group signed by the Chairperson, the hon. Okumu Reagan, MP Aswa County and they have made some contribution to the family towards funeral expenses.


I have another message addressed to the Speaker of Parliament; it is from the Speaker of EALA. I will be sending these to the family.

I have another message addressed to the Speaker of Parliament from Commissioner, Acting Chairperson Uganda Human Rights Commission signed by Dr Katebarirwe Amooti W.I.

I have a message addressed to the President from the East African Community Secretariat and signed by Dr Richard Ssezibera, Ambassador and Secretary-General.

There are messages to the family; one signed by hon. Lydia Wanyoto Mutende, another one signed by the hon. Byenkya Beatrice Nyakaisiki and another message from the hon. Bernard Mulengani on behalf of the EALA Members, Uganda Chapter. I have another one from the Minister of State for Bunyoro Affairs, signed by hon. Ernest Kiiza and yet another from the Chairman, Bunyoro Parliamentary Caucus. Those are the messages that I have received and that brings me to the end of the communication from the chair.

(Entrance of the late Rt Hon. Brig. Eriya Kategaya)

Nation Anthem (One Verse)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE RT HON. ERIYA KATEGAYA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think this will be the appropriate time to admit the Rt hon. Margaret Nantongo Zziwa into the Bar of this Parliament. May I ask those Members who are sitting in the area that will now constitute the bar to move, otherwise they will not be sitting in Parliament? 

Honourable members, it is free sitting so you can get out of there before we close the Bar. Just hold on; there are Members sitting there. There is enough space - it is free sitting otherwise you will lose your status of a Member and become a stranger. Please allow the Rt hon. Zziwa in. Yes, Rt hon. Prime Minister; motion. 

(Hon. Margaret Zziwa accesses the Bar.)

2.43
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I rise to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Rt hon. Eriya Kategaya. The motion reads:

“WHEREAS Parliament has with regret and great sorrow learnt of the death of the Rt hon. Eriya Tukahirwa Kategaya, which occurred on 2 March 2013 at Nairobi Hospital in Kenya and; 

WHEREAS the late Eriya Tukahirwa Kategaya was born on 4 July 1945 to the late Mzee Yosiya Kategaya and the late Erina Mpumbya Kategaya in Itojo Village, Ruhama County in Ntungamo District and attained his education at Kyamate Primary School, Ntare School and later the University of Dar-es-Salaam during which time he joined politics;

AWARE THAT the late Eriya Tukahirwa Kategaya joined the struggle against Idi Amin before playing an integral part and role in the National Resistance Council of the National Resistance Movement as the Chairman of the Political and Diplomatic Committee and later served the nation as First Deputy Prime Minister, State Minister in the Office of the Prime Minister, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Minister of Internal Affairs, National Political Commissar and Minister of East African Community Affairs; 

NOTING THAT the late Eriya Tukahirwa Kategaya was in 1994 elected as a Constituent Assembly Delegate where he represented, with distinction, the people of Rwampara County of Ntungamo District, formerly Mbarara District, in the Constituent Assembly leading to the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and remained an active politician until 2005 when he chose to leave elective politics;

RECOGNISING THAT the late Eriya Tukahirwa Kategaya was a committed and principled patriot who was concerned about the welfare of ordinary Ugandans and who played a very pivotal role in the re-establishment of the East African Community;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, duly convened and sitting in Kampala on this 5 day of March 2013, as follows:

    1. That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, the Government of the Republic of Uganda, Members of the National Resistance Movement, and to all Ugandans upon the demise of a distinguished son of Uganda.
    2. That it takes cognisance of the distinguished service the late Eriya Tukahirwa Kategaya rendered and the contributions he made to the country in different capacities.”   I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi and hon. Sam Otada. Please speak to your motion.

MR MBABAZI: Mr Speaker and honourable members, the late Eriya Tukahirwa Kategaya was born to Yosiya Kategaya and Erina Mpumbya Kategaya on 4 July 1945 in Kyamate, Ntungamo District. Like all of us will agree, Eriya Kategaya’s personality was formed by the experiences he had in his formative years in the early 1950s in the then Ankole kingdom both at home and at school. 

Eriya Kategaya’s home environment was at a time when Ankole was moving from the traditional religious practices to Christianity. Eriya Kategaya’s grandparents were some of the first families in Ankole to convert to Christianity possibly because Reverend Aaron Muhinda, the first Anglican priest in Ankole, was a neighbour and father in law. Eriya Kategaya’s mother was from the Muhinda homestead.

Eriya Kategaya was able to go to school at an earlier age than most of his peers at the time because of his uncle Mr Rwabihegye. Mr Rwabihegye was a primary school teacher and therefore Eriya Kategaya was able to go to school from his uncle’s school house at Rubaare Primary School. 

From Rubaare Primary School, he went to Kyamate Primary School for his primary five and six where he met Martin Mwesiga who was the son of John Mark Mutembeya, the Sub-County Chief of Ntungamo and Yoweri Museveni, among others. 

After their primary six leaving exams, the trio went to Mbarara High School for their junior secondary school before proceeding to Ntare School in 1961 for their senior secondary school.

The discipline that Eriya Kategaya espoused and expected in his official interactions like strict timekeeping, cleanliness and respect for authority and order were a result of this upbringing. 

Ntare School was one of the government schools set up by the Governor, Andrew Cohen, as a non-denomination school as opposed to the missionary schools which of course were denominational. The school had an egalitarian and liberal foundation; politically, culturally and socially from the start. Eriya Kategaya’s contempt of sectarianism is a result of that foundation. That school foundation inculcated in Eriya Kategaya that ability to listen and tolerate those who had views contrary to his. 

Ntare School was also founded at the time of upheavals in Africa as troubles for Independence gathered pace. Whereas Ugandan’s struggle was relatively peaceful, that was not the case in the neighbouring countries of Rwanda, Congo, South Sudan and Kenya. Because of the geographical and cultural proximity to Rwanda, the upheavals and influx of refugees from Rwanda had a telling effect on Eriya Kategaya as many Rwandese refugee students inevitably came to study at Ntare School. 

The then Headmaster of Ntare School, Mr William Chryton, had also just been transferred from heading a school in Juba, South Sudan where there were also social upheavals as a result of sectarianism. William Chryton had a soft spot for South Sudanese refugees and their struggle. There was therefore a historical and emotional bond with the plight of refugees from Rwanda and South Sudan planted early. 

From Kyamate Primary School, Museveni, Mwesiga and Kategaya remained schoolmates all the way to Dar-es-Salaam University and remained close colleagues. At Ntare School, Martin Mwesiga became the Head Prefect and Kategaya the Deputy Head Prefect. It was in this period that trio with other comrades got inducted into politics influenced by the above mentioned and other political events and the current affairs of the time. 

In Dar-es-Salaam, the extensive study of revolutionary changes in the world and their close association with the liberation movement leaders constituted their formative goals and development in their political thinking and subsequently their political action that led to the liberation struggles in Uganda. So Eriya Kategaya will be dearly remembered for his political struggles that ultimately liberated Uganda and ushered into power the National Resistance Movement Government. 

When Idi Amini took power in 1971 by military coup, a liberation movement called the Front for National Liberation, FRONASA was formed. Its leader was Yoweri Museveni. Yoweri Museveni was based in Tanzania. Eriya Kategaya became the first leader of the FRONASA group that was operating internally within Uganda. After the failure of the 1972 invention against Idi Amini from Tanzania, Eriya Kategaya left Uganda and after the 1973 public executions by Idi Amin, he went and lived in Tanzania where he stayed until the Government of President Idi Amini was finally toppled in 1979. 

He was very active in exile politics in 1979, in Zambia and beyond. After Amin fell, Eriya Kategaya became the Minister of Commerce under the Uganda National Liberation Front Government led by President Yusuf Lule. He was a founder member of Uganda Patriotic Movement headed by Yoweri Kaguta Museveni to contest for the 1980 elections. 

As you all know, the 1980 elections did not live to the expectations of many people, therefore, the Obote Government II came to power through largely a fraud process. This led to the decision to wage a protracted people’s armed struggle under the People’s Resistance Army, led by Yoweri Museveni to liberate Uganda and usher in democratic governance and social economic transformation of our people. 

Later on, when the People’s Revolutionary Army and the Uganda Freedom Front led by the Late Prof. Yusuf Lule united, we formed the National Resistance Movement/National Resistance Army. Prof. Lule became the National Chairman, Yoweri Museveni the National Vice Chairman and Chairman of the Military High Command, NRA and Moses Kigongo became the National Vice Chairman. Kategaya was a member of the National Resistance Council and the Chairman of the Political and Diplomatic Committee of the NRC as well as a member of the NRA High Command. 

He initially carried out clandestine tasks in Kampala, assigned to him by the chairman of the high command, before he went to the bush for a short time. He was then assigned duties outside Uganda which he performed until the total liberation of the country. 

Since the NRM took power in 1986, Eriya Kategaya has served the nation in different capacities and positions. He worked as Minister of State in the Prime Minister’s Office, when the late Dr Samson Kiseka was the Prime Minister. Then he was appointed the National Political Commissar. He was later appointed First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs and he was shuffled to be Minister of Internal Affairs. 

After a short break, he was appointed again as the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for East African Community Affairs, a post he held until his demise. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we all appreciate that as Minister of East African Community Affairs, the late Kategaya has been a key actor in fast-tracking the integration of the East African Community. I think he has been the Chairman of the East African Community Council of Ministers. His resolve and passion for accomplishing the East African Regional Federation will at this critical stage be missed. 

Having been a firm believer in the democratisation process, the late Kategaya played an important role in the Constitution making process. In 1994, he was elected Constituent Assembly Delegate representing Rwampara County, Mbarara District then. He was later to serve the people of Rwampara County as a Member of Parliament from 1996 until 2005 when he voluntarily retired from representing the area and from elective politics. 

The late Kategaya cut a figure of a person who believed in service above self and for that reason, he has been able to remain clear of any activities that would compromise his personal integrity. His gentle and non-confrontational approach to politics had endeared him to many actors across the political divide. His loyalty to his personal friends, regardless of the political, social and other differences was immense. He still treated cows that were given to his father’s fellow peasants as a debt he was obliged to return. His personal friends varied from the peasants his father had introduced to him while he was a young boy to those he met in school wherever they were to his colleagues in Cabinet and at Kampala Club.

The late Kategaya pursued so many development oriented projects for the people of Rwampara County both as Member of Parliament and as minister. He will be remembered for having lobbied for the extension of electricity to his area and helping many children to attain education especially those who came from poor families.

The late will also be remembered for promoting sports among youth in Rwampara for it was his tenure as Member of Parliament that Rwampara Football Club played in the national league.

Mr Speaker, when I asked the doctors what caused his death, I was informed that the postmortem which had been carried out found a clot in his lungs. The clot was covering both the left and right blood vessels, blocking them. And doing so, the brain and the rest of the body was denied oxygen. That was the cause of his death.

The late has left behind a very rich legacy, which will continue to be an inspiration to young politicians and others. His death is a massive loss to this country and has robbed Uganda of a great leader. May the Lord grant his soul eternal rest and sustain his bereaved family. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, Leader of Opposition.

3.02
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I stand to second the motion moved by the Rt Prime Minister for a Resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Rt hon. Eriya Tukahirwa Kategaya.

On behalf of the Opposition, I extend condolences to the widow, the family of the late, the Government of Uganda and all democratic forces in Uganda.

Mr Speaker, I would like to say that the late Rt hon. Eriya Kategaya greatly contributed to the development of this country; he will be remembered for his good works.

I recall when I first came to Parliament in 2001, he played a very big role in revamping multi-party politics in Uganda. He was one of those Members who objected to the removal of term limits while they were at Kyankwanzi. It was him, hon. Miria Metembe and hon. Bidandi Ssali who objected to the removal of term limits and indeed when they returned here, they were sacked from their ministerial positions. He, however, was never bothered and he continued with normal life. 

The late participated so much in PAFO. This was Parliamentary Advocacy Forum that led to the revamping of multi-party politics and opening up of the political space. I recall when we had just formed the Forum for Democratic Change, he one time gave a Keynote Address at Hotel Africana. In his address, he said that there was one professor of history who had not learnt from history. He said it was Prof. Ssemakula Kiwanuka.

The death of the late would be a wake-up call for all of us or some of us who think we are not interminable. The time for us to phase off will at one time come when we shall be called by our Lord. But sometimes some people decide to phase themselves off honourably before they die just like the Pope did.

The Rt hon. Prime Minister has elaborated on the life and contributions of the late. But as I second this motion, I urge you to share with me only three points. One is about hospitals in Uganda. You all know that the late died in Nairobi and not in Mulago Hospital. But when shall we ever be proud of our mother country with other countries also referring their patients to hospitals in Uganda?

At this rate, Mr Speaker, I think soon we will refer patients suffering from cough to America for treatment. As I talk, there are so many patients lying in Mulago and other hospitals in this country, especially suffering from heart diseases, cancer and so on, who have been referred to hospitals abroad but cannot afford the bills; they are just waiting for death.

Every other day, there is always a name of a patient being published in the newspaper lobbying for help to go out of the country for an operation – children, mothers, fathers, sisters and brothers. But what don’t we have? Is it that our doctors and nurses are the most underpaid? Is it because the hospitals themselves are on drip? Yet a small group of Ugandans continues to steal our resources but are let off the hook by the powers that be.

The brain drain that this country suffers especially in the medical field is appalling. For example, if the money that is being stolen such as that which Mr Basajjabalaba took with the help of Government; that which was wasted in the ID Project; that in the Bicycle Project; that in the Office of the Prime Minister; and that in the Pension Scheme, had been used very well to pay our hospital staff and equip them, we would be better off.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I hear that the economy is growing but can a quick populace ever improve on the economy. All those are lessons for us to learn.

The second one is about the late’s saying that a man can only change in bed and not his word. He may have contradicted himself by saying that to please his master, but why did he remain less privileged than his childhood friends yet he has been one of the insiders? It is because he remained sober-minded.

My third point is about being satisfied with what we have. The late was satisfied with what he had. That is why he never broke any norms, for example, by stealing anything in this country. I think that is why he objected to wreaths being laid on his casket.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I want to state the fact that the late Eriya Kategaya was one of the peace-loving men we have had. He was the second National Political Commissar, the first one being Dr Kizza Besigye, who as we talk is in police custody for having boarded a taxi to go to court. That shows what kind of country we are living in.

His personal car was smashed by police with his driver being taken to court and remanded although I have been told the file is still with the police. It is because he has no car that he used a taxi. Unfortunately, he was arrested and is now in police custody. That is why most of the Opposition MPs are absent from the House.

Dr Kizza Besigye is one of the NRM bush war members. He fought for peace for this country. Unfortunately, he is one of those suffering. In that regard, allow me inform our colleagues that yes, you may be liked now because you are serving the master, but tomorrow when you fall out with that master, you will be hit.

Honourable members, the country has lost many statesmen – Mr Speaker, you mentioned the death of the former Prime Minister in the Tooro kingdom, who was a DP MP from 1980 to 1986, an NRC member for Bunyangabo in Kabarole and a Deputy Minister for Animal Industry, the hon. William Rukuba Nyakatura. I would imagine that the late William Rukuba should have also been accorded a state burial.

Finally, the Bible says that when you have what to eat and what to drink, it should be enough because our home is in heaven and not on earth. All the wealth that some of us have amassed through corruption, cheating, oppressing the poor and killing innocent people will be left behind when we finally die. The bad news is that the Judge we shall face is an incorruptible Judge and He will judge us accordingly. 

I want to re-echo that the only sure plot of land you have when you die is six feet by three feet. Why harass and steal land from the poor when you are only going to use six feet and three feet? Why don’t you be contented with what you have?

Hon. Kategeya, we shall miss you because you are one of those who loved everybody - even those from the Opposition. We shall miss you. I hope others can play the same - farewell hon. Kategeya. May the incorruptible Judge have mercy on you and grant your soul eternal peace.

3.12
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryadongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to start by thanking the Rt hon. Prime Minister for moving the motion, and my brother the Leader of the Opposition for ably seconding the motion. I also rise in the same spirit to second the motion.

I wish to extend our heartfelt condolences on behalf of the Independent Members of Parliament to the family of the bereaved, to His Excellency, the President, to the House and honourable members, to the country and to the East African Community and Africa upon the loss of a gallant son, a patriot, a clean politician who many have tried hard to find words to describe him. One of the words that I landed on was referring to him as Mr Modest - a total man in my view because he left behind a legacy and above all things, he left his memoires. He wrote a book which we shall partake of as he has departed.

Listening to his profile read out by the Prime Minister, you do not want to add anything else, but Mr Speaker, suffice it to add, that profiling the Rt hon. Eriya Kategaya posthumously is very difficult because to me he was an embodiment of the NRM ideology. The NRM of course has its principles written down but he was a living human being exuding the principles for which the NRM was founded.

Incorruptible: You would only hear his name while he was undertaking the work or assignments on behalf of this country; you would not hear his name in controversial things. He would disagree with you but with respect, again underpinning the point that however much you disagree, it is no justification for us to fight one another.

He was a fan of constitutionalism - being a lawyer- again an ideal of the NRM. He stood by his principles. I want to thank him because like the Leader of the Opposition said, I also happened to join him in the Seventh Parliament in 2001 and I found him a mentor. He was actually one of those I would look up to in terms of playing in these political waters. 

I would like to thank the Rt hon. Kategaya posthumously at least for daring to say “No” on a very controversial matter of the third term. As you know, it was not easy to say “No” and it was also not easy to dare the people who wanted the “Yes” answer. 

I know many people have spoken about the so-called U-turn. I think we miss the point if we do not analyse the so-called U-turn carefully. Personally, I did not support the lifting of the term limits in the caucus but when it came to this House, as democracy demanded, I came and said, “Yes”. When the majority at the end of the day had had their day, I think Rt. hon. Eriya Kategaya said, “Who am I? The people have said, ‘Yes’. They have chosen their President and I am not coming to serve the President; I am coming to serve the country.” So, he did what somebody who might not think about it very carefully would describe as making a U-turn. But again I think he exhibited an act of maturity and democracy at its best. 

The Rt hon. Eriya Kategaya reconsidered his position by re-joining his childhood friend but I think you will all bear me witness that he was never a fanatic or a sycophant on return because some people, when they bounce back from some political back doors, they come back and you can think that they were not the very ones that you knew before. He was not a sycophant and I believe he stood by his principles because he never retracted the things that he said in his memoirs.

I think the Rt hon. Eriya Kategaya acted in good faith when he opposed the lifting of term limits. In fact, since the term limits were lifted, we have been moving on the political path -but I think over the years this country has found itself in very challenging times politically with its image locally and internationally being undermined because of pushing on too hard.

Therefore, I would like to say here, without any fear of contradiction, that when an important person such as the Rt. hon. Eriya Kategaya passes on, people always come with all sorts of suggestions: Let us name a road after him; let us do this; let us erect a monument in his honour. I believe that if President Museveni truly wants to honour his childhood friend, he should honour him by not seeking another term after 2016. (Applause)  

Why am I saying that, Mr Speaker? It is because in this world, there will always be unfinished business. I want to salute the hon. Eriya Kategaya for his clear mind about understanding, first of all, the issues of integration both at the regional level and at a continental level, which definitely resonates into the so-called global village that we all aspire to live in. He was a fine mind in as far as dealing with issues of integration is concerned and I want to salute him for that.

For all of us who know the Rt hon. Kategaya, we will agree that he was against the principle of speaking a forest of words with a desert of points. And, therefore, I would like to conclude by attempting to describe him as a smooth gentleman, modest, hence the other name, Mr Modest - which somebody described him with and I liked - soft spoken, an intellectual who was compassionate. He was a statesman. 

I would like to pray that this House rise in unison to support the motion. Fare thee well, Rt hon. Kategaya and may the Almighty God sustain the bereaved. I second the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you very much, the Mover and the two seconders of the motion. Honourable members, the motion is that Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, the Government of the Republic of Uganda, Members of the National Resistance Movement and all Ugandans upon the demise of a distinguished son of Uganda.

Secondly that Parliament takes cognisance of the distinguished service the late Kategaya rendered and the contribution he made to this country in different capacities. That is the motion for our debate. 

Debate is open but before we open that debate, let me recognise some of the distinguished personalities who are in the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery. Those who I can recognise without any particular order are hon. Sarah Kiyingi Kyaama, hon. Grace Tubwita, hon. Betty Odongo Pacuto, hon. Robert Kitariko, hon. Kirunda Kivejinja, hon. John Ntimba, Princess Elizabeth Bagaya, hon. Nuwe Amanya Mushega, hon. John Baptist Kawanga, hon. Anthony Butele, hon. Charles Olweny, hon. Daniel Omara Atubo, hon. Prof. Semakula Kiwanuka - (Laughter)- hon. Raphael Baku, hon. Wandera Ogalo, hon. Beatrice Nyakaisiki, hon. Henry Kyemba, hon. Gerald Menhya, hon. John Livingstone Okello-Okello, hon. Mubanda, hon. Mudoola, hon. Bitamazire -(Applause)- hon. Victoria Ssekitoleko – I could not recognise her from that far. 

Honourable members, I will now use this moment to allow the Rt. hon. Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly to address the House and the time now comes down to five minutes per contribution. Right honourable, you are welcome.

3.23
THE SPEAKER OF THE EAST AFRICAN LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY (Ms Margaret Zziwa): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to appreciate this very important moment for the honour you have accorded us - my colleagues, the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly and myself - by amending the rules of the House and allowing us to join you and the honourable Members of the Parliament of Uganda to mourn our friend and colleague, Rt. hon. Deputy Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda, hon. Eriya Kategaya.

It is with great sadness that we mourn the passing on of Rt. hon. Eriya Kategaya, the First Deputy Prime Minister of Uganda, the Minister for East African Community Affairs of Uganda and the Chairperson, Council of Ministers of East Africa and indeed a Member of East African Legislative Assembly in an ex-officio capacity, which occurred at Nairobi Hospital on Saturday, 2 March 2013.

Rt. hon. Kategaya is a statesman and a patriot who has served his country and East Africa with dedication and commitment. He has served in various portfolios as a National Political Commissar, as a Member of Parliament, as a Minister, and now as First Deputy Prime Minister of Uganda, and in all these capacities and positions, he has offered political guidance and direction. 

Rt. hon. Kategaya is an exemplary freedom fighter and a compatriot yet he served with utmost humility and his immeasurable service to Uganda can be summed up in Albert Camus description which says, “Politics, and the fate of mankind are shaped by men without ideals and without greatness.”  

Hon. Kategaya has up to the time of his death, been the Chairperson of the Council of Ministers of East Africa, which position he has held several times. He has been a talented Minister who served with boundless dedication and commitment. He was at the realm of the re-establishment of EAC in 1999 and he has gone to every level to advocate and convince the East Africans to embrace the East African Community integration. He has lived to the ideals and objectives of East African Community, namely, peace, stability, good governance, democracy, rule of law and economic development. These are well articulated in Article 5 of the East African Treaty.  

He has steered the East African Community through implementing the EAC Integration Agenda, right from the stage of the Customs Union, to the Common Market, and indeed he has set the pace for the Monetary Union phase. He has steered the East African Community through implementing this agenda and we acknowledge that he has been the longest serving minister on matters of the East African Community making him a walking encyclopedia on matters of East Africa. We attribute the milestones so far registered in EAC integration to his selfless service.
     
By character, he has been a calm person, very focused and not an alarmist. He approached each situation as a statesman, as an East African and full of wisdom. As you are aware, the East African Community Treaty and all its Protocols have been reached through negotiations. He always invoked his legal skills during negotiations and he always toed a win-win situation line. Such qualities made Rt. hon. Kategaya a key actor in the fast-tracking of the integration of East Africa. 

Indeed Mahatma Gandhi’s saying was true to Rt. hon Kategaya that, “A man of character will make himself worthy of any position he is given.” 

As a legislator, he has been very knowledgeable and factual in his debate and always offered precision and clear explanations even where the debate tended to be very controversial. We in EALA still recall his defense of Uganda’s actions during the post-election period in Kenya in 2007 when Uganda’s only route to Mombasa was blocked by election violence. He stood firm and candid and was able to explain Uganda’s action in that direction. We can also recall him very vividly during the Mijingo debate. This tells you that he always stood for the truth and was forthright.

Rt. hon. Kategaya indeed was a great visionary in East Africa; he always reminded us of our commonness. I can quote his stand during the EU-ACP Economic Partnership Agreement negotiations where he insisted and upheld that the East African Community should negotiate as a block in order to derive better terms of trade. He was totally against the dividing among the EAC partner states categorising them as say Kenya as a developed country and the rest of the partner states as developing countries. This position would negate the strength of the East African Community. He always used the phraseology that, “We are all dwarfs and the bickering about who is taller will not help us in any way since we are all dwarfs.”  

He not only stood firm to defend Uganda, but the whole of East Africa. East Africa shall indeed miss his noble service. I can also borrow the words of President Theodore Roosevelt, the former President of the United States of America who said, “A sound body is a first class thing; a sound mind is an even better thing; but the thing that counts most in an individual as in a nation, is character. The sum of all these qualities will make a man a good man.”  Definitely, hon. Kategaya was a man of character. 

As we bid farewell to the Rt. hon. Kategaya, our thoughts got to the Chairman of the East African Community Summit and the President of the Republic of Uganda, His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and the members of the East African Community Summit. To all his compatriots, his colleagues, ministers and you, Mr Speaker, and members of Parliament of Uganda; also to the people of Rwampara and Mbarara in general, which region he represented in Parliament for a long time, we extend our deepest sympathies. 

To his family, his children, his dear sister and all the relatives and friends, we acknowledge that the impact this loss has put on you is permanent but we pray for God’s supplication and sustenance in this moment and in the times to follow. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Fare thee well, Rt. hon. Kategaya. May you be granted the honour of righteous people.

Mr Speaker, EALA and the East African Community fraternity is very grateful to this opportunity and we shall have an opportunity to hold a session in honour of this gallant son of East Africa and Africa at large. May his soul rest in eternal peace. I beg to support the motion. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt. hon. Zziwa. The debate is open. Honourable members, if we are to share the limited time that we have - I had said five minutes - we will go down to three minutes. I think it will be better. I will start with the Minister of State for East African Community Affairs, hon. Frank Tumwebaze, shadow Attorney-General, shadow Minister of Foreign Affairs. Let us start like that. Three minutes.
 
3.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (Mr Shem Bagaine): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Fellow Members, it is with great sadness that I stand here to talk about and mourn the passing on of one of the great pillars of this nation and who has been my minister in the Ministry of East African Community Affairs and a long time personal and family friend. 

The late Rt hon. Eriya Kategaya has left behind a rock and colourful track record of service spanning over 40 years. After the 1980 elections, he was one of the gallant sons of Uganda who lost the liberation war during which he came to Nairobi to carry on his duties as a diplomat and political leader and was a link between the external wing, where I served as treasurer, and the bush fighters. 

Mr Speaker, Eriya Kategaya’s involvement in Government has been very well articulated by the Prime Minster and so, I will not repeat this. Let me confine my remarks to his achievements as Minister of East African Community Affairs. Hon. Eriya Kategaya actively participated in the revival of the East African Community and signing of the Treaty for the establishment of the East African Community in 1999. He was very instrumental in the negotiations of the Protocol on the Establishment of the East African Community Customs Union and the Common Market. During his tenure as a Chairman of the East African Community Council of Ministers, he demonstrated clear leadership with distinction. He is fondly remembered for his articulation of issues, soberness and passionate manner in which he handled issues of integration.

Because of his long involvement in the East African Community integration, he was always consulted by all other council members to tap into his institutional memory and was always available to provide the requisite advice. 

He successfully oversaw the ministry revolve from a department under the Office of the Prime Minister to a full-fledged Ministry of East African Community Affairs. He worked with the Parliament of Uganda to make sure that a sectoral committee for the East African Community Affairs was established. He was the current Chair of the East African Community Council of Ministers and it is unfortunate that he has passed on when his leadership was critically still needed. 

When I was appointed Minister of State in the Ministry of East African Community Affairs and sworn in at the end of October 2012, the late Eriya Kategaya and I had worked out a modus operandi of how we would share responsibilities in the ministry and move forward on strengthening the integration of East Africa with a view to finally achieving political federation. Unfortunately, he has passed on before its realisation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am getting signals from members that you are making too much constant reference to your notes. (Laughter) – it is time. 

3.38
THE MINISTER OF THE PRESIDENCY (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Mr Speaker and honourable members, allow me also to pay and pass on my condolences to the family, to the Government of Uganda and to the Parliament. We got information that the late honourable First Deputy Prime Minister died at a time when those who were attending to him expected him to be discharged from hospital. I think that was very disappointing to those who had hope of walking back with him smiling. So, that is why we share with the family that deep loss and pray for them to recover. 

I have about three quick points to talk about on the late Kategaya. I may not be so competent to talk about his legacy. There are more senior colleagues who know him better but these three points stand out. One is simplicity and political tolerance. A few speakers who talked about it of course brought in commentary to suit other interests but the lessons to learn from the late hon. Deputy Prime Minister are for all of us, especially as political actors of today. I remember when we had the famous hot oil debate here. He stood up from his seat and tried to appeal for calm. He was extremely disappointed at how the debate had collapsed and the rules of the game were not being adhered to. I think if we are to celebrate his legacy, let us learn some of those great virtues he was pushing for like tolerance even when we disagree with one another. Even when our views are at variance at any time, let us learn to listen to one another, especially in this Legislature where we should debate, disagree and agree.

Those who selfishly portrayed the so called U-turn were extremely intolerant people because the message we can learn from that is that even when I disagree with you on a political matter, it does not mean we are parting ways. That is why even when the Rt hon. First Deputy Prime Minister did not support the lifting of term limits, he did not declare his exit from the Movement. He remained and it is those who are insinuating otherwise –(Interjections)- it is on record so those who try - (Member timed out.)

3.41
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Rt hon. Prime Minister, together with the seconders of the motion, for their motion.

The greatest test of courage and humility is to have power and money without losing yourself. Anybody who knows the Rt hon. Deputy Prime Minister would tell you that he was a man of humility. We never heard him say, “We in Government, we fought, we have power.” He never said it. You see people who have even rudimentary power shouting at the top of their voices how they have power.

The gentleman lying in the coffin there is such a gentleman that this country will take a long time to have another like him. Let me give you a personal experience around 2002-2003, when hon. Adolf Mwesige, now the Minister of Local Government, was our Chairman of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs - where you were a member, Mr Speaker - we had a very controversial Bill; the Anti-Terrorism law and we were braced for a big fight.




Rt hon. Kategaya walked to that committee alone although he was a minister with power and said, “What are your concerns? On that one I concede, on that one we can make it better.” Within 30 minutes, we were done with one of the most controversial laws. I remember all the cameras were there and all the journalists were waiting to have this hot session. It was never one, thanks to the Rt hon. Kategaya.

He has friends across the political divide; genuine friends and I am still looking at his empty chair at Kampala Club where he invited everybody for a chat. The chair is now empty. Hon. Nasasira, the chair is empty and I am sure the gentlemen who have been sitting with the Rt hon. Kategaya will miss him. 

He espoused one thing; that we can be opponents and not enemies. He tried to engage everybody into a debate and he would compromise. I see politicians these days that imagine we have come here to fight saying, “We shall vote against them, we have the numbers.” He never talked about having the numbers like some of our colleagues do. He was – (Member timed out.)

3.45
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale)): Thank, you very much, Mr Speaker. I take the Floor on behalf of the people of Mbale and my family to convey our sincere condolences to the family, friends, relatives and the entire country for the loss of a great man.

I had an opportunity to work with hon. Kategaya in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and I learnt a lot from him because he was a great listener. He is a man who used to report to the office at 9 O’clock in the morning and he would leave at 5 O’clock. He never got out of the office to chase lines and deals and that is perhaps why he died in a place where there was no address; not in Kololo, Nakasero or even in Mbuya. The man was committed to his job. 

I remember working very closely with him when the government was coming up to close missions and I was heading the Asian department. I defended three missions and hon. Kategaya listened. I told him we cannot close our mission in India because of old historical touches; that we could not close our mission in China because China was a member of the Security Council; that we could not close our mission in Japan and hon. Kategaya listened. He gave a listening ear to his officers and he took the issues seriously. 

He was a principled man and never brought in people like what is happening today - if he did, his sister Gwen should have been an ambassador but he was a principled man. He is a man who spoke the truth and you know where the truth landed him? In the cold and that possibly could have contributed to his -

Hon. Kategaya believed in the truth. He is not like some of the ministers today who come on the Floor of Parliament and say “No, there is no asbestos in the Ministry of Works.” He spoke the truth and accepted it. He never minded whether you were on the government side or not. Kategaya gave a listening ear and he is going to be missed internationally. 

You have heard what he has done in the East African Community, at the AU and the United Nations. He had made so many friends at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and many are going to miss hon. Kategaya. At Kampala Club, the gang of four - I will not talk about the living ones but Kategaya was a very polite and simple man who would listen to anybody. How many people today on that side can emulate the example of hon. Kategaya? (Member timed out.)


3.50
MRS JANET MUSEVENI (NRM, Ruhaama County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to join my colleagues to pay tribute to hon. Kategaya and to recognise his personal contribution to the freedom struggle of our homeland. Hon. Kategaya’s family has been our close family friends for as long as I can remember. I have known him as a patriot, selfless, a gentleman and an honourable man in the real sense of the word. He was a quiet person and many times his humility would force him to do the listening instead of the talking. But when he committed himself to doing anything, he would be sure to see it through. 

He served his country with determination, with wisdom and excellence for many years. So it is a tragedy that he has departed so prematurely. 

Today, we mourn hon. Kategaya because Uganda has lost a statesman. Ruhaama and Ntungamo mourn their son and one of the pioneers and torch bearers in our national freedom struggle. On a personal level, we have lost a valuable friend and a brother. May hon. Kategaya’s soul rest in eternal peace? Thank you.

3.52
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I convey my deepest felt condolences to the family of the late Eriya Kategaya, to the First Family, the historical members of NRM and the entire country. 

Mr Speaker and colleagues, I think the biggest question to ask as we bid farewell to our comrade is, how do we carry on with the leadership of the country? What lessons do we draw from Eriya; how did Eriya conduct himself and how did he conduct matters of the State? 

I will give two examples that I learnt and that I think we all need to pick from the late Eriya. Eriya knew how to handle the issue of seniority, duty and chain of command. Historically speaking and in revolutionary terms, Eriya was very senior and many colleagues have said that. But whenever he served in Government, he never undermined anyone. He respected chain of command; he never disobeyed lawful orders. He nevertheless, at an appropriate time and in appropriate forum gave guidance and advice. 

It is in that context, as I have said, that our senior departed leader was able to serve with diligence under people who had been appointed to positions senior to him. Historically speaking, he served with diligence under the former Vice-President, Dr Kazibwe; he served with diligence and with dedication under the late Prime Minister Adyebo and other leaders that were put in senior positions to him. He would call them “Sir” or “Madam”. But when duty called, and advice was called for, provided he was in the right forum, Eriya gave the right advice. 

I think that is something that all of us, from both sides of the House, front and back benches, need to learn as we bid farewell to our leader. 

The second example I would like to allude to is the question of honesty to the country. I have read the papers, leaders young and old, and people in the villages have all testified that Kategaya was an honest man – (Member timed out.)

3.56
MR KRISPUS AYENA (UPC, Oyam County North, Oyam): Mr Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to thank you very immensely for allowing me to add my voice to the eulogy of a great son of Uganda. The other day, I was met walking up the stairs to Parliament and I was asked whether I knew something about Eriya Kategaya. I told them, I may not know all but I know something. They asked me, “Can you tell us what you know”. I described Eriya Kategaya as an officer and a gentleman. 

I first met Eriya Kategaya in 1979 when I was a student leader at Makerere University. I have met so many people in this country and in particular in this Parliament but a few measure up to the level of integrity that Eriya Katagaya had. As a professional colleague, a lawyer, Eriya Katagaya was honourable in outlook. And those of us who understand great statesmen and wished to emulate them looked no farther than Eriya Katagaya. 

I know that the hearts of Ugandans are out to the family of Eriya Katagaya and in particular his childhood friend, the President of this country, who must be missing him greatly. 

People have already made comments about his conduct of public affairs. We all owe it to this country that when we participate in politics, we do not participate as enemies though we may hold different views. The sum total of our effort should add up to making Uganda a better place. 

I have seen Eriya Katagaya at his best during the NCC, during the debate on controversial issues in this House and during times when people on the Opposite side who would have different views and would like to contribute to a better Uganda – (Interjections) – Shakespeare once said, that the good that a man does is often interned with his bones but the bad things he does live long after him. But I think in the case of a man like Eriya Katagaya lying down there, he has defied that saying. I think the good that the late Rt hon. Eriya Kategaya has done will remain forever a touch or light of great significance to show the people of Uganda; to show our posterity; and the way forward to make Uganda a better place. This – (Member timed out.)

4.00
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I bring condolences on behalf of the Conservative Party and the people of Rubaga South Constituency to the Government of Uganda, H. E, the President, Parliament and Government in general.

The general message I would like to pass on to the President is that, ordinarily, during our traditional days when a person loses a person of the magnitude of the late Rt hon. Eriya Kategaya, that is considered a huge loss. The general rule is that you who is in the chair makes a sacrifice by abandoning future plans of coming back to stand as President come 2016. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, by character sketch of the man I dearly respected and loved, the late Eriya Kategaya was a reasonable person who always acted reasonably. That is why he did not have any phobia for the Opposition. I recall a moment when I suddenly won a high profile case against the IGG in the Supreme Court, he telephoned to congratulate me. I would like to pay tribute to him because of that memorable message I got from him.

Socrates once said that all that live must die passing through nature to eternity. The challenge is to live over life so that we can be prepared for death when it comes. The late lived his life; he lived his words; and he lived his activities. I wish he comes back although I don’t have the powers to bring him back. Anyway, all I can tell the family is that your great relative died a humane person; a man of respect; a man of conviction; a man of passion and a man who wheeled a will. (Applause)

Before I end, I would like to say that the late feared to do wrong. No person can claim to be good if that person does not fear to do wrong things. That is why he always referred to the Ten Point Programme, the Constitution and to the presidential term limits. And like I said, he never hated the Opposition like some of you. (Laughter) Why do you hate us? Why don’t we work together so that we can reform society for a better future? 

Anyway, I would like to end my contribution by paying tribute to the late Rt hon. Eriya Kategaya who was a man of love. He was a man – (Member timed out.)

4.04
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me, on behalf of the people of Kasilo County, to send a condolence message to the family.

Last week I received a message from the late Rt hon. Eriya Kategaya, saying he would be back home in two weeks’ time because he was still being monitored in Nairobi. But I was shocked on Saturday to learn of his demise. He used to call me his namesake; I knew him as my namesake.

Very few people knew the late lying here today as a Brigadier. Actually some people asked me today when he got that rank. But I think it is because he wasn’t such a pompous person. Today, we see some civilians with a convoy of military men escorting them. But here is a brigadier who was a very humble man. Today, I asked myself why God loves taking away the good and leaving the bad people amidst us. (Laughter) There are so many bad people here but good people keep dying. 

I would like to say that I have admired the way the late lived his life. There are two people here – the late and hon. Ndugu Rugunda – that I admire. They are very humble people and I wish all of us could emulate them. I pray that the Almighty God gives the remaining one long life so that we can learn more from him.

I remember one time when we were forming FDC, the late was invited to one of the conferences as a guest speaker at Hotel Bonita in Lubowa. While addressing us he said thus: “Young men, you are joining this struggle; it is not a simple one. The person you are engaging is not a simple person. Be firm otherwise, you will drop along the way.” I recall that message from him. That was the time he was appointed and he accepted to be an FDC envoy and up to his death we never received any letter from him stating he had resigned from those duties. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I also keep asking myself why the appointing authority continues to appoint the very good people to only deputize others. Why? Some of these good people are supposed to be given substantive responsibilities but you find them deputizing people with questionable character – (Laughter) – and with bad motives. I think there is something wrong with this country.

I would like to conclude by asking the Almighty God to rest his soul in eternal peace. Thank you.

4.08
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Aruu County, I want to extend my condolences and ask the family to remain strong. We are with you people in prayers.

The last time I met the late hon. Eriya Kategaya, I was with hon. Otada at the Sheraton Health Club where we usually meet between 6 and 7 a.m. While there, we exchanged a lot of pleasantries and discussions with the late. That is the last time I saw him. But as many have said, he has been a humble man.

I would like to say that fire does not always beget ash, as writers say. At times fire produces fire. So, I wonder how those who went to the bush – we can have both bad and good people emerging out of the bush. I am saying this because the late, to me, was a very good man; hon. Ruhakana Rugunda is a very good man; Maj. Gen. Mugisha Muntu is a very good man, but there are others who were also in that same bush but are very bad. (Laughter)

I am a young man but I have heard that during the bush days of the NRA, there used to be executions for people who did wrong things. I am even reliably informed that they had issued a warrant for some members to be executed for misconduct. Those who were in the bush are aware that while in the bush, a warrant of execution was issued for one of the foreign coordinators, hon. Amama Mbabazi. (Laughter) So, what point am I trying to say? I am trying to make? I am trying to say, Mr Speaker, that God should be kind to us in this world and spare us for the many sins we commit. 

Hon. Eriya Kategaya was not involved in any public scandal. We have public leaders who appear in scandals every week. In fact Ugandans would be very disappointed if a week passed without hearing their names in public theft. Rt hon. Eriya Kategaya was not involved in the PRDP scam. He was not involved in the CHOGM scandal. He was not involved in the oil scandal. He was not anywhere near the Temangalo scandal. This is a lesson for those on the Frontbench: Please do something good so that when you die we do not have problems in this very House trying to invent what to talk about you - (Laughter) - because some of you have been doing very bad things. It is my only prayer. 

On behalf of the people of Aruu County and Uganda at large, Brig. Eriya Kategaya, we will miss you and we shall come in millions to bury you and give you a good send off. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

4.11
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in supporting the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, paying tribute to our fallen comrade and brother, Ndugu Eriya Kategaya, and conveying condolences to the Kategaya family, Parliament, friends and all those that were in one way or another connected with Ndugu Eriya Kategaya. 

Ndugu Eriya Kategaya has really been an icon as we have heard; an icon of the Movement politics for which he was the National Political Commissar; an icon in Government because for many years he has been a very senior person in Government and first Deputy Prime Minister; and also an icon in as far as East Africa and Pan-African affairs are concerned. He was very passionate about these issues, about the Movement, about Uganda and about East Africa. And if there is anybody who was cut out for the Ministry of East African Affairs, Ndugu Eriya Kategaya fitted that position extremely well. It is no wonder that he performed very well in that position. 

He was committed to Uganda. In his early days, he spent a lot of his time organising young people and resisting Idi Amin so much so that in 1979, when Idi Amin was being thrown out, he was already very active and he was appointed one of the administrators of the liberated areas to ensure that the revolution was consolidated at that material time. 

Again in the struggle, during the bush war, Ndugu Eriya Kategaya played a critical role and you have heard eloquent testimony of what he did both in Uganda and also in the external mission. The politics of the Movement meant a lot because he was a chairman for political and diplomatic affairs. So, he did a lot to shape, to guide, to counsel and to educate people about the Movement politics. No wonder the whole country embraced the Movement politics. We attribute this partly to Ndugu Eriya Kategaya. (Applause)

A number of colleagues have raised issues which they termed U- turn. I will make a short comment on that. I regard the U-turn as a phase of contradiction in the Movement and in the country where Ndugu Eriya had a different view and another section of the Movement had a different view. The critical point about it in spite of that contradiction, the contradiction was subsequently resolved and Ndugu Eriya and the Movement came together once again - (Applause) - and therefore became stronger. So, Ndugu Eriya in many ways continued to make significant contribution to the Movement. 

During the exile days during Idi Amin’s regime, Ndugu Eriya and some of us like Amanya Mushega, Adonia Tiberondwa, Edward Rugumayo and many others lived in Zambia and again Ndugu Eriya used that period to consolidate the Pan-African links between ourselves and our African brothers and to mobilise support for Uganda in its struggle against the dictatorship. 

So, Mr Speaker, Ndugu Eriya has departed from us but as Ndugu Kiyonga said, the critical point is to learn critical lessons from his life so that we can pursue his struggle up to the very end. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Moyo East. (A Member rose_) Is that your constituency? (Laughter)

4.16
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Many people may wonder why it appears I am not ready to speak. I was actually ready from the beginning; in any case I am one of the few who came here first. In most cases, I have heard many people contributing. We met with our brother whom we are now paying tribute to, in Nairobi. Of course the benchmark is Amin’s departure and all of us also went away but then we went to form another organisation to come back. (Laughter) That one of Tanzania actually did not make it so we needed another organisation. So, in Nairobi, we tried to agree. 

The late was there, the Prime Minister was there and many others who are not here were there. So, sometimes the contributions of peace which we are now enjoying actually should be shared by many people who are vocal and sometimes who are not vocal. (Laughter) The late has been quiet. He has been watching but he gets concerned when situations tend to get out of hand. That is a serious contribution. But you find people in a road junction saying, “I did that.” That is a poor contribution. (Laughter) People must commend you but you do not commend yourself. (Applause) That is why I did not want to claim so much but I have also contributed. (Laughter) 

I want to give evidence that during my contribution - I am even able to give witness about our late brother because I met him in Nairobi with many other people elsewhere. That is why we must protect this peace jealously so that we are even able to see him – we think that his death may even be in vain because of his contribution to this peace. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. May his soul rest in eternal peace. (Applause)

4.20
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): I thank you, Mr Speaker. In many ways like the previous speaker, we do not speak very much but we appreciate a lot. If I have got to say anything about Eriya – Eriya was a wonderful soul who listened to people, who argued in an amicable manner and who in the end took the right path.

I got to know him - because I was not initially in politics – and when he returned, he was the Minister for Trade and so I called him and he tried to persuade me to join the Movement. At that time, I had just come out of Luzira where the “Big man” of those days had put me – (Interjections) - (Laughter) - the “Big man” at that time was Amin. Eriya suggested that I should join the Movement but I declined. 

Later on, we met in Nairobi and he was not feeling very well and had spent terrible nights on the lake trying to find his way to Nairobi. Once he got into Nairobi, he became our leader and what a leader he was. He put us together and encouraged all of us to work together and in that way, he consolidated the Movement. 

As time went on, his contribution became more and more evident and he has been sitting there next to me. I really miss him. When I say that I miss him, I really miss him as a leader and as a friend - (Member timed out.)   

4.24
THE MINISTER FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr John Nasasira): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, members of Parliament, the family and fellow mourners who are here. 

I had the opportunity to visit hon. Kategaya in hospital in Nairobi one week before he passed away on the 23rd last month when he had been discharged from the Intensive Care Unit and everything looked normal. In the course of that week, I was always in touch with the sister who is a friend and as you heard that the very Saturday he passed away, he had been discharged from the hospital. 

As the Rt. hon. Prime Minister said, because of that blood clot that blocked the lungs – I am sure the doctors were – so it was a shock to hear that somebody who I had just seen and was recovering had just suddenly passed away. 

But I am happy to have known hon. Kategaya for over 30 years. What I am going to say in these three minutes is not different from what others have said and the reason is because hon. Kategaya was not fake. He was not a fake person. (Applause) He was not fake - whether he was a friend, a leader or in whatever he did. We have a lot of counterfeit politicians, leaders and cheer leaders but Kategaya used to stand here as a friend because for me, he was a leader – he was my leader. 

In fact during the bush days, he was the bridge between the bush and the external wing and that is why you hear people talking about the bush and also Nairobi and other places in the country. 

He was my colleague in our Movement and in Government. He was a social friend and that is why you hear hon. Katuntu was talking about an empty chair. We played tennis together and actually after a hard day’s work, we would play tennis and after a hard game, we would also sit down to discuss over some few refreshments. So we shared a lot. He was a family friend including being a god father to my own son. 

Lastly, he was my OB although I found that he had just left Ntare when I joined. I see him as a person of the generation that came on after those who had fought for Independence but now we are fighting for a decent and dignified country. We had got our Independence from those who fought for it but after our Independence, I think we also started messing up our own Independence. And this is the generation of freedom fighters and revolutionaries who started to fight to ensure that we have a decent country and the struggle continues - (Member timed out.)

4.27
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to speak as a mother.

If the late Rt. hon. Prime Minister’s mother lived today, she would have been one of the happiest mothers for having raised a child of integrity. I am speaking from the Prime Minister’s motion. He rightly said that this is one gentleman who cared about the welfare of the ordinary people. But today you would ask what the Minister for Gender said about the counterfeit politicians we have in this country. If such a gentleman was in a team of people who cared about the ordinary Ugandans, I can assure you that if life was to leave him, it would have been in a Ugandan hospital and not in a neighbouring country. (Applause)

I had an opportunity to visit a friend who was admitted in South Africa. While she was there waiting for a doctor who is a specialist – the specialist had to fly in from the US and this happened to be a Ugandan. It was so painful to see how we have abandoned the ordinary Ugandans for artificial life. Here is the gentleman who from today, effective now, will be speaking to the Front Bench of Government to see whether they will really care about the welfare of the ordinary people.

From what I heard from colleagues, this is one man who used to give clothes to the ordinary people’s children when he was in school including some of his very close political friends in Ntare. Now here we are but how many Ugandans today are capable of sharing clothes or even parting with clothes? This is what we are asking and begging as mothers of this country. Nothing else!

We have been constantly reminded of counterfeit politicians. What is our biggest problem and challenge now? It is greed, insatiable acquisition of wealth and something that we just cannot explain about leaders of today; for example, how can you explain one man acquiring billions of shillings when in the end he will need one ordinary coffin, six feet down and three feet wide? What is the essence? Why are we unable to give to the people so that we live a life of equity? 

Look at how we have segmented this country today; we have the ultra rich and the ultra poor. There will come a time, dear friends, I can assure you, when there will be a clash of the ordinary with those who are well-placed and those and who consume about 90 per cent of this country’s wealth, and it is very unfortunate. 

As the gentleman lies here, I pay tribute to the family. It is my prayer that out of him will come some people who will constantly remind this country about a great son of this nation. We talk about leaders everywhere but when we come down to Uganda, it is an embarrassment because all we know today is how much one can immediately amass in an office that they are holding before they leave, including eating money for the dead without any remorse.(Member timed out.)

4.31
MS BARBARA NEKESA OUNDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues who have spoken before me, on behalf of my people of Busia District, to extend my sincere condolences to the family of the late hon. Eriya Kategaya. As I join Members in supporting the motion to pay tribute to our fallen colleague, I will just mention a few things because even though the late was born in the 1940s and I was born in the 1980s, I had the privilege of working with him as a colleague. 

Honourable members, today our young people have prioritised things like sports to an extent that some of them even drop dead when teams like Arsenal lose a match. It was very different with hon. Eriya Kategaya. He was one man, during his early days, who focused all his energies towards a free Uganda. That was a special trait that he had, which is not expected or seen today. 

Hon. Kategaya was a promoter of Ugandan interests not only at the EAC but at other international arena. We shall miss his selfless and mature politics. As we move closer to Thursday when a father, a mentor to many, a colleague and a friend to all Ugandans shall be laid to rest, I just hope and pray that many have learnt a lesson about humility, because we all knew the late as a man who was very down to earth. 

Honourable colleagues, allow me say fare thee well, hon. Eriya Kategaya. Thank you.

4.34
MS KEVINAH TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion. On behalf of the people of Busia Municipality, I want to send our sincere condolences to the family of hon. Kategaya and Uganda at large. 

Since the NRM came to power, whenever I heard the name Eriya Kategaya, I would think of somebody who was focused and I would think of truth, democracy and love for the people. Hon. Nasasira said that the late hon. Kategaya was a bridge, especially when the NRA was still in the bush. If he was not that kind of person, I think the NRA would not have crossed the bridge; they would have died there. So, he really played a very big role.

Mr Speaker, hon. Kategaya was a leader. He was a fatherly person and a leader beyond the borders. He died holding the portfolio of Minister for East African Affairs, which he did ably. So, we need leaders of that calibre. 

When we talk about the East African Community, especially the integration, you cannot leave out anything to do with the economy of Uganda and trade. As Shadow Minister of Trade, I interacted with the late very much. We talk of regional integration at the top but at the bottom people do not know it. So, we had to sensitise the communities about the integration. 

One day, we were in Tororo in Uganda and we crossed over to Kenya. During our discussions with him, I told him that when Ugandans go to Kenya, they are arrested.  They use a Kiswahili word, “mukanyago.” Ugandans cannot buy land in Kenya but the Kenyans can come here freely, get employed, buy land and build houses and own property whereas it is different in Kenya. So, how do we do it? 

The late told me that Kenyan women also do not like integration; they say that if there is integration, they fear that Ugandan women are very beautiful and good mannered and they will take over their men. (Laughter) That is a very crucial issue, and it is good that Ugandan women are very good. But the Kenyan men are in favour of the integration saying that Ugandan people are lazy, so they are eyeing our jobs in Uganda. 

On that light note, I want to pay tribute to the late hon. Kategaya. Allow me to say, the honourable Brig. Eriya Kategaya, may your soul rest in eternal peace.

4.39
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. Before my time starts, I would like to seek clarification. I raised a point of clarification that in the motion moved, the date of birth of the late Eriya Kategaya is mentioned as 1945 but in his book, Impassioned for Freedom, it states 1943. In the portrait right in front of you, Mr Speaker, the funeral services have put 1943. 

I beg that this Parliament clarifies this and the record be put straight. I am saying so because while I was here, I googled and Wikipedia, which is known as the house of information, quotes 1945 but the Library of the Congress, which is the Parliament of the US, quotes 1943. So, I think this is an opportune moment for us to clarify his date of birth.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya filled a form declaring his date of birth in this House and we have the record. So, that should not be your problem. 

MR TANNA: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for that ruling. I met the Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya immediately after my election. I received a call from somebody who worked for him who said that he wanted to meet me. While there was a little bit of anxiety, there was also reservation in my mind. I had known him as an extremely upright person, and I had been invited by quite a number of NRM ideologists before my election asking me why I had chosen to be independent and not stand on the NRM ticket. 

When I met him, he was interested and asked me two things. First, he asked me, considering my Indian origin and skin colour, what was my interest in politics in Uganda? His intentions were extremely simple, and I think he is the only person from the old guard who actually took time to listen to me. While he was keen to know, something that came out very strongly, and that nobody in this House has mentioned so far, is that the late was non-segregative. He did not segregate against me on the basis of my colour, creed, religion or race but was extremely passionate to know how I was elected by the people of Tororo Municipality. 

Something else that came out, and that I would like the rest of the world to know, is that unlike several other people of his calibre and age bracket that I have met, hon. Eriya Kategaya was a friend of the young people and was extremely keen to understand their aspirations. Hon. Eriya Kategaya was a friend of the young. Thereafter, every time he met me or if I had an issue I needed to seek guidance on, he was extremely keen to give guidance and direction on matters of national importance.

Something that I have been pondering on in my mind, and I forget the person who said it, is a saying of the wise, that you might replace me in your lives, but you cannot replace the memories that you had with me. I believe that if hon. Kategaya could say something today, he would say these words. The Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya’s memories with me shall never be replaced. (Member timed out.)

4.44
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to join my colleagues in paying tribute to the late hon. Kategaya. 

Mr Speaker, why does this become important in our lives? There are many people who would never think about God if it were not for the challenges of life and most especially in times of death. To us, death is a constant reminder that we are sojourners on this earth and definitely, time will come when we shall be like hon. Kategaya. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

Mr Speaker, I have heard people talk about the U-turn concerning the late hon. Kategaya. Every time I have interacted with people, I have reminded them that in life, God gave us these bodies and we have feelings, fears, preferences and likes. That is why St Peter denied Jesus when the time came, but that did not prevent him from taking over and being the heir at the time Jesus was gone. He was holy but he had a body and he feared and had challenges. As human beings, all of us should reflect on these issues as we try to judge others for what they have been.

Finally, I pray that the death of hon. Kategaya pushes us to make very serious reflections on the way we deliver our health services. If we can enhance the policy reviews that we must take - When I was a small boy, they used to tell me that Kampala, especially Makerere University, was a destination for training doctors, Nairobi was for training engineers and Dar es Salaam was for training lawyers. Why should an institution like Makerere, which was known for training doctors, now be exporting government officers to die in the neighbourhood? We should make some fundamental reviews so that we can effectively deliver what our community expects. We can only use these moments when we are talking about our fallen colleagues to reflect on this.

I wish to deliver my condolences to the members of the family and the people of Uganda. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.47
MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA (NRM, Rushenyi County, Ntungamo): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Today, the East African Community, Uganda and the district of Ntungamo are mourning the passing on of a legend. A legend indeed because these qualities, which everybody has talked about - humility, simplicity, straightforwardness and clarity of mind - are not easily embedded in one human being. Yet, every speaker, without contradiction, witnessed the qualities herein in the Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya.

While we are witnessing the demise of our beloved friend, father and countryman, we should know that this is a rude reminder that tomorrow, each one of us, without exception, will be here. So, what lessons do we draw? I used the word, “legend” selectively. Legends are meant for a purpose. A legend is something or someone, which everybody who is living must copy from. It is a duty incumbent on all of us to emulate or at least try to emulate these qualities of the Rt Hon. Kategaya, if we are to do what he has been doing or if we are to build on what he has built. No wonder, the late Rt Hon. Kategaya, for most of us who are still young, was our political mentor and inspiration and has contributed a lot to this country. 

Honourable members, as we mourn the passing on of the late Rt Hon. Kategaya, I want us to reflect on what it is we want for this country. I have listened to many Members contribute and I have listened to those Members who want to use this example to score some cards. Definitely, that would never have been the Rt Hon. Kategaya’s approach to situations.

It is true that human beings may not agree, but do we need to shout, do we need to quarrel, do we need to mock each other? Definitely, that was not the Rt Hon. Kategaya’s style of work. You could disagree, you may not tread the same line, but at the end of the day, I believe that when we are in leadership our role is to better society and humankind.  (Member timed out.)

4.50
MR SAM KUTESA (NRM, Mawogola County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to a fallen hero of this country. 

The Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya has been described in many ways by speakers who spoke before me. Many of them have said that he was a humble man; I do not agree. The Rt Hon. Kategaya was not humble; he was just civil. He would conduct his matters in a civil way, but he was not humble. He was a stubborn man, stubborn with his views on principle. He was principled and stubborn about them. There was no humility about his principles, but he was civil in the way he put matters across, and that is what I know about him. So, do not call this man humble. When he said this, he had said it but he would not say it quarrelling; he would say it to you in a quiet, sober and civil manner and he would listen to your argument. That is not humility; it is civility. I hope that we can also copy that from him. 

Secondly, I think he was committed to patriotism, as a principle, and Pan-Africanism. I heard hon. Rugunda talk about it. He believed strongly in the cause of Pan-Africanism and regional integration. I had the opportunity of serving with him in the Council of Ministers of East Africa. His commitment to East African integration was exemplary and outstanding. He made friends in the different countries to ensure that he brings them close, even those who did not understand the value of the East African integration. As we say goodbye to him, you will be seeing many people from this region coming to pay tribute to him, which is a testimony to this integration agenda and commitment. 

The Rt Hon. Kategaya also believed in listening to people. I think he had a culture, which is dying out in this country; he read books. We would share books. I do not know how many people read books these days. That is a dangerous thing because you do not increase your knowledge. I think it is important to read so that you keep yourself abreast; whether you read it from Google or whatever, read. It is a very important culture that should not disappear. I think that is something that may not have been public, but he did it privately and I think it enriched him and made his knowledge of subjects more intense and wide. As I – (Member timed out.)

4.54
MR JIM MUHWEZI (NRM, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I first got to know the Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya in 1979 after the takeover of UNLF. I later interacted with him in 1981 when I found him in the bush. Many attributes have been given about him and I do not intend to repeat them. I can just say that he epitomised the good qualities of a patriot, a democrat and a nationalist. 

He was very brave; he operated during the bush war in what we call clandestine operations. He used to come to the bush and come back to the city, go to Nairobi and so on. This required a brave person. Twice, he was almost captured at a road block in Nakulabye and another time, he had to escape by climbing over a wall to escape capture and possible death in Kampala. I think it was in 1982. He was doing all that for the sake of liberty and freedom of the people of Uganda. 

In politics, he was principled, very principled, and he would not compromise his principles and conscience. Many people give away their conscience for political expedience. It was not him. Churchill once said that some people change their principles for the sake of their party and other people change their party for the sake of their principles. The Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya could never change his principles and this is something to emulate about him. 

I do not think that he turned on the bed as we call it, or made a U-turn. For him, he had the bigger picture of Uganda and of East Africa. I do not know what he discussed with the President, but I know that his coming into Government and concentrating on East African Community Affairs was not by accident. It must have been something they discussed and given the position he had taken and his coming back, they agreed. For some of the people who find it contradictory for someone to come back, it is because the disagreement is not on principles – (Member timed out.)

4.58
MR VINCENT KYAMADIDI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Rwampara and on my own behalf, allow me to extend our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family, to Uganda and to the East African Community for the demise of our gallant son. 

We in Rwampara were blessed to be represented by Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya in the CA and subsequently, in Parliament. The late Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya left an indelible mark in Rwampara, which will never be replaced. Every time I move around town and they ask me, “Which is your constituency?” When I tell them Rwampara, they say, “You mean that of hon. Kategaya?” There have been many MPs but they only remember the Rt Hon. Kategaya. So, I am wondering whether I will live up to what he did. (Laughter) What comes out very clearly is that he put Rwampara on the world map. 

There are two fundamental things that come out here. People from Rwampara are always principled, take it or leave it. Being principled is based on the nature of how we live. You cannot live in a place like Rwampara, with all those roads, with that road network and all those health centres, and sell your conscience for the sake of political expedience; never in life. That is a person from Rwampara.

Two, he did not sell his soul. In Mark 8:36, it is says, “What will you gain if you acquire the whole world and you lose your soul?” the way some of you have. He did not lose his soul. I am very sure, like it is stated in Timothy 6:7, he did not bring anything and has not taken anything from here.

Allow me say that the late Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya was never - and trust me – involved in any form of intrigue. He was never involved in any form of blackmail. Some of us are suffering – You may say we are suffering and you may be proud, but remember today it is me, tomorrow it can be someone else. The truth is that the late never engaged in any form of intrigue or witch-hunting. That is why you would not find him in any of those cliques. As people of Rwampara, we are very happy about that.

Finally, I would like to thank all Ugandans and all people of East Africa for working with our gallant son. He served this country well and lived his life well. He also did what he was supposed to do. We hope to find him there. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

501
MR EDDIE WA GAHUNGU KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I also wish to join my colleagues in supporting the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. 

The late Rt Hon. Kategaya had greatness exhibited in his humility and honesty. The late was a simple man. He has been a leader and a role model to many people including some of us who are still young. His name had no dark record. He was never involved in any scandal. He has left an untarnished record.

The late Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya was known as a diplomat. He served this country here and abroad in various capacities because of the respect he commanded from Ugandans and the international community. That is why I have no reservations in saying that both Uganda and the international community have lost a lot.

There are a number of leaders who have been involved in corruption as some of the Members have said, but there is no single incident that can indicate the late Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya’s name was mentioned. In that regard, I want to say that it is useless to say that so and so was good while we are doing the contrary or behaving differently. It means we have learnt nothing from him.

I would like to say that the late was a sincere man and did not possess an element of selfishness in him. He greatly contributed to good governance, both in East Africa and Uganda. His contribution is very unquestionable. However, while I say that, I would like to point out that the situation at Mulago Hospital is horrible. While we think about referring our patients to hospitals in places like South Africa or Kenya, what and how much are we doing to correct that situation? What are we doing to improve our health facilities? I think we need to learn a lot from this situation.

I would like to call upon all leaders and colleagues to emulate the late. We should not just talk about his good things and leave it all in this Chamber. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

5.04
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also stand to support the motion on the Floor. Ntungamo District has lost. Actually, in this motion, there should have been deep condolences to the bereaved family and Ntungamo District. Anyway, since we are all under Government of Uganda that is still okay.

The late has been an inspiration to the young politicians. When I first came to Parliament, during the Sixth Parliament, we formed an association called the Young Parliamentary Association. Because of the word “young” it seemed to be only for the young ones and so some people were uncomfortable with it. But the late took off time to call me and asked what that association was all about. He later gave us some good advice because the method of our work then was not mature enough. Because of his non- confrontational method of working, we took up his advice. So, when people said that he was friendly to the young, I bought that idea. He was an inspiration to the young politicians. Many people in Ntungamo looked up to him. Many people also came up to join politics because of his character.

The late was a special breed that cannot be replaced. I call him so because many people have talked about his good character. When you read the newspapers, since Saturday, you notice how much has been said of him. Even those I would call “stubborn” people talked about the late in the exact way. Nobody mentioned anything bad about the late Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya. That shows the type of person that Ntungamo has lost. The late was like the Biblical writing that says that – (Member timed out.)

5.08
MS MASIKO KABAKUMBA (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I bring my condolences from the NRM fraternity in Masindi and the people of Bujenje Constituency to the family of the late Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya and the country at large, including the people of Ntungamo District.

I consider myself lucky to have closely worked with the late Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya, first as the NPC while I worked at the NRM Secretariat and later as a minister and Deputy Prime Minister.

As many have said, the late never raised his voice. He only used the power of persuasion to influence people into accepting his position. He was a principled man. When he failed to agree – remember many have talked about this – with the majority view of lifting term limits, he kept peace. Later, when he was invited to serve the people of Uganda, he accepted. I know it is very difficult for one to go and come back to start afresh, but one can start from wherever they stopped to make a happy ending and that is the gentleman we are saying farewell to today.

When I decided to join elective politics in 1996 while  he was the NPC, he had his reservations but never told them to me. However, when I reported back to the office and informed him that I had been elected woman MP for Masindi District in 1996, he said this: “I thought you were very young and you could not manage the rigours of elective politics.” But he had never discouraged me; instead, he encouraged me from then on. He mentored me. Indeed, he was my role model. 

Rt Hon. Kategaya, as many have said, was a Pan-Africanist. I will just give one example. When I was a Woman MP and there was an influx of people from Congo, I lobbied him as Minister for Internal Affairs then, to establish an immigration post at Butyaba. He looked at me and laughed and said, “What are you worried about? Aren’t they Africans?” That was the end of my lobbying for an immigration post at Butyaba. That is the bigger picture the Rt Hon. Kategaya had about Uganda, about East Africa and about Africa indeed. We shall miss, Rt Hon. Kategaya. 

All this time, he never referred to me as honourable. He would say, “Omubiito kati”, that is, princess. That shows clearly how humorous Rt Hon. Kategaya was. He really gave each and every one of us his or her place in our country. (Member timed out.)

5.12
MS SARAH MWEBAZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibuku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join the Members, the country and my party, the NRM, to pay tribute to the fallen hero of the NRM party and Uganda at large. 

Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya has been described as a good man by many people. As the chairperson of the Committee on EAC Affairs, I interacted with the late immediately they made me the chairperson. He guided me very well, most especially on the issues of foreign policy. The late Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya helped the committee on EAC to manage our business, not only in Uganda when we travelled but across the whole region. Actually, the first time we travelled to Arusha, the Ministers of East African Affairs in the Partner States of East Africa were referring to the late Rt Hon. Kategaya as Eriya. They called him Eriya because he lived up to his name as it is in the Bible - he has been a good political prophet. 

Rt Hon. Kategaya made Ugandans proud even beyond the borders of Uganda. He was a good team leader in the East African Community integration process and a pillar in the stages of the East African Community integration. Actually, EALA is going to miss the Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya, and even the Community at large. He had the knowledge, the courage and he wanted peace not only for Ugandans but for everybody in the region. 

Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya has been an exemplary man, a soldier who lived a civilian life and in his life, he never segregated against young or old, or against colour as the honourable member from Tororo Municipality said, nor did he segregate against tribe. Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya would refer to himself as a Ugandan. Across Uganda, whenever they would ask him what his tribe was, he called himself a Ugandan. 

We are going to miss him as a committee. Actually, there is one memory I have. We were at a conference in Kigali and he did not have a state minister by then and yet they wanted state ministers to present at the conference. Together with the Rt Hon. Speaker of EALA, they immediately promoted me to the status of a minister and he told me, “You go and present. I am not a state minister; I am a Cabinet minister.” That was the Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya. (Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have 45 minutes to close, at 6.00 p.m. I have 18 Members on my list that I have chosen and there are more who have stood. I do not know how to proceed, but let us proceed this way: can we reduce the time to two minutes so that we can take as many as possible? Two minutes. Let us just proceed. The problem I have is that I was given an advance list of people who wanted to speak and I am trying to balance everything.

5.16
THE MINISTER IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We need to thank God for the presence of the Rt Hon. Kategaya in Uganda and among us. I have known him for 52 years since the time he joined me in Ntare School. I think I can say this, with no doubt at all, that Kategaya’s presence was real. His presence did not have to be announced. His presence was there both physically - you could see he was not a small man – and also his will was very strong. That is point one.

Secondly, he was a firm man. Although hon. Kutesa said he was civil, civility could be seen to be part of humility. You cannot be civil when you cannot bring yourself down to other people. Thank God this man has been humble but also firm and very firm indeed. He would despise. To be told very clearly, the Rt Hon. Kategaya would despise you if you behaved below average. He would throw his left hand and say “Ah”. I am sure the people who know him very well, who have lived with him, know his hand like this would mean, “You can go.” He would even use the words, “Go and hang” so firmly. 

Loyalty; Hon. Kategaya was a loyal person, loyal to principles, loyal to Uganda. No wonder his assignments attest to this. (Member timed out.)

5.19
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): Mr Speaker, the family members, I speak on my behalf and on behalf of the other comrades that I represent in Parliament. I have known the late Rt Hon. Brigadier Eriya Kategaya Tukahirwa for 34 years. When we came out of the bush, he was my best man and he has remained the greatest man in my life and my family. 

I have a song to a comrade so dear and so special. From my heart, soul and body, I salute you sir. To all of you who are here and who can hear, this is my song to a comrade so dear and so special: 

For all of us who live,
it is not that it is by our choice 
or by our might

It is mainly by God’s grace
But also by
The sacrifice of our comrades
Like Comrade Afande Eriya Kategaya
Who gave it all.

All you here who can hear
This is my song
To a comrade so dear
And so special.

For us to sing their praise
They did not sacrifice 
Their lives for us 
To sing their praise 
Or to worship Them
No no no, not them
It was to change everyone’s life
For the better.
 
That Eriya made the choice
That he took the step
That he made the resolve
That he identified a cause
And associated with it, 
To give it all
Including his life
Is a great virtue
That deserves a song.

Afande Eriya stood his ground
He chose to sacrifice
He was patient
He was persistent 
He was committed 
He was disciplined
He was determined 
He was devoted
Cool but firm.

He set his mind, body and all
To pay the necessary price
For the better world
And he deserves a song.
 
Look unto you
Afande Eriya
Our great man that 
Has brought us here
Can you still remember 
All of you
What would be his message
That he always told everybody 
At whatever stage of the struggle
And those words were  
Do not give up. 
Keep on
And he did at all the times.

He stood his ground
He kept his principles
To the last day
And this is the comrade
That is so special
And so dear 
And deserves a song

 To you
Afande Eriya
From a young age To the last day
You offered your life
Ready to pay The ultimate price
Always ready
To contribute
As much as you could.

To inspire
Young and old
To be an example
And a role model at that 
And you deserve a song.
 
In times of trouble
You would give confidence
In times of worry
You would give Hope
In times of challenge
You would defend the cause
In times of war
You were always with the troops
In times of excitement
You were cautious.

In times of anger and greed
You would not grab
Nor would you rush
He stayed Eriya Kategaya.
 
All you people 
Who can hear
This is my song
To a comrade so dear
And so special.
 
Not that he did not
Enjoy his life
In good times
With humour
And humility
He would make you laugh
And always smiled.

Talk about love
He loved Himself
He was always smart.

He loved People
All people
But the enemy.

Talk about sports
He played his game
With enthusiasm
At the club.

Talk about company
He kept his team
Never to change
Even in disagreement.
 
Fare thee well
Comrade
Greetings to all
Fallen comrades
Who went ahead.

Whose struggle
Shall continue
Unabated
Whose sacrifice
Shall live
In the lives
Of many
Those who Were close
Those who Supported
Those who Followed,
Those who Benefited
And even those Who do not
Know yet.

All you people
Who are here
Who can hear
This is my song
To a comrade so dear
And so special.

That there are many people 
Who yet do not know 
That it is
By the sacrifice of such 
That they are enjoying
The fruits 
But it is okay.
 
Go well Eriya
Go well our hero
Go well our comrade
Go well
The Patriot
The Nationalist
The Pan Africanist
The Integrator.
 
Many more
Songs should follow you.



He was a medallist of the Luweero Triangle Medal, of the Kagera Medal and of the Golden Jubilee Independence Medal, which he had not received. He was a pillar in his family, FRONANSA, NRA, UPDF, Uganda, East Africa and humanity at large. We are happy that he has been honoured as a Member of the High Command and has been buried in full military honours. I thank you and may his soul rest in eternal peace. (Applause) 

5.24
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

Dear hon. Kategaya, we look unto you. To many, people have said a lot but to the family and to those who can hear us, in 2002 I was in the United States and President Bush and the American Government was looking for people whom President Museveni trusted most. I was in the State Department and I had a meeting with Donald Payne, the Chairperson of Foreign Affairs Committee in charge of Africa, Paul Raing and others. They asked me who President Museveni could listen to so that he does not cause instability by standing in 2006. I mentioned the Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya. 

They asked me, “who else?” I said, “maybe Gen. Salim Saleh because he is his brother.” I then said, “Maybe his other friend, who is his muko, hon. Sam Kutesa.” Then they asked me about his wife, hon. Janet Kataaha. (Laughter) I said that I did not know but please, put her on the list. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I remember that when President Bush came here, his word was to tell President Museveni not to run again. The discussion then was to appoint President Museveni as the advisor to the Secretary-General on HIV/AIDS. That was the deal we had in the United States. Following that, Rt hon. Eriya Kategaya was approached by the international community and he tried to engage President Museveni not to run but President Museveni disobeyed and that is one of the reasons he joined the FDC – (Member timed out.) 

5.27
THE MINISTER FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): I want to thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank the Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi for moving a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to our gallant late hon. Eriya Kategaya for the contribution he has made. I am speaking on behalf of Ntare School Old Boys and also speaking because I succeeded Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya as house captain at Ntare School. He succeeded me as Minister for Commerce under the UNLF Government and I succeeded him as chairman of Ntare School Old Boys. We have been friends and I can speak for him, really, and the old boys. 

The old boys include, if I can see in the House, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, hon. John Nasasira, hon. Phinehas Katirima, hon. Yaguma and so on – (Interjections)- (Laughter). This is of those in the House but outside the House they include His Excellency President Yoweri Museveni, His Excellency Paul Kagame and very many other eminent persons. 


At Ntare School, we lament the death of a gallant Old Boy. Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya was at Ntare School from 1961 to 1966, a complete six-year period. He was house captain of Baker House, now Africa House. He was an active member of the debating society. Actually, Kategaya could debate, dance and he was also a member of the history society. He was a very accomplished student of Ntare School. He had a very high sense of fairness and a very – (Member timed out.) 

HON.MEMBERS: More time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What can I do? Okay, one minute.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Two minutes. I thank you very much. At Ntare School, Rt Hon. Kategaya was brilliant and all those who were in his class can testify, and that includes His Excellency the President, Prof. Meddie Kawuma if he is here, hon. John Kawanga who was a Member of Parliament for Masaka Municipality, Mwesigwa, Mehanje, Isoke and Manyindo – all these I can mention.

At Ntare School, he left a legacy. He extended water to the school after its destruction twice. He was the founding chairman of the Ntare Old Boys Association and I succeeded him. At Ntare School, he represented us at the burial of Crichton, the founding headmaster. 

We promise you, Eriya, that wherever you are, we shall maintain and promote the ideals you stood for - the ideals of nationalism, the ideals of meritocracy, the ideals of democracy, the ideals of non-sectarianism and the ideals of patriotism. We have lost a gallant lion and may his soul rest in eternal peace.

5.31
MR PETER LOKERIS (NRM, Chekwii County, Nakapiripirit): Mr Speaker, I rise to support the motion and to convey condolences of the Karimojong people to the family of a great friend. I am an elder in Karamoja and I have the right to speak on their behalf and not only for Chekwii. 

I just want to give testimony about this great and industrious son of Uganda. I knew him since 1996 when I was appointed as one of the special district administrators in this country. When he became my political commissar, he came to Kasese where I worked and he was inquiring about rebellions in that district. There was NALU and there was FOBA - maybe you know all of them – and he asked how I was handling these groups. I told him that I was doing mobilisation on the mountains for people to denounce these rebel groups. 

I went and showed him a place called Abiga and another called Mande and I asked him, “Do you see those Manyattas?” He asked, “What are Manyattas?” I said those villages like ours are called Manyattas. He laughed and from that day, he gave me the name Manyatta and to him up to now, I was Manyatta. Now, I have lost my fan who called me Manyatta and he is here, he cannot call me Manyatta again. So, my name has also died with this great person.

In every interaction, he was down to earth. He would come to you, talk to you closely and give advice. There was no question of saying that he was a big man because he did not show that at all. When he would come with his imposing body, you would fear him and you would think, “how do I approach this person?”, but when he came to convince you, he would sit together with you and consult you in a discussion until you would agree. So, for me – (Member timed out.)

5.34
MR PHIILIP WAFULA-OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First, I would like to send my condolences to the family of the Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya. Eriya was my friend and everything that has been said about him is true. Maybe a word that has not been said or description of him is that he was very inspiring. 
I first met Eriya in Dar-es-Salaam in 1978. We were in a meeting of exiles in the house of hon. Ruzindana and Anyoti; Museveni and Eriya were there. While listening to Eriya, at the time I had just come out of college and I was very radical, you could see a shell of moderation. Eriya, Ruzindana and Anyoti, the three of them, were good at moderating people. If you listened to them, even if you are radical, you can also make a point without being very extreme and you can be listened to. So, that was Eriya and since that time, we have been friends and he was one of my mentors and I thank him. 

On the issue of the U-turn, yes, Eriya came and we founded FDC together. He gave a keynote address and he said something that we have always remembered. He said, “You people seated here and have founded this party are on the right side of history.” That is true, that we are still on the right side of history as Eriya said. He even led the first delegation of FDC to the neighbouring country, and I was a member of that committee and there, I could see the usefulness of Eriya. When he went back to NRM, we were not very angry because I think Eriya was going to serve another purpose. The purpose is moderating NRM, - (Member timed out.)

5.36
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to convey my condolences and that of my family to the family. All I would like to say is that we shall miss Rt Hon. Kategaya for his good leadership. He was a good listener, a principled man, an advisor and a disciplinarian whenever need arose. We shall miss you as a Pan-Africanist, a nationalist, and wherever you are, I wish you good rest. May God rest your soul in peace. 

5.38
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I bring condolences from the mother Kingdom of Bunyoro as we mourn a Pan-Africanist, a Statesman, and defacto NRM No. 2. It is very important that we take serious lessons from his life and, therefore, I also want to call this a celebration of his life. No wonder when great people die, the Speaker in his wisdom even has to invoke some rules that we rarely use, and that is why we see EALA with us here.

Rt Hon. Kategaya’s death has taught me many lessons. I have seen our NRM historicals and ideologists in a reunion. Can we do something after his death in as far as mapping out the future of this country is concerned? I was very humbled when I saw the reunion.

Rt Hon. Kategaya served his last term not as a constituent MP. Can we start thinking of relieving our ministers of constituency pressure and stress to concentrate and think for the country? Rt Hon. Kategaya and his colleagues, the historical ideologists, in our days of Makerere University - Mr Speaker, you are a witness; we had study groups and we benefitted from the teachings of the Mushegas, the Otafiires, and I saw among the officers who brought the body here senior Afande Mugira out there. We benefited from their teachings. What could be happening to the many universities we have? Who is guiding the young people? (Member timed out) 

5.40
MS LOWILA CD OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I bring my sincere condolences to the family and the entire country.

What has been said about the late Rt Hon. Kategaya has reminded me of what I always reflect on in Paul’s letter to Titus 2:7-8 which says, “In everything you do, set an example by doing what is good. Show integrity by doing what is good and saying what will not be condemned by those who oppose you.” This is supposed to be reflected upon by all of us in Government and the Opposition. This is because we have heard about the level of integrity that the late had and how he was exemplary.

To the family, I know all of us go through this at one time or the other. It is a very hard time, very difficult to accept, very difficult to bear and very difficult to put off our minds. It is my sincere hope that the Almighty God, the loving and merciful Father, grants you comfort and sustains you. May the soul of the Rt Hon. Kategaya rest in eternal peace.

5.42
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is a saying in Acholi that the height of a tall tree is seen when the tree falls down. That is exactly what has happened to our gallant father, revolutionary and hero, Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya. 

Much as I did not have close interaction with the Rt Hon. Kategaya for the two years I have been in Parliament, I have seen the power he holds in this country, the kind of influence he had. All of us will bear witness that at the time of the oil debate, the House was so hot; many people rose and thought they had the power to cool the House but they never managed to do it until the Rt Hon. Kategaya got up and spoke and the House was silent.

About the U-turn, I think that was a smart move. It showed another quality that Rt Hon. Kategaya had. He foresaw that the country was ready to move from the Movement system to a pluralistic system of leadership. What he did, he saw that there was a section of Ugandans who could not go to the old parties of UPC and DP. He went to the other side to create a mirror of Movement. We are very proud as Members of Parliament from the NRM and as a party - (Member timed out)

5.45
MS HANIFA KAWOOYA BANGIRANA (NRM, Woman representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. To the family, I want to say that God giveth and God taketh. I want to pray that the Almighty God strengthens you during this difficult time of grieving and we are all with you.

We have heard much about our friend and mentor, Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya. There are lessons that we should learn and the first is that we should never be politically emotional. That one, he has left it. He was never politically ambitious like the ones I see here running up and down. (Laughter) He started from his young days, he contributed to peace in this country, he formed the FDC, he never struggled to be a president in FDC; he was a humble man.

He personified total commitment, total dependability, total trust to the cadres he trained like me. You should depend on the values and the ideological principles that you cherish so much. Those are the lessons that you should learn from him. 

He was a friend to his family. He cherished friendship. He was a loving father, a loving husband. His sister Gwen can testify that his love was trusted love and he gave himself to those that he cherished most. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is going to be the last round for now. I am going to ask Amuru District, Isingiro North, Bungokho South, Maracha County, Koboko County, Ngora District, the Ministry of Trade, hon. Byandala and Nyabushozi. Then we will extend the time.

5.48
MS BETTY BIGOMBE (NRM, Woman representative, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion. A lot of good things have been said about EK as some of us who worked with him referred to him. So, I am not going to repeat what has been said.

I just thought I would point out one thing, that since Rt Hon. Kategaya’s death, I have seen how united people have been. So, he is definitely one person who united people - the young, the old, different political parties. He had no tribe. I was at his house last night and people like Olara Otunu were there paying glorious tribute to him. In charge of funeral arrangements is Amanya Mushega. Who could bring such people all together if it is not EK? So, he was a very special man.

I want to say, Mr Speaker, that we always pay tribute to people when they are dead; we do not praise them and talk to them about the good things they have done when they are still with us. I hope this will be lesson that we learn to tell people the good things about them so that it encourages and motivates them to do more. Thank you. My condolences to the family, the entire Uganda and East Africa. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

5.49
LT COL (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (NRM, Isingiro North Constituency, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This afternoon, a roll call was made and one of our members, the right honourable R002, Eriya Kategaya, was missing. The casket of his remains is moved in the House and a motion is moved. 

I support the motion to pay tribute to the late Rt Hon. Kategaya, a freedom fighter, a nationalist, a Pan-Africanist, an accomplished politician and a statesman who lies here before us. On behalf of the people of Isingiro County North and Mbarara High School old boys and other stakeholders that I represent, I wish to convey our condolences to the bereaved family, the first family, Parliament and all Members of this House and Uganda.

Many things, especially very good things, have been said about the late Rt Hon. Kategaya, and I want to confirm that those things, which were said, are true. Mr Speaker, I knew Rt Hon. Kategaya since I was a small boy because of family ties. Rt Hon. Kategaya had a rich history and to talk about him, you do not need two minutes. We would rather sit down and forget about it, but I am indebted to speak.

Let me talk about two things; one is the talk about the U-turn. Even within ourselves, we disagree. You can disagree within yourself but when you do not agree on a point, it does not mean a departure, and it is not true that the late Rt Hon. Kategaya departed from the Movement. 

You will notice that one of the organisers of this funeral is hon. Amanya Mushega- (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One minute.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, we may disagree but Uganda is for all of us. We need to know that the destiny of this country lies with this group in this House. Whatever we do, we set examples. Therefore, from Rt Hon. Kategaya, what experience do we learn? When you are a leader, you are a leader for everybody, for those who support you and those who do not.

Mr Speaker, I had two days in Arusha with the late Rt Hon. Kategaya and I had time to talk to him for long hours. I know he has died a happy man for the cause of the struggle. I am sure he has not died in vain. We shall carry on; the struggle continues. May his soul rest in perfect peace. I thank you very much.

5.53
MR MICHAEL WERIKHE (NRM, Bungokho County South, Mbale): Mr Speaker, thank you. On behalf of Bungokho South, I would like to extend my sincere condolences to the family of the late Rt Hon. Kategaya, the government and the people of Uganda. 

I know this has already been raised but the issue of humility, respectfulness and being honest are among the attributes that those of us who joined this Parliament and found our elders, the late hon. Eriya Kategaya being one of them, detected. He proved to be an inter-generational person as has been mentioned, interfacing with all of us. He respected the old, the young and all other people. He would treat every person that he interfaced with, with respect and he would listen. He was a listener.

I remember when we had just come, he would listen to all of us who were speaking on the Floor of the House and if he detected something that needed one to get advice and guidance, he would actually invite you. Like hon. Katuntu said, he had a special seat at Kampala Club, together with the late hon. Wapakhabulo. Of course, the young ones like hon. Nasasira would also be there accompanying them. He would sit you down and take you through all the issues that touch politics.

In him, you would see that the late Rt Hon. Kategaya was a patriot and a nationalist who was committed to seeing Uganda progress. He was a person who would deal with any person irrespective of political affiliation, and I think this is the legacy that the person we are paying tribute to has left for us to emulate. Those of us who have known him for a short time in politics will certainly live, I pray, to emulate his example so that this country can move forward. 

I pray that the Almighty sustains his family during this difficult time. May the Lord rest his soul in eternal peace. Thank you.

5.56
MR DAVID WAKIKONA (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion and on behalf of the people of Manjiya and Bududa in general, I pass our condolences to the family of the departed Eriya. Obviously, we know them personally. Joan and others, each time they would come, they would stay with me. So, everybody is shocked to hear that Eriya is gone. 

Eriya and I used to attend the sessional committees of East African Community in Arusha, Burundi, Kenya and various other places. He was one character who had already won the sympathies and attention of many people of East Africa. Eriya with that attire, wherever he was, his word was enough to get people to listen to whatever he wanted to say.

I remember when we had a question on the Customs Union. It was him and I, and he was slightly late, but he told me on phone to take the decision. Meanwhile, Ministry of Finance rung and said, “No” and I said, “yes” and the matter became very serious afterwards. But when we met His Excellency, he said the “yes” was correct; so, we had won. I ask the government to get that type of person. 

Regarding the language, which he used in those councils of the Community, he managed both English and Swahili. His attire, that kitenge, was also an attraction to people to support him. This is the way we are supposed to dress as East Africans. 

I pray that the soul of my brother, Eriya Kategaya - I call him brother because as youth, there were three youth in Bududa who everybody in Bududa knew, the President, Ndugu Rugunda and Eriya Kategaya. Nobody forgets them and they are known as part of the people born in Bududa. I pray that the soul of Eriya rests in eternal peace and please - (Member timed out.)

5.59
MR ALEX ONZIMA (Independent, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to bring out the humility and patriotism in the late Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya. If you were the late Eriya Kategaya, if I, Alex Onzima, were the late Eriya Kategaya and No.2 in the National Resistance Army, a lawyer trained in the University of Dar es Salaam, an OB of Ntare where our President also had his education, would you accept to remain in a position in this Government below that of a Vice President, Speaker, Chief Justice, Deputy Speaker, Prime Minister or Vice-Chairman of the National Resistance Movement? Would you accept that? On my part, I would say “No”. 

This man, who founded the National Resistance Army, participated in the bush war, allowed all these Ugandans, to the extent of serving as First Deputy Prime Minister under a younger Prime Minister, whom he mentored. That was the late Eriya Kategaya whom we are talking about. The nationalism, the patriotism, the selflessness in him – (Member timed out.)

6.02
MR AHMED AWONGO (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion. On behalf of the people of Koboko, with great sorrow I want to convey my heartfelt condolences to the family of the late Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya, to the NRM Organisation, H.E the President, the First Lady, the Government and the entire people of Uganda upon the demise of our beloved brother, elder and First Deputy Prime Minister of this country.

Mr Speaker, I got to know the late Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya when he was NPC. At that time, I was working as the RDC and as RDC I was directly working under his supervision. The Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya was a man with very peculiar qualities. He was always very smart; he was smart in the mind, he was politically smart and above all, he was a man who wanted this country to be better than it is. 

Mr Speaker, we have lost a great man, a man we cannot replace easily. This is a man who had a liberated mind. He is a man who lived beyond sectarianism – (Member timed out.)

6.05
MRS AMELIA KYAMBADDE (NRM, Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Mr Speaker, I rise to support the motion. I would just like to say a few words. 

The Rt Hon. Brigadier Eriya Kategaya was an icon of clean leadership. Is that clean leadership still there? We, as the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, we have missed him because he has been our encyclopaedia. He has been quite resolute on a number of issues and we are going miss him, especially as far as East African Community matters are concerned. 

I would like to extend my condolences to the family - Joan, the children and all members of the family. I wish to extend my condolences from Mawokota North. Thank you very much. 

6.06
MR JAMES BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion and also to convey our deep condolences from the people of Luwero, the transport sector, my family and I to the bereaved family, to the Government and the people of Uganda. 

Dear colleagues, whenever I stood around Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya, you would hear him talking about Uganda and Ugandans, East Africa and East Africans, African and Africans; you could never hear him talking about himself. Maybe that is why he was never involved in these scandals of accumulating wealth. He was a Ugandan, an East African and a Pan-African. We are really going to miss, Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya. 

He stood for the truth. He knew that truth would always prevail and he stood on his feet and at all times, he succeeded. When he started representing Uganda in the East African Council of Ministers, we felt proud to be Ugandans. He was respected and he was always consulted; everybody looked at him with respect and he gave us a good name. Eriya Kategaya did much for us. When I was there, after meetings he would say, “Hon. Byandala, come and we go for a meal”. He never allowed me to buy my own meals; he took me as his own son. We are going to miss, Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya. 

In December, I received a phone call and my secretary said, “Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya wants to speak to you.” Whenever your boss wants to speak to you, you wonder what it is. I was shocked when he said, “Hon. Byandala, I have rung to thank you for working on my road.” There are very few people who appreciate, but the late Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya would consider even the small things. I was only doing my duty, but he had the courtesy to appreciate. I wish all of us could emulate that.

To the family, please, look to God. God will solve all these problems for you – (Member timed out.)

6.08
MR FRED MWESIGE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Mr Speaker, I rise to support the motion. The Rt Hon. Brigadier Eriya Kategaya was instrumental in shaping FRONASA and NRM. He was highly respected among freedom fighters. We all called him “Waziri” since 1979 and he has died a waziri. 

He was a man of few words who never picked quarrels, except when he picked a quarrel with Idi Amin. He was a polished, fine, humble and exemplary freedom fighter and a statesman. He was a great counsellor. Comrade Waziri was a patriot. He was a very transparent person who had special leadership qualities. Waziri was a disciplined, committed nationalist and Pan-Africanist. He cherished humility and he was incorruptible. 

Waziri was a great fellow and his death is a massive loss to the family. I send my sympathy to the family, the NRM party and the whole country. This is a tragedy for East Africa. Fare thee well Waziri. May God rest your soul in eternal peace. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much for your contributions. Yes, we extended the time, but we have to bring this debate to an end.

There is a condolence message from the head of a delegation of Members of the National Council of the Parliament of Namibia, Mr Nimrode Mbandu Muremi. The delegation is visiting this Parliament. This message was sent to the Speaker’s Office and will be passed on to the bereaved family.

May I now ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to give us an outline of the programme as we bring this debate to a close.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First, I would like to thank my colleagues, Members of Parliament, for the kind words of sympathy to the family and to the nation upon the loss of this comrade. Obviously, I deplore those who deliberately tried to manipulate this sad moment to achieve political points. I am sure that in his fullness, as we all have said, the late Rt Hon. Eriya Kategaya would never have countenanced that.

The rest of the programme is that tonight, there will be a vigil at his home in Kiwatule. Tomorrow, there will be a service at Kololo Ceremonial Grounds at 9.00 a.m. That means we are expected to arrive before 9.00 a.m. because the service will end strictly at midday because the body has to travel from there to Itojo. Burial will be at his home in Itojo on Thursday, and it begins at 11 O’clock. Itojo is on the main road from Kampala to Kabale; one cannot miss it.

Because of these events, I would like to inform my colleagues, Cabinet Ministers, that tomorrow’s Cabinet meeting has been cancelled to enable us attend to this programme. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, the Government of the Republic of Uganda, Members of the National Resistance Movement and all Ugandans upon the demise of a distinguished son of Uganda; that it takes cognizance of the distinguished services that the late Rt hon. Eriya Kategaya rendered and the contributions he made to the country in different capacities. I now put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

The East African Community Anthem

The National Anthem

(Exit of the late Rt Hon. Brig. Eriya Kategaya)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much for the contributions made, which have summarised a life well lived, a contribution so well made, a dedication so well demonstrated in the affairs of Uganda and those of the East African Community, in the spirit of Pan-Africanism and in matters that affect the whole world of God’s people.
 
At this moment, may I recognise the presence of hon. Grace Akello; Dr Louis Kasekende, the Deputy Governor of Bank of Uganda; hon. Kubeketerya; and our friend, Mr Vicks Kingo; and all of you who have joined us in paying last respects to this gallant son of Uganda.

Tomorrow’s prayers are important. You have all been asked to attend. Of course, I again welcome our Members of the East African Legislative Assembly for your maiden appearance in this House. You are most welcome. Tomorrow, it is required that we all be there just like we have been here today, so that we can pray with the family and ask God for the blessing of our fallen colleague. 

I had earlier communicated that we would be sitting tomorrow afternoon but after consultation, I have found that it may not be necessary for Parliament to sit. So, tomorrow’s afternoon sitting will not be there. Since Thursday will be the burial, normal sitting of Parliament is adjourned to Tuesday next week. This special sitting is hereby adjourned. 

(The House rose at 6.20 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 12 March 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 
