Thursday, 31 March 2015

Parliament met at 2.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. We rose up this morning to very shocking news of the death of Joan Kagezi, who was a prosecutor in this country. The circumstances of her death are a matter of concern to all Ugandans that this should be happening. Similar things have been happening and there have been efforts by this House to try and make the Government move and give us clear guidance on how these situations are going to be remedied. However, since that time, things are ongoing, but what happened yesterday was a great shock. 

I will not say anything more, but I have received a condolence message from the Speaker to the family, which I would like to read:

“I have learnt with great shock the news of the assassination of Ms Joan Kagezi, one of the shining lights in the legal profession, that occurred on Monday evening. It is extremely unfortunate that both her and her career have been cut short in such a senseless manner. 

My thoughts are with the entire family as well as with colleagues at the Ministry of Justice and the entire legal fraternity. Please, accept my most sincere condolences on behalf of the Parliament and on my own behalf. 

It will not be possible for me to attend the funeral as I am away and out of the country.” 

It is signed by Rebecca A. Kadaga, MP and Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda.

We expect a statement from the Minister of Internal Affairs on this matter. It is urgent, it is sad and in the circumstances, I would like us to rise and observe a moment of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this goes to the chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources; there is a petition on the pipeline that is supposed to pass through Kawempe. This petition has been before the House for a while and the citizens are concerned that this matter has not been handled.  Can I ask the chairperson and the committee to expedite this process and have this report before the House, so that we can guide ourselves on how to proceed in resolving the matter? It affects the people of Kawempe in such a manner that they required us to address it. We will be failing in our duty if we do not do just that.

Today, I received the Auditor-General and his team in in my office. He brought the statutory report, that is required by the Constitution and other laws that he should bring in relation to accounts of the last financial year. 

I congratulated the Auditor-General for being one of those institutions that still consider timelines in the Constitution and in other laws of this country important. I congratulated them because it is an institution that has still given this country a ray of hope that timelines are still important. The framers of the laws that give these timeframes have in mind some orderly conduct of business. If we flout them, we mess up the entire business and process of governance and it is not helpful. 

Therefore, thumbs up for the office of the Auditor-General. They were expected to submit this report by 31 of March and they submitted that report today early morning. I congratulate them and I ask all the other institutions of Government to emulate these operations of the Office of the Auditor-General. That includes of course the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

We have had issues with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We have not received some documents which were supposed to have been submitted on the 31st of December 2014. However, they have apologised; we expect those documents to be in Parliament tomorrow. If they fail to do so, this time there will be sanctions.

Honourable members, you will recall also that on 16 February 2015, we had a big commemoration in memory of Saint Janani Zachariah Luwum, who is a modern-day martyr and saint recognised by the whole world. At that time, we had planned to have a tribute motion; a request at the end of January during the central organising committee meeting for Parliament to move a motion of commemoration before the event. However, in that meeting, I told them the business of Parliament at that time would not permit us to have a good debate on that matter. We agreed that after the event, which was on the 16 February 2015, we would hold it. That motion is now on the Order Paper. It is important that we give it that significance. 

It is a tribute motion, honourable members. All of you will remember that Janani Luwum rose against a terror regime. Like Sir Edmund Burke said, evil triumphs because those who know choose to remain silent. Martin Luther King also said, “In the end, we will not remember the words of our enemies, but the silence of our friends.” People like Janani Luwum stood to remove a dictator and they died trying to remove him. Many others died with him trying to remove Dictator Idi Amin Dada. He died under brutal circumstances and he was buried in a small village in Mucwini, where the commemorations were held. 

Today, we have this important motion. I have members of the central organising committee in attendance. They are in the treasury bench behind me. I also expect the family to be in here any moment. I can see Ambassador Olara Otunnu, who is part of the family; he is in the VIP gallery. 

This motion is coming and we will give it some time, so that this country can reflect on its past. I keep saying that if Uganda was a human being, it would have scars from the legs up to the head. However, we should use these scars as visible signs to stop and make a firm declaration that never again shall we see such tendencies, regimes and brutalities happening in our country. 

Those who have died should not die in vain. We should live now to uphold the reasons they died for. They died to uphold democracy and its principles; they died to uphold human rights and respect for humanity and progress for human kind. Therefore, this motion is significant and we should give it that due importance when the time comes. Thank you.

2.16
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County, East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Recently on television, I saw pictures of people who were affected by jiggers in Masaka Municipality. By the time jiggers reach the municipality, it means the countryside is badly affected. 

Mr Speaker, you are also aware that the regions of Busoga, Karamoja and some parts of Tororo are affected. Being a parliament of the people, last year this Parliament recommended that Shs 100 million should be re-allocated for management of this national problem. This money was to be got from the Uganda Sanitation Fund whose activities were dormant. Parliament further recommended that Shs 500 million should be reallocated from the Public Health Emergency Fund for management of jiggers.

In December, I went with some of my colleagues to the Ministry of Health. I had talked to the Director-General of Health Services. She was out of the country so she referred me to Dr Mbonye and we agreed to have a meeting. We have so many NGOs, which are working towards solving the problem of wiping out jiggers from Uganda. However, because there is nobody coordinating them, including the ministry, you realise that the impact is not felt on the ground. 

The other day, while I was in Jinja, I saw a Land Cruiser with a sticker saying, “Zero jiggers”. These are NGOs but because they are not being coordinated, their impact is not felt. Right now, there is no intervention on the ground -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you raise the matter so that we can proceed?

MR WAIRA: Yes. There is no intervention on ground. I would like the Minister of Health to tell us what they have done in detail - activity by activity, coin by coin to add up to Shs 600 million. 

Secondly, in National Medical Stores, there is Shs 2.5 billion. The committee also recommended that part of this money should be used to ensure that they buy medicine to treat Ugandans who are suffering from this problem. What I would like is for the Minister of Health to come here, very faithfully, and tell us how he has used that money up to now. I would also like him to be honest because now there is nothing on the ground. I thank you.

2. 20
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of jiggers has been discussed a number of times in this august House. As we all know, the critical way of dealing with jiggers is improvement of personal hygiene and environmental sanitation. 

The main call by Government and the Ministry of Health has been to mobilise the people affected. Let me take this opportunity to appeal to the leadership in the country, particularly in Busoga, to take a lead role in mobilising the population to defeat and get rid of jiggers. 

I will also alert the Minister of Health to come and brief this august House on steps specifically being taken to reinforce the people in Busoga to defeat jiggers.

2.21
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I present a matter of public concern, I would like to thank you for the wonderful quotation of Martin Luther King Jr on issues that still loom large up to now. 

Mr Speaker, I would like you to allow me raise a matter of public concern regarding the continued presence of Uganda’s troops in South Sudan. It has recently been reported by Daily Monitor that South Sudan intends to postpone general elections for another three years to concentrate on the war.  I get worried when I hear such a statement. 

When the issue of deployment of our troops came in this House, we passed the motion with a lot of reservations. It is also on record that we requested the Government of Uganda to physically produce the letter, which the President of South Sudan wrote inviting Uganda. Up to now, that letter has not come. Those are some of the reservations we had.

Since the deployment of our forces, we have not received any updates regarding what is happening in South Sudan. I put it to the Government of Uganda that Uganda does not have the locus standi to plead self-defence because no one invaded Uganda as a state. Aware of that, I would like to pose the following questions and I rest my case: Is Government aware that our continued presence in South Sudan on the strength of Article 2(4) and Article 51 of the UN Charter is an open negation of international law? If so, why don’t you pull out and come back to Uganda?  Lastly, where do we get the locus standi to plead self-defence when we were not invaded by anybody? 

General elections coming to the Sudan should be a blessing because they can provide a lasting solution so that the war can end. Therefore, in light of those questions that I have put, I beg this House to get concerned about the continued stay of our troops in South Sudan. 

South Sudan recently stated that it pays for only internal movements of the UPDF. Who pays for the upkeep of our forces? Who pays for the renewal of armament during the fights? You have no answers to give. Maybe if Prime Minister has an answer, I will entertain such an answer. Thank you. 

2.24
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, in spite of my brother, hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi, knowing that I have no answer I just want to disappoint him by saying that after all, I have an answer. 

It is true, as is well known by the country and by this august House, that after these conflicts broke up in South Sudan, Government of Uganda and Government of South Sudan signed a memorandum of understanding. The Government of South Sudan, democratically elected by the people of South Sudan, invited our troops. It is also true that they have done very commendable work in South Sudan in saving the lives of the South Sudanese, Ugandans and the international community. 

Instead of raising many complaints, my dear brother, John Ken-Lukyamuzi, should highly commend the timely action by the UPDF to save lives in South Sudan. Details could be given later, but our work has been very condemnable and internationally recognised as having stopped an imminent genocide from taking place in South Sudan. (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The procedural concern I have is in regard to the constitutional requirement that troops deployment is authorised by this House. If it is authorised by this House, it is only prudent that this House is given an update about the welfare of the troops wherever they are. Besides, the House has to vote some money for their continued mission wherever they are deployed.

I find a challenge with the response the Prime Minister has given to a very pertinent question raised by a colleague, requiring that Government comes to this House and gives us an update. We hear of a renewed situation. How many troops did we send? How many of them are alive? What are we going in for? How long are we staying there? Those are some of the things we expected our very responsible Prime Minister to commit to bringing to this House.

Therefore, is it procedurally okay that the Prime Minister just comes in here and merely says that you should applaud the deployment and we stop there, yet we really need the accountability. Is it okay, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It does not sound like a procedural point; it sounds like a clarification that you seek from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The fact that I gave the response does not exclude Government to come in and give a more comprehensive response to issues raised by hon. Lukyamuzi. It is legitimate and appropriate that Government should come and respond. The minister responsible for defence will come and give an appropriate statement on the situation in South Sudan with regard to our troops. Mr Speaker, I will have to interact with the responsible people before I commit myself on the specific timeframe on this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, can we expect a commitment tomorrow when you have consulted?

DR RUGUNDA: That is fair. After this consultation, tomorrow the Government Chief Whip, the Minister of Defence or I will be able to give you the timeline.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

2.29
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I rise here as the Shadow Minister of Internal Affairs. 

I would like to join the Speaker in her condolences to the family of the late Joan Kagezi, who was gunned down. In the same spirit, the death of Ms Joan Kagezi is not a one-off; it is becoming a trend in the country. Prominent citizens of this country are being gunned down across the country, from eastern Uganda, to the central region and northern Uganda too. 

The style of their death is similar. One is approached by two or three people riding on a motorcycle as one disembarks or boards a taxi from either a mosque or a market and they are gunned down. This is coming at a time when there is heavy deployment of troops on the streets of Kampala.

I happen to sit on the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs; we are increasingly - even in the supplementary we have before Parliament - having a huge budget extended to these security operations. It is high time that the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda gets a detailed security report. Otherwise, this will not stop on the judges and sheikhs, but all of us will be targets. The security operatives in the country seem incapable of stopping this wave that is hitting our country.

Mr Speaker, I think the Government owes not only Parliament but also the general public an elaborate explanation on the security situation in this country. Therefore, my prayer is simple: The Government should come to this Parliament and explain the current situation in the country. 

I happen to represent a constituency that has a high density of Muslims. They are living in total fear of either being arrested as suspected killers or being killed. This should not go on. I have tried to raise this matter privately with my counterparts so that we can have detailed meetings about it, but this has come to nothing. So, it is high time that this matter got the due attention it deserves in this Parliament. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, before I entered the Chambers, I had got notification from the Minister of Internal Affairs that he wanted to make a statement on this issue of the killing of Ms Joan Kagezi yesterday. However, I do not know what has happened. I am therefore going to schedule a formal statement from the Minister of Internal Affairs for tomorrow at 2.00p.m. 

This will help us to receive it, understand it and see how far they have gone with the investigations, among other things. This will enable us have an insight into the very sad event that has taken place. So, let us have it for tomorrow. The statement will come from the Minister for Internal Affairs and then we will see how we handle this. Thank you.

2.33
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, District Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last week, you had directed the Ministry of Internal Affairs to come to this House today, on Tuesday, and make a statement on the rampant gun murders in the Teso Region.

What has happened here is shocking and it is a high profile murder. What is happening in Teso is that the villagers are getting killed in their gardens in broad daylight, on a weekly basis and nobody is arrested and yet investigations are inconclusive since November last year. You had directed that they come here but I do not even see the minister coming here. How do we precede, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will proceed with that statement also tomorrow. The reason it was not on the Order Paper is because we had not received confirmation that the statement is ready. That is why it was not put on the Order Paper.

LAYING OF PAPERS
2.34
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the following documents: 

i) Annual Report of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2014 – Performance Report, Volume 1. 

ii) Annual Report of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2014 - Central Government, Volume 2 A.  

iii) Annual Report of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2014 - Central Government and Statutory Corporations, Volume 2 (b). 

iv) Annual Report of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2014 – Volume 3, Local Authorities.  

v) Annual Report of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2014 – Statutory Corporations, Volume 4.

vi) Annual Report of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2014 – Value for Money Audit, Volume 5. 

vii) Extracts of the Summary of Key Findings of the Annual Report of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2014. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let the records capture all those annual reports from the Auditor-General and the extract of the summary of the key findings of the annual report of the Office the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2014. They stand committed to the appropriate committees of both public accounts and local government accounts to handle expeditiously within the framework of the law and the Constitution and advise the House on how to proceed with those issues. I think the other committee is also COSASE.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure specifically on the laying on the Table of these documents. I have noticed a certain practice that happens in the House where the Commission, on behalf of various committees, comes to lay on the Table specific reports of different entities and ministries even after carrying out an exercise like hon. Rose Akol has done.

I think we should avoid presenting reports for specific entities and ministries as has always been done. What has just been done now should suffice; we should consider that all reports for the year 2014 contained in the different volumes have been laid before this House. Therefore, we would avoid the hustle of laying them entity by entity on the Floor of the House. I wish to receive your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the reports that come from the Office of the Auditor-General come in various forms. This is the one that is required by the Constitution to be presented six months after the end of the financial year. These are the reports we have just received. There are also the specific vote audit reports that come in smaller volumes and that are also brought to the House. 

Whatever the Office of the Audit–General does should be received by this Parliament and that is why we keep bringing them here. Otherwise, we would not even be receiving accounts from local governments, sub counties and all those, because they have a different framework of laws that handle that entire process. However, because Parliament is the chief oversight institution, we must receive all the documents. 

Also, a decision was taken previously that all matters that come from the Office of the Auditor- General, that office being an office of Parliament, should now be handled by the Parliamentary Commission. This is as opposed to what was done in the past where PAC used to handle some; the Committee on Local Government Accounts would also handle some; and COSASE used to handle some. Now it has been set that as long as these reports are from the Office of the Auditor–General, they will be presented by the Parliamentary Commission because that office is an office of Parliament. That is how the procedure is being handled. 

If there are other variations that need to be taken care of, that certainly would be accommodated and be handled on a case by case basis; as the matters arise, we can see how to handle them. However, a decision has been taken for reports of this nature to be formally brought through this process and that is why we are doing it this way.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, while not disputing what you are saying, all I was trying to raise is that these volumes are actually summaries; it is information that is compiled from individual reports. I felt that to save Parliament’s time, maybe this could serve as the laying on the Table of all those reports for a financial year. Therefore, there would be no need in future for a parliamentary commissioner to come with individual departmental or ministerial reports from the Auditor-General for that year. This would suffice so that we do not have the same thing done again and yet it is being done now in summary form.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what I am saying; that decision was taken previously. Any single document that comes from the Office of the Auditor-General must be brought to this House. Even the local government accounts of Lalogi Sub-county, where I was born, find their way to the Table here through the Parliamentary Commission; that has been the practice. If there is need to review that, it can be done. However, for now, that is it. 

The key issue that we should be raising now is how do we substantially handle local government accounts for sub counties and all these other entities, because there is an entire process that is supposed to handle that. Public accounts committees of the districts are supposed to look at those reports and opinions of the Auditor-General, make their own recommendations to the Minister of Local Government, and the Minister of Local Government compiles volumes just like these ones. Those are the volumes that are submitted to Parliament so that we can act on that basis. 

As you are aware, we have not yet received any of these reports from the Minister of Local Government. These are the issues that we are trying to review to see if we can use the law more pragmatically and take the provisions seriously, so that we can benefit from it. This is because those who drafted the laws had certain things in mind; for example, they imagined that there is no way the Local Government Accounts Committee of Parliament can handle the accounts of sub counties of the whole country, prepare sufficient reports, complete them in three months and then we take a decision. That would be for God to do, not human beings. That is why these proposals were made in that framework. I see Members rising, may I know why?

MR JACOB OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising to further supplement and partially report on the progress of our committee in handling this matter as directed by this House. We have a draft report already and I think that early after the Easter break, we shall be able to bring the experiences in relation to the law that you are guiding on. This is something that will either help us make amendments in our rules or make some legislation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, because for now, we should implement the law as it is and not as it ought to be.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, perhaps my issue has been over taken; I would like to remind the House that we have taken a decision and asked the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to review that position and give us a report so that we can move forward. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

LAYING OF PAPERS 

2.45
MS MARGRET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Mr Speaker, in accordance with rule 33 of the Rules Of Procedure of Parliament, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on a field visit to central and western Uganda. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. We will schedule it on a day that is appropriate so that we receive your observations, findings and recommendations on what we should do and have a debate on that matter.

THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Mr Speaker, much as we appreciate reports of field trips or foreign trips being laid on the Table, it is very important that the chairpersons at least be given two minutes to highlight the content of the report. The chairperson stands here and says, “I beg to lay” and “I hereby lay” and ends there! I think it is important.

I know you are pressed by time, Mr Speaker, but at least the chairperson should be given one or two minutes to highlight the issues in the report. With that, some of us who are interested in certain lines of events taking place in the country can follow them up. Although you say it is gender fieldwork, we do not know what they did. Just one or two minutes, I am begging you as the whip. Thank you so much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Today I am whip? (Laughter) I do not know what that makes hon. Cecilia Ogwal if the Speaker is now the whip; you might have just lost your position. 

However, honourable members, there is a distinction between the procedure just used now, that is, laying of papers and nothing more than that, and another for a motion for presentation, consideration and adoption. That is when the chairperson would speak and it is under a separate rule. 

What is on the Order Paper for today is laying of papers, and you just do that. If you do anything more, the Speaker will rule you out of order, and I would not like to do that and many chairpersons would not like to be ruled out of order. As I said, we will find time to handle this. Thank you.

Honourable members, we have in the public gallery this afternoon students and teachers of Ebony College Luwero, represented by hon. Byandala Abraham and hon. Nabukenya Brenda, woman representative. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) We also have head teachers from Arua District, represented by hon. Atiku Bernard, hon. Okuonzi Sam and hon. Abia Christine. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Honourable members, I had already stated earlier, but I am waiting for further information on the people who have come for the motion for Saint Janani Luwum. However, I have not got the full list yet; I will be announcing them when I receive it.

As I said earlier, in the distinguished strangers’ gallery, we have Ambassador Olara Otunnu, President of the Uganda People’s Congress. I think he is still President although the note here says former president. He is still President of Uganda People’s Congress until possibly the next elections or something. 

Honourable members, on item No.5, the Prime Minister, who is the mover of the motion, has had a slight problem but he is coming back shortly. However, in the meantime, let us handle the next item and as soon as he comes, we will move back to this.

MOTION FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT 
OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that we had started handling this matter. I had put the question for decision and we had started taking the decisions one by one. We reached chapter two of the report but there was an issue on the legality of the action of the leadership of National Social Security Fund in relation to the purchase of shares of the Umeme Ltd IPO.

The issue then was, did they act within the framework of the law by not getting guidance from the Solicitor-General or is there a law that overrides that requirement? That was a debate we had and we had guidance from the learned Attorney-General, which I would like him to repeat so that we can take a decision on the rest of the recommendations.

2.51
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, we have harmonised our positions on this matter with members of the committee. We also consulted with officials of the National Social Security Fund and other relevant stakeholders. I hope the chairperson is -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, the chairperson is here.

MR RUHINDI: Now that there is silence, it means that we are in agreement. Mr Speaker, when I came into the House that day when this issue was deferred for another time, you had asked hon. Adolf Mwesige to present or hold the brief for the Attorney-General. When I came in, what came into my possession was a letter which was authored in the Office of the Attorney-General, specifically from the Office of the Solicitor-General, which I presented at that time.

I wish to clarify as follows: first, that letter of 28 October 2013 was in respect of purchase of shares in Tanzania Breweries Ltd and Cooperative Bank of Kenya Ltd by National Social Security Fund. If it were not for the principle, I would have withdrawn that position, because this letter is not related to the affairs of Umeme Ltd. However, because of the principle, I wish to state as follows: This letter carried a very important principle, in that, what went to the Office of the Solicitor-General was in respect of analysis of investment. 

The Office of the Attorney-General does not advise agencies of government on any risk they are undertaking on a particular venture; that is the work of those agencies. They come to us with legal documents, agreements and contracts in accordance with Article 119. In this case, there was none, and the Solicitor-General advised properly that they could not attend to this matter because there was no contract or legal document to be cleared.

Clearance means that you have to put in perspective that legal document and see whether it falls within the four corners of the law: Are you in compliance with the law which establishes you; are you in compliance with the Constitution - That is our work as the Office of the Attorney-General.

At the end, he seemed to indicate - and Ministry of Finance or NSSF can speak for themselves – that, “please, apply section 30 and 39 of the National Social Security Fund”. It is up to them to tell us how they understood that, but all he was saying was, assess your investment, crystallise your legal documentation and there is no way you can fail to get back to the Attorney-General’s office. That was the import of that letter.

Before that, there were about three letters also written from the Office of the Solicitor-General. One actually cleared some documentation of the National Social Security Fund in respect of offer documents. That was in the IPO two, where they cleared some documentation. I understand there was an investor who had already procured some shares then and had wanted to offload them. So, there was a broker who managed the transaction between the investor and the purchaser and it is that document, in form of a contract, which was forwarded to the Attorney-General’s office, which was cleared.

That, of course, means that in terms of these shares and portfolio investment, the Attorney-General cannot be disclaimed. In any case, the National Social Security Fund Act must be read together with the Constitution; it cannot prevail over the Constitution.

This letter, which cleared this IPO, is dated 9 May 2014 - purchase of shares from Umeme Holdings Limited. However, there was an earlier IPO, which was never cleared from the Solicitor-General’s office. It is true that a matter could be urgent, but you cannot actually exclude the responsibility of the Attorney-General’s office. I think agencies of Government must be advised that if you know a matter is of such an urgent nature, it is always better to forward your request early enough so that it can be attended to. It is very unfair to visit your agency’s urgency or emergency on the Office of the Attorney-General.

There was also another letter from the Solicitor-General, which was to the effect that, “You would like to invest in Umeme, but there is already an investigation going on, on Umeme matters within Parliament; are you aware of it; can you advise us whether its import would not in any way jeopardise your prospective investment?” Those were the letters from the Solicitor-General’s office.

Further, the Attorney-General is represented in the Capital Markets Authority. There has been an argument that since the Attorney-General is represented in the Capital Markets Authority, whatever takes place there binds the Attorney-General. My view is different because what comes out of that Capital Markets Authority is the decision of that board and certainly, not the decision of the Attorney-General. You may find that they may even disagree there but you go with the majority. So, at the end of the day, recourse must be heard in the Office of the Attorney-General.

In short, there should be no disclaimer on the role of the Attorney-General. We are here to advise Government both on the procedures and on the substance where the law is impacted. Therefore, to me, that is our position. We are in agreement with those we have consulted with and I believe that this clarifies the position.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, learned Attorney-General. Can we now go to chapter two and please read recommendation No. 2 and we take a decision. Now that is clear, honourable members. You have heard, the committee recommendation is now agreed upon by the learned Attorney-General.

Recommendation No. 2
The committee recommends that Mr Ivan Kyayonka be forced to vacate the board of NSSF due to his irregular action in pushing the NSSF to purchase Umeme IPO shares without the approval of the Solicitor-General.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to that recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation No. 2, agreed to.

Recommendation No. 3

In light of the above, the committee recommends that Mr Ivan Kyayonka and Ms Geraldine Ssali should be reprimanded for their dubious and irregular action in the acquisition of shares.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to that recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation No. 3, agreed to.

Recommendation No. 4

The committee recommends that the MD NSSF should be faulted and punished for avoiding the advice and proper procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to that recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation No. 4, agreed to.

Recommendation No. 5

The committee recommends that African Alliance Uganda Limited should be visited with sanctions by the Capital Markets Authority for having conflict of interest by working both as seller for Umeme Limited and buyer for the NSSF.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation No. 5, agreed to.

Recommendation No. 6

The committee recommends that the management and board of the Capital Markets Authority be reprimanded for their complacency.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation No. 6, agreed to.

Recommendation No. 7

The committee recommends that the Income Tax Act be reviewed to address the loopholes that concession holders in Uganda would use to avoid capital gains tax payment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation No. 7, agreed to.

Recommendation No. 8

The committee recommends that hon. Gerald Ssendaula should be forced to relinquish one of the positions in either URA or Umeme Ltd. to avoid conflict of interest.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation No. 8, agreed to.

Recommendation No. 9

The committee recommends that the concession agreement with Umeme Limited be reviewed, given the major changes that have occurred in the ownership of the company.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation No. 9, agreed to.

Recommendation No. 10

The committee further recommends that the Minister of Energy and Minerals should audit the effects of the violation of the concession agreement as a result of the reduction of the shares of the original shareholding below the acceptable limits as per the concession agreement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation No. 10, agreed to.

Recommendation No. 11

The committee further recommends that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should reprimand the leadership of the Capital Markets Authority (management and the board) for its failure to do a comprehensive due diligence that would have safeguarded the interests of Uganda in the Umeme concessional agreement.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you seeking clarification from the minister or from the chairperson because there is nobody holding the Floor? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, what does “reprimanding” mean? If somebody has committed a crime, we recommend that action X should be taken. They may issue a reprimand letter yet they have caused a loss. I think the action to be taken must be clear; we either sack the management and the board or they should be held liable for the loss other than just reprimanding. I would like to propose that - maybe let me first get clarification on the meaning of “reprimand”.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The committee used the word “reprimand” because there are several actions that management or those with authority can take. It is a set of different decisions they can take. You can be warned, suspended or sacked. We had left it as a package but Parliament can guide accordingly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is sacking a reprimand? 

MR KABAJO: Mr Speaker, going from the explanation of the chairperson of the committee, I think what she would like is for disciplinary action to be taken. “Reprimand” is a specific action; it does not include all those that she has mentioned. 

Therefore, I think we should change the recommendation to say, “Disciplinary action should be taken against those responsible by the appropriate authority”. In that case, it will be up to the authority to decide which particular disciplinary action to take or which set of actions to take.

MR JACOB OBOTH: Mr Speaker, I think hon. Nandala-Mafabi was right to raise this. It can be defined. When you are according punishment, you look at the offence. Now, reprimand - I am holding in my hands a definition - would mean a rebuke, scolding and also finger pointing; that all includes reprimanding an officer, but also to a large extent it can mean dismissal. Therefore, if we want to say dismissal, it could be specific. 

However, given the kind of offence committed, the chairperson could have helped this House to let us know what was in the mind of the committee members. Did the reprimand here mean finger pointing, just rebuking, scolding an officer or did they mean more than what they are saying?

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think different dictionaries perhaps give different meaning. I am also holding the Advanced Learner’s Dictionary here and it says reprimand may mean “an act or expression of criticism and censure”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do we say in the recommendation that reprimand according to the Advanced Learners’ Dictionary –(Laughter)– Please, let us wind up on this issue.

MR OBOTH: I am sure that is not helping us at all; that Advanced Learners’ Dictionary should be updated because it does not help. If your recommendation is that somebody should be criticized, then say it. I thought by even making that recommendation you are already criticising.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Make a proposal now, please.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, given the fact that the only concession agreement that the Capital Markets Authority management and board has brought to our notice is Umeme Limited - there could be more of this nature; wrong advice to Government and to any institution that they are investing in the wrong sector.

If you have discovered that these are wrong, I want to propose that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should dismiss the leadership of the Capital Markets Authority for failure to do due diligence because they are involved in this and Government is going to lose money. You cannot say that the Chairman of NSSF should be forced yet he relied on the advice of the Capital Markets Authority.

If you are saying the chairman is wrong yet he relied on the other one, then the people who advised him should be the first to be dealt with and that is the Capital Markets Authority leadership and board.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would taking appropriate action suffice to give the discretion?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I want to propose that the leadership of the Capital Markets Authority management and Board should be dismissed for failure to give good advice to investors. These are the people holding a lot of our resources and they are the ones advising where to – (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Whereas I agreed with the definition, I find it quite necessary to seek clarification. Dismissal – did the poor advice lead to financial loss? What was the magnitude of the damage? If the word reprimand has been used many times in Public Service including the standing orders and for this House, we can also adopt appropriate action being taken.  We are constituting ourselves, Mr Speaker. We are giving a verdict. My brother, would you want to clarify why you are so incensed with a dismissal instead of appropriate action recommendation?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, very much. Mr Speaker, if you read recommendation No. 2, you said the Chairman, Mr Ivan Kyayonka, be forced to vacate office. You have said “forced to leave”; if you can force others to leave, who are these you are supposed to leave? That should apply across the board. If you are saying so, then we should recommit section 2 and say, we reprimand the board chairman and then we shall reprimand others. But if all of them are going because the loss has occurred and you say they should vacate, then they should also vacate.

THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, we should not quarrel with the word “reprimand” because reprimand is a formal and technical way of punishing somebody basing on the gravity or perceived gravity of the offence committed.

It is akin to the word caution, which is a sentence in a criminal matter. In a criminal case, you can be convicted for having committed a crime but sentenced to a caution. Likewise in a civil matter, if people judging you think that what you have done is not severe, they can subject you to a reprimand and it is a technical, formal and an official way –(Interruption)

MR KASSIANO WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank my long-time friend, the Deputy Attorney-General. The clarification I wish to seek from you is around the word “reprimand:, especially when you take it into the context of the Uganda Government ascending order. It takes into account the gravity of the offence for which you are being advised to be reprimanded, in which case it relates to only those offenses which are of light nature, not those which are of serious nature.

In this particular case, have you addressed your mind to the gravity of the offense that has been allegedly committed by this group of people in respect of whom hon. Nandala-Mafabi is proposing a dismissal? Have you addressed your mind to that?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker that is exactly what I was saying. (Laughter) If in the opinion of this House, the act constituted very grave misfeasance, then the House can say instead of reprimand, we substitute with a harsher sentence. Somebody was saying that the word “reprimand is not recognised and known; and I said that reprimand is a formal way of punishment basing on the gravity of the offense. It is still open to this House to say no; in this case we do not merely reprimand but take further action; that is what I was trying to say.

I was trying to say do not think that the word reprimand is out of the way or out of context. In the opinion of the committee, they thought that the matter referred to was not so severe. Therefore, they recommended to reprimand.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, we cannot over debate this matter. The proposal is to remove the word “reprimand” and in its place we put the word “dismiss”. I will put the question to that amendment. We cannot go on at this rate.  I will put the question to the amendment proposed by the Member of Budadiri West. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that recommendation 11, as amended, stand as a recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation No. 11, as amended, agreed to.


Recommendation No. 12

The committee recommended that this possible fraud should be further invested by the relevant government agencies.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, again, I would like to seek clarification from the committee chairperson. She has said that fraud should be further investigated by the relevant government agencies and yet I thought that the committee investigated and discovered that fraud had taken place. Which other fraud are you now talking about that should further be investigated?

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Where the committee was constrained is where we were proposing different recommendations for different players. One, we found out that the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development appoints the boards of the Capital Markets Authority, the regulatory authority and the NSSF. Now how did they all act differently and under what circumstances where they all constrained in their actions? 

Then a letter of no objection comes from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to Umeme to divest more shares even beyond what was acceptable. What would you expect ERA, the regulator, to do when ERA is under the guidance of the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development?

Then there comes the Secretary to the Treasury, the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development; they have cleared. The Capital Markets Authority wrote on 12th November properly indicating that they had not yet approved the prospectus and would approve if particular issues were streamlined and cleared. However on 11th October, there is a prospectus that is out –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, the clarification is on the recommendation. Would you like to clarify?

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: That is why we are saying that there is need for more investigations in the fraud that happened because we found out that there was connivance sometimes or stage managing the transactions. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Budadiri West, fraud requires strict proof and the committee did not have the capacity to establish that level of proof that would sustain a charge of fraud and that is why they are saying that somebody more competent should do the investigation. I will now put the question – please, then why are you going round and round?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence. The fraud that they are talking about is on pages 34 and 35 of the report, which says that Umeme Limited is being compensated for poles, among others, that they did not buy and this weakness is a result of ERA’s oversight problem. 

If you have now discovered that ERA is not doing its job, we must deal with ERA now as they go. Because if we are compensating poles that they never bought and yet it is ERA recommending – that is why power is expensive and many people are not connected to power – we should deal with the ERA management now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable member, what this recommendation is saying is that they have seen that there is a possibility of fraud and have recommended that the specialised agencies of Government should carry out investigations to establish if there was fraud. What is wrong with the recommendation? Can I now put the question members?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation No. 12, agreed to.

Recommendation 13

The committee further recommended that the performance of ERA be critically evaluated.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that recommendation? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation No. 13, agreed to.

Chapter 3 

Recommendation No. 1

The committee recommends that the Managing Director, Mr Richard Byarugaba, and the Chairperson NSSF Board, Mr Ivan Kyayonka, be compelled to make good the loss of the Fund incurred of Shs 56,170,001 that resulted from the sale of the Namirembe land below the cost price.

MR MUSASIZI: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to propose that this recommendation be deleted. The justification is that Shs 56 million was incurred while transferring this land from leasehold to freehold and the cost of transfer of property does not form part of the acquisition costs. Therefore, the basis upon which this figure was computed is misleading.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: It is true that Shs 56 million includes the amount that was used. This plot was procured in 2008 at a cost of Shs 650 million on leasehold. The land had a lease of 99 years but had expired by 44 years and so had only 56 years left. NSSF incurred Shs 65 million to transfer the land from leasehold to freehold. Those who understand land issues know that freehold can never be valued at the same rate as leasehold. NSSF was right as it had an objective to increase the value and security of assets of NSSF thereby increasing the value. This is even actually cited in the IGG’s report.

What we discovered during the investigations was stage managing and connivance up to the Office of the Chief Government Valuer who said there was not a big disparity in the price of freehold and leasehold land.

The board, first of all, passed a resolution to dispose of all assets that they had bought at the time and the Namirembe land was part of it. However later on when they purchased this land, the investigations indicated that the land had three access roads but four years down the road, they want to dispose of it. 

After the board had agreed to dispose of it – it was the buyer of the land who called NSSF to dispose of the land and when the board agreed, the Investment Manager at NSSF raised a red flag and said that the land was going to be disposed of at a cheaper price and yet the NSSF could explore all options to have access to the land. The Commissioner for Lands also advised that there were laws and it would be possible for NSSF to explore those options to have access to the land. The IGG’s report – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Chairperson, can you tell the House about the Shs 56 million loss?

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: We are saying that it is a loss because the NSSF now sells the land at a value less than it actually was at the time of disposal. The NSSF board to which the Managing Director is the Secretary and Ivan Kyayonka, the chairman, halted the sale after the investment manager raised the red flag. So, what happened the following day? 

The chairman at the following board meeting said that whereas they had taken the decision to halt the sale, they had sold and disposed of the land which raised questions. Were they not members of the board when the board was taking a decision? Why did they report to the board that whereas they had taken that decision, they had already disposed of the land? The committee, therefore, concluded that there was a loss. Because of the different reports, there is no land that remains with the same value here in Uganda after four years. Therefore, there was a loss of Shs 56 million.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to that recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will halt the proceedings of this particular item here and as soon as we are finished with the next item, we will come back to it. Can you call the motion?


MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE MOST REVEREND JANANI JAKALIYA LUWUM, FORMER ANGLICAN ARCHBISHOP OF UGANDA, RWANDA, BURUNDI AND BOGA–ZAIRE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister moves the motion, let me recognise the following people and family members who have come here to listen to this motion as it progresses.

I had already introduced and recognised Ambassador Olara Otunnu, co-chairperson of the national organising committee; Justice James Ogola who is in the treasury bench behind me, co-chairperson; Ambassador Bernadette Olowo, member of the national organising committee; Dr Thelma Awori, member; hon. Okello Okello John Livingstone, member; Mr Kagenda Atwooki, member; hon. Ben Okello Luwum was a family member and member also; Mrs Pauline Okello Luwum, member; Ms Julie Luwum and Ms Phoebe Luwum, daughter; Ms Mary Bagenda; Mr Okello Simon Linus; and Mr Harrison Kiggundu. These are people who are coming from the family and also the national organising committee.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, on 3rd March, hon. Anywar formally moved this motion and Parliament only delayed the debate of the motion because we wanted to give it due adequate time and the prominence it deserves.  Now that the Government side has recognised and given it that due respect and that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is the mover and the Leader of the Opposition is the mover and hon. Fox Odoi the Seconder, I would like to beg that natural justice be done and hon. Anywar also seconds the motion. That will not be too much to ask, given that the same motion featured on the 12th and 14th of the respective Order Papers when hon. Anywar was the mover. 

Now that Government has taken it over, would it be procedurally wrong for this Parliament to find it within your bigger hearts to recognise that she becomes one of the seconders?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I said it at the beginning of my communication about the origin of this motion. It was in the meeting of the national organising committee that a proposal was made and I was in that meeting. The proposal was that a commemoration motion should be brought to the House before the event. I was there and I said, given the schedule of Parliament at that time, it was not possible to hold a meeting of Parliament specifically for this motion. 

I, therefore, proposed that immediately after the events, we would be able to convene the House and prepare a tribute motion like the formal motion we always do here. The family members were there, the members of the central organising committee were there and it was agreed that after the event, we would come and do this motion.

I am not aware of other proceedings. However, it has now been brought to my attention and we have no problem at all. You know, the issue is, Janani Luwum is no longer a local issue, and his issue should be accorded that significance. What I am going to say is, the Member will speak to the motion formerly. We will give her more time since she comes from the area where Janani Luwum was born. However, Janani Luwum is no longer a Kitgum, Acholi, or Ugandan affair; he is an international affair. He has been recognised by other countries even before we have done so. Therefore, please, let us give this motion the significance it deserves.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE MOST REVEREND JANANI JAKALIYA LUWUM, FORMER ANGLICAN ARCHBISHOP OF UGANDA, RWANDA, BURUNDI AND BOGA – ZAIRE

3.24
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to move this important motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to Reverend Janani Jakaliya Luwum, Archbishop of Uganda and martyr. I am moving this motion under Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“WHEREAS the late Archbishop Janani Jakaliya Luwum was born in 1924 in Mucwini village Kitgum district in northern Uganda;

AND WHEREAS the late Archbishop joined Gulu High School and later Boroboro Teacher Training College and finished his religious education at Buwalasi Theological College;

AND WHEREAS the late Archbishop Janani Jakaliya Luwum joined the Anglican Church in the early 1950s and became a Deacon in 1953 and was ordained priest in 1954 and was consecrated Bishop of the Dioceses of Northern Uganda at Gulu in 1969 and later served as Archbishop of the Church of Uganda and Metropolitan Province of Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi and Boga-Zaire from 1974 to 1977;

NOTING THAT the late Archbishop Janani Jakaliya Luwum was one of the most influential leaders of the modern church in Africa, advocating for democratic governance, rule of law, protection and promotion of fundamental human right and freedoms and that  the late Archbishop Janani Jakaliya Luwum was unwavering in the pursuit for common good, fairness, equality and democracy in a hostile environment perpetuated by the Idi Amin military regime of that time which resulted into his murder on the 16 February 1977;

RECOGNISING the role played by the late Archbishop Janani Jakaliya Luwum in the liberation of Uganda and establishment of democracy as well as his contribution to the spread of Christianity not only in Uganda but other countries leading to him being declared a martyr by the Church of England;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:

1. That Parliament collectively pays tribute to the late Archbishop Janani Jakaliya Luwum for his distinguished service and contributions towards the liberation of Uganda and the spread of Christianity in Africa as well as the development of Uganda.

2. That the ideals of democracy, good governance and the rule of law that the late Archbishop Janani Luwum advocated for should be upheld.

3. That Parliament takes cognisance of the Public Holiday of 16th February pronounced in Mucwini by His Excellency President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, in appreciation of the numerous contributions made by the late Archbishop Janani Luwum during his lifetime.” 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, the Chief Opposition Whip, Member for Kitgum, Member for Gulu, members for West Budama North, West Budama South, Serere, Ndorwa, Mitooma, Mbarara Municipality, Kole – all the Members of Parliament. Would you like to speak to your motion?

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are here today to pay tribute to an icon who stood for truth, justice, faith and respect of human rights in Uganda and beyond.

Archbishop Janani Luwum was a prominent Christian leader, a great man of the 20th Century and a compelling role model for the world regardless of faith or any other background. The legacy and resonance of Janani’s testimony and the example exhibited so far transcends all levels of his personal heritage.

Janani Luwum served as the Archbishop of the Province of the Church of Uganda, Rwanda and Boga-Zaire. He resisted intimidation of the brutal regime of Idi Amin and ended up paying the ultimate price with his life.

Mr Speaker, remembering and paying tribute to the late Archbishop Luwum by this august House is important and timely. It is important because it is the key that we remember our heroes and let present and future generations know the people who have sacrificed for our country Uganda. The testimony, martyrdom and example of Janani should not only be known but celebrated and emulated in our nation Uganda, Africa and all over the world.

Who really was Janani Luwum? Janani Luwum was born in 1924 in Mucwini, Chua County – present day Kitgum District – to Eliya Okello and Irene Aciro. Janani Jakaliya Luwum attended Primary School in Puranga, Gulu High School for secondary and Boroboro Teacher Training College in Lira where he trained as a teacher.

He then went for further training at Bishop Asher Wilson Theological College, Buwalasi in Mbale. He went to St Augustine College Canterbury in 1958 to 1959 where he enrolled for a one-year course in Anglican leadership. He returned to England for a three-year diploma programme at London College of Divinity. However, because of his aptness, he completed this programme in two years.

On return to Uganda, he was ordained priest of the then Upper Nile Diocese at St Philip Church Gulu. Thereafter, he served as chaplain and as parish priest in several schools and parishes. In June 1955, Janani Luwum was appointed Principal of Buwalasi Theological College where he served with diligence, honesty and dedication.

In September 1966, Janani Luwum became Provincial Secretary of the Church of Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi and Boga-Zaire. On 25 January 1969, he was consecrated Bishop of Northern Uganda. On 9 June 1974, barely five years after his consecration as bishop, Janani Luwum was installed as successor to Bishop Erica Sabiti as Archbishop of the Church of the Province of Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi and Boga-Zaire.

The late Archbishop Luwum had a heart for a just society. He made it his business to confront the injustices and atrocities of Idi Amin. He made his criticisms public. For example, in a radio address on Christmas Day of 1976, he condemned Idi Amin’s atrocities.

Mr Speaker and colleagues, the late Archbishop Luwum never wanted to live in peace elsewhere in the world while his people suffered here in Uganda. At the height of the extrajudicial killings, it is reported that the British contacted him and were ready to take him away from Uganda. However, he refused to run away. He is quoted to have said and I quote, “If I, the shepherd flee, what will happen to the flock? I am not afraid at all. In all this, I see the hand of God.”

Archbishop Luwum would have fled to the comfort of London – England – but he chose to suffer with the rest of Ugandans who were being tormented by Amin’s regime. This is a clear sign of love for his country and a strong sense of patriotism, which he ultimately paid for with his blood. He became a major uniting factor and healing force within a fractured Church and a country in agony and riddled with fear.

During his life, he confronted tribalism, religious rivalry and despotism in Uganda. On 10 February 1977, he led the House of Bishops of the Church of Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi and Boga-Zaire in writing to Amin condemning the manner in which the Archbishop’s house had been searched. His wise and courageous leadership encouraged the people of Uganda not to disregard, but confront issues of the Church and State in Uganda.

Mr Speaker, a word about his death. On 16 February 1977, Archbishop Janani Luwum was murdered by the Amin regime. Soldiers secretly transported his mutilated body to Mucwini for burial and dumped it in a hurriedly dug grave at a primary school at Wii Gweng, where he rests to-date. His death was, indeed, a tragedy. He was a gift to Uganda, Africa and humanity.

His Excellency President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni condemned this extrajudicial killing and declared 16 February a public holiday. The President also directed that the ground where Janani Luwum is buried be improved to include a museum to serve as his memorial and a perpetual reminder that extra judicial killings should never be tolerated. (Applause)

Uganda lost a gallant son. The Church lost a shepherd. The family lost a loving husband and father. The world lost an icon and a courageous leader. His death is to be celebrated because it marked a pivotal turning point for the liberation of our country, Uganda. It was his death that united Ugandans and his martyrdom galvanised international attention for the liberation of our country. It set the stage and mood that greatly facilitated and led to the subsequent and ultimately the successful Tanzanian led campaign that led to the removal of Idi Amin’s regime.

The life of Janani Luwum could not be more pertinent and powerful for Uganda, Africa and the world than today. In him, we have an authentic hero, a giant at many levels and a compelling role model whose example should inspire and challenge us all regardless of our faith and affiliations. 

Mr Speaker, let me take this opportunity to salute the widow, Mama Mary Luwum and family for keeping the memory of Janani Luwum alive and also for sharing with Uganda the tremendous gift that Janani Luwum was. I salute the fraternity of the Church and the people of Uganda for nurturing this gallant son of Uganda. May his exemplary life and powerful testimony continue to inspire and challenge all of us.  Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Prime Minister. Seconder, Leader of Opposition -

3.50
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much, Rt hon. Prime Minister, for moving the motion. I stand here to second and support the motion honouring one of the greatest Ugandans who ever lived, Saint Janani Jakaliya Luwum. 

Indeed, I would like to also thank hon. Beatrice Anywar who was the first person to initiate this idea but at the same time, I am very glad that the government side graciously agreed to take it up and make it more high profile bipartisan motion.

The Most Reverend Janani Luwum served the Anglican Church of Uganda at a critical period when the political setting was characterised by the military dictatorship which attempted to ensure that Idi Amin remained in power at all costs. The Most Reverend Janani Luwum was a leading voice in criticising the excesses of Idi Amin’s regime that grabbed power in 1971. St Janani Luwum worked for a just, peaceful and democratic society.

Mr Speaker, through the influence of Balokole or the “Savedees” and the writings of Martin Luther King, St Luwum used the philosophy of non-violence resistance to confront Idi Amin Dada’s policies of arbitrary killings and unexplained disappearances of innocent Ugandans. Archbishop Luwum could, for example, personally approach the dreaded State Research Bureau to help secure those who had been captured or waited to be killed. Through the use of live broadcast, Luwum educated Ugandans with his sermons. Similarly, he preached and attacked the atrocities, which were championed by Idi Amin. He urged Christians not to fear and tackle the problems facing Uganda at the time. Although this broadcast was stopped at times, nevertheless, Archbishop Luwum would personally confront Idi Amin in his palace in the State House and present his case. 

As many people continued being killed and insecurity accelerated in Uganda, many leaders were silenced. The Most Reverend Janani Jakaliya Luwum became almost the only voice for the voiceless. He believed that as a Christian Church the wider social order is integrated with a fallen sinful condition. Therefore, the destiny of the Christian Church community is intertwined with the wider social, political and economic dimension of human life. As such, he argued there was no separation between the Christian community and the socio-economic, political and spiritual life. 

This holistic understanding of the gospel compelled him to explicitly visualise the task of the Anglican Church of Uganda and the Christian Church in general to be God’s agents for justice, peace, reconciliation and restoration. This understanding enabled him to integrate the pastoral theory and proxy, which would engage the Church in social transformation programme.

As such, he initiated programmes geared towards fighting oppressive socio-economic and political structures. He affirmed that the church was called to engage in ensuring the wellbeing of the poor. In this respect, he saw structural poverty as being rooted in socio economic and political institutions.

His argument was that if these social and political institutions are not transformed, they would continue perpetuating poverty, hence transferring it from one generation to another.

The Most Reverend Janani Zachariah Luwum’s contention was that human beings are psychosomatic beings and what affects the body also affects the mind and soul. Therefore, the Church should be involved in socio-economic and political issues as well as spiritual ones. This is in line with a holistic approach to pastoral care as opposed to the inherited conservative approach where the physical body is seen as separate from spirituality.

The holistic understanding for the human being is vital for us because a better society can only be achieved when the Christians, or the people, or the citizens in general understand the social economic and political dimensions of the gospel. 

Sometimes, we get surprised these days when our leaders begin to reprimand Church leaders who are trying to struggle for the social economic transformation of Ugandans. They call them all sorts of names, just like they did to Luwum.  A few of the present religious leaders are doing exactly the same. We should also appreciate why they are doing so.

For Janani Luwum, the Church as a redeemed community had an obligation to work for justice and peace to redeem the oppressed, the weak and the deprived of every society. He asserted that the Church should speak out with justice as experienced in the society. Of course, this broad Christian vision compelled him to engage with the question of the Church and state relations. Luwum’s assertion was that it was possible for the Church to initiate caring programmes like Martin Luther King’s beloved community. 

Mr Speaker, like Martin Luther King Jr, Luwum was killed in 1977 by the system he was trying to transform; this was after he was arrested, humiliated in public and then accused of treason together with two cabinet ministers namely, Erinayo Wilson Oryema and Charles Oboth Ofumbi. 

It is ironic that even though Luwum was preaching peace and non-violence in the community, he was killed violently by Amin’s security forces after his home was raided. Today, we pay tribute to the St Luwum for a service he whole- heartedly rendered to this country, our mother land, Uganda. 

Many reflections will be made of his life that resonates with bravery, commitment, patriotism and accomplishments. He was an achiever. He stood firm on his conviction to his last hours of life and made some of us proud as Ugandans today. He served his Creator in Church and the country with dedication, humility, integrity and nationalism putting the country and its people first. There are not many of us who do this. Many Ugandans today serve themselves first, then their President second, their party third and the country last. 

Today, we thank God for such a distinguished and resilient man of God who never wavered from the truth despite the waves of threats and harassment. His actions and accomplishments gave us reason to fight on. These days, many of us are swayed from the truth because we want to survive amidst injustice and suffering. May we draw inspiration from actions of the man of God whom we pay tribute to now. The Most Reverent St Janani Jakaliya Luwum left behind a legacy of clean, dedicated leadership, and strong commitment to serve others. As we reflect, reflect also on yourself as a Member of Parliament and as a Ugandan. How far can you go as Luwum went? 

Mr Speaker, as a country we are doing poorly today. Virtues of putting people first, selflessness and commitment to serve others are very difficult to find. Why do we continue to kill, like somebody was killed yesterday? Leaders continue to steal, like we have dismissed some of them. They abuse office; we rig elections so that we can remain in power; we lie; we deny fellow citizens their human rights and we do this with impunity. 

As we pay tribute to the Most Reverend St Janani Jakaliya Luwum, we may pause a moment and ask ourselves a few questions: Do we mirror what he represented and stood for during the struggle for justice and peace in Uganda? The choices then were between speaking out for the voiceless or remain silent amidst disappearances, arbitrary arrests and killings during Amin’s regime. The Most Reverend Janani Jakaliya Luwum chose to speak out against any form of injustice to all Ugandans. Today, as we pay tribute to him, how many can commit to speak against injustice towards Ugandans under the current regime? Surely, as we remember St Luwum, we should also appreciate other religious leaders who are standing out for the rights of individuals and justice. 

Is Uganda, at 52 years after independence, the country that the Most Reverend Janani Jakaliya Luwum and his fallen colleagues dreamt to leave behind for their children, grandchildren and great grandchildren? If not, why? Isn’t it time to break the silence? There comes a moment when silence amounts to betrayal. Haven’t we, for long, betrayed the Most Reverent Janani Jakaliya Luwum? 

The Most Reverend Jakaliya Luwum, you fought a good fight. Your blood was not in vain but as we pay tribute to you, we are sad and our hearts are filled with pain because the dreams and aspirations you had then for your children and grandchildren about 40 years ago have not gone to pass. We still face a similar situation as you faced in 1977; disappearance of Ugandans is regular; there are still arbitrary killings and injustice is alive, which has challenged some religious leaders to rise up to the call you made in the 1970s. 

Look over us your followers. The struggle continues and we will live to always be inspired by your dedicated, unwavering, and pure service to Ugandans. 

Although the sparkle in your eyes is long gone, your brave actions still remains fresh in our memory. Those actions are the daily sources of inspiration to keep the struggle for a better Uganda alive. 

We in opposition, wish to assure the family of the late Janani Luwum and all Ugandans that some of us continue to work to pursue the Most Reverend Janani Jakaliya Luwum’s dream to see a better country with justice, peace and enjoyed by all of us, our children and hopefully our grandchildren. May his soul rest in eternal peace. For God and My Country.

4.08
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. By the way, I am one of the people who served on the national organising committee for Janani Luwum, the Saint. We know we are all sinners, but there are those who are known as sinners in public. (Laughter) Janani Luwum is a saint. Will it be procedurally right for somebody who likes homosexuals to be the one seconding this motion? Will it be procedurally right? (Laughter) (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, all of us are sinners and all of us have that opportunity to be redeemed by our Lord. Our moments of sin may be public but our moments of redemption might be secret. We will take it in that spirit and allow the Member to second the motion. (Applause)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for your very wise ruling. (Laughter) I rise to second the motion to pay tribute to the Most Reverend Janani Jakaliya Luwum. I associate myself to the most eloquent submission made on the Floor this afternoon by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the mover of the motion. I will try to restrain myself from making any comments in respect to the very provocative words of the hon. Nandala-Mafabi. 

A few things have been said about St Janani Luwum. The first and most important is that he had very humble beginnings. Janani Luwum was born in Kitgum District. It is recorded that he could not afford to go to school up to the age of 10 because the family just did not have the means; up to the age of 10, Janani Luwum provided family labour, he grazed family cattle, goats and sheep. He could only be taken to school after the age of 10 and he went to Gulu High School and Boroboro where he trained as a teacher. 

Mr Speaker, this leads to the second quality of St Janani Luwum - hard honest work. The Leader of Opposition made a wonderful presentation in respect to this quality. However, I want to state that Janani Luwum, after converting to Christianity in 1948, became an active member of the revival movement as a lay leader and then became a deacon. 

Earlier on, his leadership skills became apparent and he was chosen to do a one year course at St Augustine’s College in Canterbury in the United Kingdom. After working in a parish and Buwalasi Theological College, he returned to Britain to study at the London College of Divinity and later returned to Uganda to be the Principal of Buwalasi.

In 1966, he became Provincial Secretary and in 1969, he was concentrated Bishop of Northern Uganda. In 1974, St Janani Luwum became the Archbishop of Uganda Rwanda Burundi and Boga-Zaire. In summary, this was an honest man working very hard and rising through the ranks.

Mr Speaker, the third quality - and submissions have also been made in this respect - is the Archbishop’s firm belief in God. You know, God does not segregate, God is not judgmental - actually, the Bible that I read teaches that judgement only belongs to God and St Janani Luwum was an epitome of biblical knowledge. I have not found any record of a judgemental Janani Luwum.

He stood up, fought for justice and this is the very last point I want to address myself to - St Janani Luwum’s love for Uganda and for justice. He fought for a just Uganda, he fought - and the Leader of the Opposition made a good case in this respect - he fought for the respect of human rights and dignity, the right to life, St Janani Luwum fought for a country where human life cannot be dispensed with except in accordance with the judgement of Court.

Unfortunately, he paid for that with his own life. He fought for the dignity of even the most obnoxious people; the people that we do not agree with. Disagreements are normal; they occur every day but it does not matter wherever we come from; it does not matter how we look like; it does not matter what we believe in; what matters is that we are all Ugandans and our right to life and our right to live in Uganda must be respected and there is abundant evidence that St Janani Luwum fought for this. To say otherwise would be to dis-grade the memory of a wonderful saint.

Mr Speaker, his service to the country and service to the Church – we have all been told that from a lay leader, St Janani Luwum rose to the rank of a Deacon; to the rank of an Archbishop of the Church of Uganda, Rwanda Burundi and Boga-Zaire. He made tremendous contribution in preaching the word of God, in propagating the Anglican faith and in propagating Christianity.

For this reason, the hon. Alice Alaso is asking whether I believe that these were contributions worth extolling. I would not be standing here if I did not believe that he made a wonderful contribution. For those few reasons, I stand to second the Motion. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I now propose that motion and question for your debate and for the record. The motion is that Parliament collectively pays tribute to the late Archbishop Janani Jakaliya Luwum for his distinguished service and contribution towards liberation of Uganda, spread of Christianity in Africa as well as development of Uganda; two, that the ideals of democracy, good governance and the rule of law that the late Archbishop Janani Jakaliya Luwum advocated for should be upheld; and three, that Parliament takes cognisance of the public holiday of the 16th February pronounced in Mucwini by His Excellency President Kaguta Museveni in appreciation of the numerous contributions made by the late Archbishop Janani Jakaliya Luwum during his lifetime. That is the motion for your debate, which starts now. I will start with Kitgum District, five minutes.

4.16
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Prime Minister for moving my motion to a higher level that we recognise this gallant Ugandan. It is true that the idea of this motion was conceived much earlier in August last year and was well discussed with the Speaker. The Speaker confirmed that the Archbishop confirmed her while she was still in Boroboro. She actually advised me to have hon. Migereko, the minister, to second my motion. Now that the Prime Minister has taken it on at that high level, we thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for lifting this motion to that level. It could have been nice that as author of the motion, I second it, but nevertheless, as a people’s representative, I am happy to be at that level.

When I look at the motion, I would like to say that late Archbishop Lumwum’s, contribution is unquestionable. The words, which were quoted from him keep us going. First of all, I would like to thank my honourable colleagues who have stood with us, as a people of this nation, those who have contributed immensely and those who were able to come all the way to Kitgum during the celebrations. I pray that we continue walking together as people’s representative to ask this blessed man of God to help us in our leadership. I look forward to receiving you next year when we are doing the same celebration. I would like honourable colleagues to take notes of some of these inspiring write-ups as a matter of information.

One is that the Archbishop Janani Luwum was not fearful. He was able to speak up, to the point, as we read from the testimony, that he was ready to march through Kampala protesting what the regime is saying. Some of us have been protestors for a long time against bad things of the regime. It takes courage and selflessness to stand up for the people, to put your head on the chopping board. Demonstrations have not just started but any upright person who is convinced about doing what the people want will do anything to deliver that.

Some of the write-ups – I would like to quote some of the critics who accused Janani Luwum of being on the Government side and he said, “I feel daily being picked up by the soldiers while the opportunity is, I dare  preach the gospel with all my might and my conscience is very clear before God. I have not sided with the present Government, which is utterly self-seeking; I have been threatened many times. Whenever I have the opportunity, I have told the President the things the Church disapproves of.”

This is an inspiration even to the current leadership in the Church that these words have made the work of faith bring us today celebrating and paying tribute, as the people’s Parliament, to a very strong man.

Another quotation which I find inspiring is that -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MS ANYWAR: If I had seconded this motion, I would have had more time but -(Laughter)- now that I am being martialled up, let me conclude on the prayers. Prime minister, please  accept that a memorial university be put in Mucwini in addition to the prayers and monuments be built in Kampala in memory of the late Archbishop Luwum.
Secondly, that his graveyard and the tomb, as you had earlier alluded, be brought to the level of that of the late Erinayo Oryema which now stands as a memorial site. If you looked at this booklet, the tomb of the saint is lying in almost a bush, in a small village in Mucwini in Kitgum District. He deserves to be put in a place that he deserves. I would request these three to be included on our prayers and I hope, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, and the government will take this up and implement it. 

I will be happy to receive all the contributions and co-operate with you. The people of Kitgum are watching you as you are debating this motion. I am happy that the family is also here. Please, make this a commitment. Thank you very much.

4.23
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I stand here as chairman, West Nile Parliamentary group to second this motion in honour of the late St Janani Luwum who was the Archbishop of Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi and Boga-Zaire until he met his death in 1977.

The person in whose memory we are talking was a man who believed in humanity. He was the man who believed in equality. That is the reason we derive some of the spirit that we have especially when we hear leaders say, “Such men and women have their domain in the pulpit, in the churches and the mosques.” We are saying a healthy soul dwells in a healthy body. There is no way you can distance men and women of God from advising political leaders in matters of good governance.

Today, we are talking about the late Janani Luwum, a man who fought against oppression. Although, I was young that time, I was somebody who was able to listen to news, a person able to read newspapers. At that time, it needed a man of courage to stand up and say, “Mr King, all is not well in your pair of shorts, things are out.” You had to be courageous to stand up in front of Idi Amin and be able to say, “Look, things are not going the right way.” This is none other than the St Janani Luwum in whose memory we are paying tribute today.

Mr Speaker, yesterday, I was in Nairobi. On Kenyatta street, citizens demonstrated their anger with the regime in matters of corruption. They paraded donkeys, painted them and put writings on them: “Corruption is bleeding Kenya: Members of Parliament stop raping our women,” and they put all sorts of things. At no one time did I see Kenya police - neither did I see Kenya army, neither did I see canisters of teargas being hulled at these people. (Applause) These were people who were exercising their democratic right giving out information to the Government that things are not okay. It is in this spirit of standing up for nothing, but the truth that we commend the soul of St Janani Luwum into the Almighty’s hand.

If you read the biography of St Janani, he had a very humble beginning; a man who was not exposed to Kampala until he reached a position of authority. Today, how many children can you curve out from Boroboro, Koboko, Lumino, Kigezi that are able to rise to positions of authority. The way things are happening in this country are so skewed that you have to be at the centre of things in order to rise. However, here was a humble man, whom I believe went to school barefooted but was still able to achieve what he did.

Today, we are talking about Janani Luwum, a man who stood for equality. How many of us do appreciate that we are Ugandans and are enjoying a level of equality in treatment. Not long ago, there was a motion defeated on the Floor of the House moved by hon. Fungaroo, saying this is Uganda, can we treat everybody as Ugandan and at equal footing? These are the virtues that we are missing in a person like the late Janani Luwum. 

My only prayer would have been that the late Janani Luwum was still alive today to give us counsel in terms of how unity can be forged in this country because it is only through such kind of wisdom that we will be able to get results. In consonance, of course that goes a long way - like they say in Kiswahilli; “Uzee ni akili”, the Baganda will say “Obukadde magezi”. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up quickly.

MR WADRI: Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker, for being kind enough to allow me wind up the sentence that I wanted to say, that “Obukadde magezi”; old age is wisdom and that is what we are missing in this great son of Uganda. May he rest in eternal peace.

I do not know about my friend, Prof. Kabwegyere, when your time comes whether these nice words will be talked about you. (Laughter) But, please, God forbid. I do not think you will be there. May the Almighty Lord rest the soul of the late Janani Luwum in eternal peace. Thank you.

4.28
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on behalf of the people of Mitooma and the people of West Ankole Diocese as a council member and on my own behalf to pay tribute to an exceptionally outstanding icon.

A God fearing man, truly chosen, anointed and empowered by God to perform mighty exploits. A true shepherd ready to die for his flock; a super model of humility and true servant leadership; holding up as a shining example of what a church leader and indeed, a leader especially at the apex of any organisation should be like.

A man of integrity, totally committed to true biblical principles and therefore, incorruptible even in the face of death. He stood firm to the end, sacrificing his life for all of us because it was his martyrdom that drew attention of the international community to the plight of Ugandans under the oppressive and brutal regime of Idi Amin. And this also united all Ugandans to rise up.

A man of peace who believed in the power of prayer rather than confrontation. An extremely bold and brave man who was not afraid to die for the truth and made an impression on both the young and the old. We will forever be indebted to him and we thank the Church of England for canonising him as a saint and also the Government of Uganda for designating 16th of February a public holiday, the Janani Luwum Day. He fought a good fight and made all of us proud to the glory of God. May his soul indeed continue to rest in peace. Thank you.

4.31
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise up to support the motion. Mathematically, today marks 38 years, one month and fourteen days since the late Archbishop, Janani Luwum was assassinated on 16 February 1977.

History tells us that the Archbishop was accused of treason and smuggling of arms, never subjected to the principle and doctrine of natural justice, brutally murdered and the right thinking citizens of Uganda attempted to believe that the death of the Archbishop amounted to crime against humanity. I have always asked myself, if the life of the late Archbishop Janani Luwum is raised from the dead, what would he be confronted with?

I am optimistic that the late Archbishop would be sad and would be happy. He would be happy because Uganda has progressively transformed its military into an organisation and institution that respects the rights of civilian authority. (Applause) 

We have seen situations where the military have killed and have been subjected to the principle of natural justice, some of them are rotting in our prisons because of murder.

In this case, it is reported that Luwum’s killing was either directly supervised by the then Commander-in-Chief and the President or his henchmen. However, at least now, we are proud of our military; we sit with them in Parliament in their military outfit. A civilian can do anything and the military will respect them.

I would also like to believe that the late Archbishop would be confronted with a country where the Anglican community is growing bigger and bigger. However, on the other hand, he would be sad because he has been using the Bible as his divine constitution to preach the word of the Lord. He would be sad to find that even Uganda, a country of his origin, is currently, slowly but surely getting under the territory of homosexuality which is clearly against the preaching of the Holy Bible. (Applause)

The decision taken by the head of Government to declare every 16th February, a public holiday in memory of the enormous contributions of the late Archbishop Janani Luwum is a welcome idea; welcomed by both the Christian community, Muslim community and any other religious community within our country Uganda.

We would like to believe that, it marked the end of history. That history must not repeat itself where a serving Archbishop, Bishop is brutally murdered by a Government in power and we are optimistic that the future is bright. I thank you for opportunity.

4.35
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion moved by the Leader of Government Business and seconded by the Leader of Opposition. 

It is unusual for a country like Uganda individual who unites it like Janani Luwum did. He did this even in his death. People who were not attending functions together were seen exchanging pleasantries. I saw Ambassador Olara Otunnu with a very cheerful face shaking the hands of President Milton Obote – (Laughter)- when I talk about Olara Otunnu, I am sure you know that the leader I would think about is Milton Obote. Pardon me, I meant Yoweri Museveni. I saw Imat Cecilia Ogwal on the side and you could see Uganda united in paying tribute to a great man.

Archbishop Janani Luwum was one of the most courageous men at that time. Many people chose to flee the country. Many leaders, including some opposite me now, fled but he stayed around and confronted the dictatorship. It was not easy at that time to tell President Idi Amin that, “Actually, your Government is murdering people.” Archbishop Luwum did.

He was such a religious leader, not like those of today. Partisan religious leaders are being bribed with boda-bodas, bicycles and vehicles. Why don’t we emulate what Janani Luwum stood for? I do not respect leaders who plead self-righteousness; he was not. He was a humble leader and he knew that he came from Acholi but maybe if you asked him his tribe, he would not remember. He would just say, “I am a son of God.” That was Janani Luwum.

He died many years ago but just yesterday, somebody more or less died in the same circumstances. This makes some of us grieve that maybe his death was in vain. We are still committing the same crimes and mistakes in this country. Things that Janani Luwum, at that time, saw as sin we comfortably see happening in this country, crimes are being committed and we keep quiet. Why do we have to keep quiet when things are going wrong?

Janani Luwum could not afford to keep quiet. Therefore, when we see the likes of Bishop Zac Niringiye, we believe that there are leaders who know that once upon a time, there was a man of God who stood up to tell Idi Amin, “You are president but you are a wrong leader.” Even the people, who fled from Idi Amin’s regime because of the prevailing mistakes, come and glorify the very mistakes Janani Luwum was talking about. They come and justify them. They are apologists.

Mr Speaker, history is for us to learn such that we have a better future. However, it seems many people learn history to pass exams. They do not pick lessons from history in order to say, we have to correct those mistakes in our bad history and have a better future. They learn history to earn degrees and get jobs, which is quite unfortunate. 

I am sure when Archbishop Janani Luwum sees us committing those mistakes, which he fought and laid his life down for, his heart bleeds. Ugandans, why don’t we wake up, look into our history and say, never again? We need a country of equality. We need a fair country. We need a country of justice and we need a society where we live in harmony and with equal opportunities. We do not need a country with classes of the privileged and the under privileged; of the oppressors and of the oppressed; of the rich and the poor. We need a fair country and that is what Archbishop Janani Luwum laid down his life for. May the Almighty God rest his soul in eternal peace!

4.42
MR MONOAH ACHILE (Independent, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Owing to the uniqueness and preponderance of this motion, I would request that the whole House rises to honour and say a prayer in silence. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will be doing that later.

MR ACHILE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That was my approach but I respect your wise ruling. We are talking about a man who was very inspirational, motivational, charismatic and courageous and that is St Janani Luwum. 

Cognitively speaking, St Janani Luwum approached the issue from the angle that the Church and State are inseparable. That is why in socio-political-economic spectra or scenario, he courageously articulated issues pertaining to the same. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, this is a moment of seriousness. Why do I say so? It is because here is a man who has laid a precedent. Archbishop Janani Luwum was a man who was arrested, intimidated, humiliated and killed in cold blood by the brutal regime of the dictator Idi Amin Dada. That indicates that he actually was a true servant of God. He was a man who was committed to his calling by God. In other words, he was a true shepherd. Why do I say so? 

In the gospel according to John 10: 10, it states, “The thief only comes but to steal, kill and destroy” but then Jesus says, “I have come to give life and give it in its fullness.”  He adds, “This life only can be given by the true shepherd not a hireling and the true shepherd is he who lays his life for the flock…” Jesus Christ actually did the same for humanity. Yes, praise God. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence to add me a minute when my time is over. Jesus laid down his life for humanity and St. Janani Luwum never cowed away when he was being intimidated by the tyrants. He faced him squarely and even prayed for him before he was killed. This is because he knew that he was going to be killed. 

Honourable members, these are matters to be articulated without any fear because if you know the truth and speak the truth, the truth shall set you free. The Bible says so. The learned brothers and sisters here will always say, you can be acquitted on the basis of truth. I do not want to go into the history of that because we are here for a specific motion. 

Janani Luwum faced the dictator and he was killed. What happened is that he emulated Jesus Christ himself. He never ran away, as the earlier speakers have indicated, but remained in the country when he was being intimidated. He inspired the Christendom and the entire population of Uganda irrespective of religious differences. All denominations were united.

In fact the example St Janani Luwum gave was precisely like the death of St Stephen in the Acts of the Apostles. Janani Luwum forgave those who were ready to kill him before he died. St Stephen also forgave his killers. He said, “God forgive them because they do not know what they are doing.” How many of us today can do that? This is a very powerful testimony, which cannot be erased at all because it is a testimony that has been written with indelible ink - blood - and our Lord saved us because of his blood. 

Mr Speaker, as I conclude, we Ugandans have lost a very important person. In addition, Africa has lost a genius, a great prophet. The world indeed has lost a great prophet. The Bible says, “Touch not my anointed one.” Soon after the murder of St Janani Luwum, his successor, now the late Archbishop Silvanus Wani, in the company of another clergy, went and confronted Dictator Idi Amin in the presidential suites of the former Nile Mansions and said, “You have killed the man of God, you are here to kill innocent people, you will not live for two years.” Praise the Lord. It never took long. Exactly two years from when the man of God prophesied to the dictator, he was off the seat. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) 

4.52
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is also recorded that on 15 February 1977, just a day before his arrest, Janani Luwum took a protest note to President Idi Amin complaining and protesting against the evils and killings that the President was involved in. That has not been stated and I thought that for the record, we needed to have that.

Hon. Katuntu talked about courage and I had this in mind. Courage inspires and motivates but you cannot have courage out of fallacy. You can only have courage based on the truth and this is a man who believed in the truth at any cost. I wonder how many of us can believe in the truth and stand for the truth at any cost including when your own life is threatened.

I find this day very important for us to reflect, not on the past but in the present and also be able to predict the future. I believe we are better off today if another regime can recognise the need to present a motion to pay tribute. It is a step ahead and I hope that the gains that we are making will not be swept away one day. 

I rise to support this motion and one of the reasons is that one of the then ministers, Charles Oboth Ofumbi, came from my area. He was also killed on the same day. One of the gates in his home in Nyamalogo, Nabiyoga Sub-County where I come from, has never been opened to date. This is where the soldiers stayed from 1977 until Amin was removed in 1979.

This is a big call for us to live lives that are worthy and that will have an impact for posterity. I believe that St Janani Luwum is happy where he is. We are not here because of the evil that was meted upon him, but we are here because of the testimony that he lived. We want testimonies without going through the test. Janani Luwum went through the test and he has a clear testimony. 

Sometimes we want victories without anticipating battles. Janani Luwum fought his fight and now we enjoy and celebrate his victory. This martyrdom is not a matter of jokes. How many of us can die for what we believe in? If we had more people giving themselves up, Uganda would be a better place for us to live in. If we all stood up and got ready to die for truth and justice - you cannot have justice without the truth. The truth is a matter antecedent to justice.

Mr Speaker, Janani Luwum sang a song and the melody of that song will keep on in our minds. The song appears to have ended but the melody will ring and remain in our minds forever. How I wish people in this House would not point fingers at others but at themselves and ask, what can we do to make this country a better place than we found it? May the soul of giant Janani Luwum rest in peace.

4.57
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion and I would like to say that when Archbishop Janani Luwum was in office, I was in primary school. The Archbishop was a man who stood for human rights as a principle. Those days, there was no freedom of speech but this gallant son of Uganda would stand and speak for truth and justice. He died a martyr for the sake of seeking freedom for the people of Uganda.

At the time Janani Luwum was archbishop, we children loved to be in church unlike these days when you go to church and people think of fundraising, what you have brought and all these other pressures. You would love to see the man of God preaching. We would line up as children from school to sing for Janani Luwum. I recall the time when he came to Soroti. He was like a popular President. I have never seen a person with a huge crowd like Janani Luwum had. We stood along the roads to see this great man of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, some of us experienced the Uganda of that time when many things were happening. Those were black days and one did not know whether the morning would find them alive. However, I would like to say that this man was brutally killed. He was indeed a man of God and he kept telling the then President and you would hear it over the radio that Janani Luwum had challenged what Idi Amin had brought forward. 

It was unfortunate that when Janani Luwum was killed, it was claimed that he had died in an accident. His killers did not admit that he had been killed and insisted that the archbishop was involved in an accident. I think he was pulled into the car based on vivid recollections from my mother about that day.

How I wish that as leaders, we became servant leaders instead of boss leaders! We are here to serve the people and tell the truth about Uganda because Uganda is bigger than anybody. I think that if we as leaders emulate this, it will help us move forward. We are sometimes blamed for corruption; I think corruption starts with us and we need to see how we can fight this. This was the principle that Janani Luwum stood for and he was a man that you would believe in and look to as a father. 

Much as Uganda lost a good man in Janani Luwum, I would also like to salute the gallant sons and daughters, both alive and dead, who ushered in the peace that we enjoy today. At least there is peace in that you can sleep and wake up. You can speak and nobody will follow you up unlike in those days when if you made a statement, your neck would go. You would either be burnt or something would be done to your family. There were even times when they would erase the whole family and some of us witnessed those days. It is my prayer that those days do not come back to Uganda. At least we can be able to take our cases to courts of law and be heard.

I support all the prayers in this motion and I would like to say, let Janani Luwum rest in peace and we pray that Ugandans will reflect on his success. I thank you.

5.01
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support this motion in all honesty. In 1977, I was in Primary Three and very young. The late Archbishop Janani Luwum was a very brave man who never ran away from his people unlike hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi who hid in a yam garden when there was a problem in Rubaga – (Laughter)- but Janani Luwum stood by his people.

Mr Speaker, I was very hurt recently when I heard some relatives of Amin trying to force Government to return his remains. I totally disagree with this because this man killed very many people including some to whom I am genetically connected in Kabale. These people were shot in broad daylight at a playground and actually, the last Mukiga man to die was not even shot. He died out of fear. It was Amin who caused us all these problems.

I would like to thank the Prime Minister, Ndugu Ruhakana Rugunda, for running away. If you had remained there, they would have finished you off and we would also be here paying tribute upon the death of the Makerere University Guild President. You would have also been history. This man had come to finish us and he was a very good example of a very bad man who killed a very good man. 

Some others say, let his soul rest in eternal peace but I am telling you, Mr Speaker, that wherever Amin is, I do not know what God should do for that man because he really hurt us. I am not cursing him but I am trying to ask God to help us and make us remember how Janani Luwum died for the truth and for the sake of the people of Uganda. 

I have now changed my mind and would like to urge Government to allow Bishop Zac Niringiye to speak because you never know, God could be telling him to tell Government some things. Let us listen to these people. I saw that Bishop Niringiye moves a lot these days - I do not know what has happened to him but surely if he is in his real senses and he is talking, I would like the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to call Bishop Niringiye and talk to him. Let us not have a problem and we end up getting problems.

It is a pity that Uganda was led by a man like Amin. In 2004, when I was a very young lecturer in Mbarara University of Science and Technology, I went to London and entered through Heathrow Airport. I was asked where I came from and when I answered that I was from Uganda, the gentleman asked me if I knew Idi Amin. I was very scared. You can imagine the whole world feared Amin whereas his relatives, who shared bread and other good things with him, miss him up to now. 

Personally, I will never miss Amin because there is no way you can kill an archbishop and yet you are the President of Uganda. I would like to thank President Museveni for not killing Ugandans and I am very serious, by the way. I would like to look at hon. Wadri and say that irrespective of the things that hon. Wadri has said here, if President Museveni behaved like Amin, you would be finished. (Laughter)

I would, therefore, like to thank President Museveni for being a very good man to you, to hon. Cecilia Ogwal and everybody. As a Christian, I know that St Janani Luwum is in heaven but the methodology that was used to take him to heaven was very painful and I pray that this sort of thing does not happen again. 

Mr Speaker, I support the idea of isolating 16 February every year as a day to remember this wonderful man of God because it will remind all Ugandans that have bad hearts, on a yearly basis to stop killing other Ugandans. 

On that serious note, I would like to implore Government to make sure that it supplies policemen to all those prosecuting the bad people. Yesterday, a prosecutor was killed without a guard. I can tell you that there are bad people in this country. Leader of Government Business, please protect people who prosecute wrong doers and corruption should be cursed.

Mr Speaker, we should curse corruption in all its forms for the sake of remembering Janani Luwum so that whoever becomes a corrupt person is sacked immediately and put in prison without fear or favour. May the soul of this wonderful man of God rest in eternal peace. I thank you very much.

5.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR NORTHERN UGANDA (Ms Rebecca Amuge Otengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for moving this very important motion and I would like to thank all the Members who have seconded and supported it.

I am here both as the Minister for Northern Uganda and as a member of the Synod of the Diocese of Lango. The death of Janani Luwum, our Archbishop, symbolises the fragile history of Uganda where brothers killed one another, where people moved in separate ways politically and socially, and where tribes were against tribes and religious organisations against religious organisations.

From the time our history got so fragile, it has not been easy to bring Ugandans together. However, I would like to thank all those who have worked to bring Ugandans together. As the Minister for Northern Uganda, because of our history, it was not easy even as a ministry or a minister to go to some areas. However, we must give credit where it is due. I would like to thank the President of this country for recognising the difference in our history and the fragile history of this country and for working towards bringing the people of Uganda together -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, let me interrupt you a bit. I see some children leaving. Let me recognise, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, pupils and teachers of Balawoli Primary School in Kamuli District, represented by hon. Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga and hon. Allen Andrew. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. Please proceed.

MS OTENGO: Mr Speaker, at one time, Ugandans were bundled together by the mistakes of individuals from different areas but it is now no more. We have now learnt that different people who made their own mistakes must stand for them but not people being put together because of the mistakes of one person. Therefore, the mistakes of Amin should not be put on the people of West Nile. The same history should instead help us to work and move together as Ugandans. 

I would like to put this to our people that many things have been done to make sure that as Ugandans, we move together.

    1. Reburying Brig. Arube who was Amin’s soldier. 
    2. Decently reburying Gen. Bazilio Okello.
    3. Bringing back the body of the late Dr Milton Obote, past President.
    4. Making these children feel part of Uganda because even if there were mistakes, these mistakes were not theirs.

I would like to say that as Ugandans, we must learn and discover that this can still happen if we do not handle ourselves well. Mr Speaker, I heard some people trying to compare the era of Idi Amin to the government today. This is incomparable because that was beyond human imagination and description. Currently, as Ugandans, we can disagree even in Parliament but when I get out, I am a sister to hon. Anywar. We do not have that huge difference.

Mr Speaker, as directed by His Excellency the President that a monument be put in honour of our Archbishop, as the Minister for Northern Uganda, we have already discussed that and we will make an undertaking. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.11
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Janani Luwum was a blessed man at birth. The fact that we are discussing this motion during the holy week is testimony enough that he was really blessed. For those of us who studied Literature as a language, we can only compare this to Sir Thomas Moore’s play, A Man for all Seasons protesting the reign of King Henry VIII and his excesses. 

I support the motion moved by Rt hon. Ruhakana Rugunda to pay tribute to Archbishop Luwum. However, we can only do justice to this motion by preaching and practicing equity. I travelled to Mucwini to bury a journalist who had died. Here in Parliament we called him Lacan pe nino and that is the late James Odong. We had to leave this place at around 4 a.m. in order to be in Mucwini area by midday.

Mr Speaker, to this House, I say we should practice the doctrine of equal opportunities. We should not only leave it on the table, in the shelves and write it but we should practice it. Members of this House, every village in this country has the potential of producing a great man and woman, given equal opportunities. Therefore, I do not want this kind of development when we talk about concentration of development to some regions while others remain with question marks. This is homework to be done by all of us leaders.

Secondly, I would like to speak about politics versus religion. To this I pay tribute to Fr Gaetano and Bishop Zac Niringiye. I may not be there to talk at their funerals, God forbid, but Mr Speaker, and I send this message out to President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni - politics and religion from the biblical times are juxtaposed. They have never been apart. That is why even Jesus said, “Give to Caesar what belongs to Caesar and to God what belongs to God.” That was religion at play.

We will be wrong, as political leaders and leaders of the country during our time, if we say, religious leaders have no place in politics. Instead, let us check our excesses. These people are not there to witch hunt us but to correct us where we go wrong so they should not be criticised. I call upon all religious leaders and the sheikhs in mosques, who have podiums, to preach against the excesses of any regime just like Janani Luwum did.

Lastly, I send this message to the family and as members of the greater North, we definitely feel privileged and thank the government, at this juncture, for extending this to the family. Thank God it has happened during your time and that you were able to accord decency to this saint. We are grateful, as members of the greater North and to the family; we are glad that you are part of this privileged family. 

I see hon. Okello Okello in the Gallery. Definitely, we pray that the members of this region continue cementing this good relationship so that as the greater North, we have something worth commemorating. May the good Lord rest the soul of the late Janani Luwum in eternal peace! I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.17
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. Let me also thank the Prime Minister for moving this motion as well as everybody who participated during the preparations for 16th February. 

I would like to thank His Excellency the President for making those pronouncements about the museum, about putting a good structure on the graveyard and also about the school. I did not hear anything about the vocational school, although hon. Anywar talked about the university, but at least a big and good school should be put up there.

I would also like to thank those institutions and people who recognised the Archbishop earlier. We have here in Kampala a street called Luwum Street. I believe that Luwum Street is named after him. There is also a theological college in Gulu: Archbishop Luwum Theological College. There is also a school on the Kampala-Gulu Highway. I believe that, that school was put where the fake accident – because there was a fake accident, which took place – killed the three persons; the late Janani Luwum, Erinayo Oryema and Oboth Ofumbi.

I would like to say that for me, Janani Luwum looks like Jesus. Jesus was killed with two other people and all three died at the same time. Even the late Janani Luwum was killed with two others. He sacrificed his blood to save all of us. Unfortunately for us in the country, it took us a lot of time to recognise that important fact. You can imagine 38 years down the road that we then came to realise that this man was a very big man. He laid his body and blood and really sacrificed himself to save all of us. 

I would like to appeal that the late Janani Luwum goes beyond parties, tribes and religions. However, at the local levels, because there was a national committee and also local committees, there were a lot of divisions and lack of co-operation. People thought it was political yet it was not.

I must thank Ambassador Olara Otunnu very much. He stood firm in spite of some people thinking that, that was a way of maybe trying to promote Olara Otunnu, which was not right. My appeal is that since the day is going to be celebrated annually, we should cooperate. We should all join hands. As I stepped out, some people told me, “They are debating something concerning your region. Where are you going?” It is not for the northern region only nor is it for Acholi sub-region only. It is something, which is internationally recognised as very important. United Kingdom and other places recognised it earlier so let us be together. 

When we commemorate this day of St Janani Luwum, let us do it together. There are a lot of things that I should say. Actually, my husband was the chairperson of the local committee and he suffered a lot due to lack of co-operation from very many people. This lack of co-operation did not come only from the national level but right from the village level. You find people just - (Member timed out.)

5.22
BRIG. GEN. PHINEHAS KATIRIMA (UPDF Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion and pay tribute to this great man of God. I wish to correctly describe him as one of the pioneer freedom fighters for this country. 

Mr Speaker, the death of St Janani Luwum and an additional 100,000 to 500,000 Ugandans during that dictatorship, in all respects, enhanced the people’s struggle for freedom and self-determination. When the late Archbishop was killed, I was just a student at Ntare School. However, it was to later have a great influence and I think it was still the same influence it had on the rest of the people of Uganda when they later struggled nationwide against the state excesses to build on our people’s earlier struggles for today’s freedom and self-determination.

Mr Speaker, as we move forward into the future, we should always remember all those Ugandans who struggled for freedom and in the course of that struggle, some lost their lives and some were killed brutally like we now recall when the late Archbishop was killed. This is so that as we move forward to prosperity in this country, such a thing should never happen in our country again.

The struggle we got involved in, in the 1980s, was not a novel struggle. It was a struggle building on all our earlier people’s struggles since the colonial days and the late Archbishop, in no mean way, played his role for the liberation of this country. There are adjectives that describe Idi Amin but I do not know whether there are other countries that received excesses like those Idi Amin meted out on this country.

Archbishop Luwum paid the ultimate price but now we are happy that these continuing and continued struggles against dictatorship, oppression and suppression have yielded times like these, which we should build on, to continue to make our country a better place to live in, not only for ourselves but also for all the future generations to come. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, it was my wish that we should debate this motion until the end of the day. However, I see that our numbers are reducing quite quickly. We might need to take a decision when the House is still properly constituted. 

I am encouraging members; those of us who are already here, that if we are to sustain this debate, please let us keep ourselves in so that I am convinced that I do not have to put the matter to vote at this moment. If there are no more outflows but only inflows, I will allow the debate to continue. However, if I see any single outflow, I will put this matter to vote so that we can still take a decision when the House is properly constituted. 

Therefore, you are all appointed whips of yourselves so that we can continue with this debate. I urge you, honourable members, to give significance to this moment and continue with this debate. At this moment, I will pick the honourable Member for Kawempe North who is actually the Imam -

5.27
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I rise to support the motion. A lot has been said about St Janani Luwum and we have been informed, and it is true, that it is now 38 years since he was assassinated. I am convinced that by the time Janani Luwum was killed, many of us here were below 15 years old. 

Mr Speaker, I do not know why it has taken all these years to recognise all the achievements that Janani Luwum made to this great nation. If you can put aside the years of turbulence, from 1986 up to where we are right now, there are many years. I think this motion would have been moved more than 20 years ago because of the significance and the contributions made by Janani Luwum. 

Having said that, Mr Speaker, we must request maybe the Ministry of Education and Sports, through the Prime Minister, to provide documented records so that even young generations in primary schools and other institutions of learning can learn the significance of Janani Luwum in as far as our country is concerned. These records could be published in our national syllabus or adopted by the National Curriculum Centre so that our children get to know who Janani Luwum was.

Mr Speaker, besides designating 16th February as a national holiday, we need to disseminate the information as far as this great man is concerned so that the people celebrate the day with all the necessary information. Therefore, I request the Minister of Education and Sports that more literature books be availed to primary and secondary schools so that the young can know his contributions.

Mr Speaker, it is very timely right now that we are talking about this great man when as Members of Parliament, we have a very important Bill in waiting - The Anti-homosexuality Bill, 2014. I believe the gift that we can give and also the significance that we can attach to Janani Luwum is for us to come up, own our Bill and pass it. This will go a long way in cementing the values that Janani Luwum wanted or cherished so much.

Finally, we believe that Janani Luwum was a courageous religious leader who faced the leader of the day and told him that things were not moving well. I would request that even the present religious leaders across the divide - I know that when religious leaders talk well about this Government, they are said to be performing their right role. However, if they say anything negative about the government, the government comes out to demand that religious leaders maintain their roles.

Let us borrow a leaf from Janani Luwum by telling the leaders what is wrong and also praising them where they have done right -(Member timed out.)

5.32
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to pay tribute to the late Archbishop Janani Jakaliya Luwum.

Mr Speaker, I want to start by quoting Romans 8:28 which says: “We know that God causes all things to work together for good to those who love God, to those who are called according to His purpose.”

Mr Speaker, the late Janan Luwum was called by God and for a purpose. He fulfilled that purpose he was called for and we are very grateful for that. I want to remember the late Luwum as the person who made the women of the Church of Uganda to start Mothers’ Union in the Anglican Church. 

When he was Archbishop, he encouraged his wife to get together nine women in Uganda to start Mothers’ Union. Mothers’ Union is a worldwide movement that brings together married women in the Church to serve the purpose of strengthening their homes, raising their children in a godly way and helping others who are in need.

We have one lady in Busoga called Mrs Joy Batambuze who is one of those ladies that founded Mothers’ Union in Uganda and Mrs Luwum made sure that it spread all over Uganda. If you see what Mothers’ Union is doing in this country, you will really see the work of the late Janan Luwum and we must be proud of that. I happen to be the President of Mothers’ Union Busoga Diocese and whenever I put on my white gomesi with a blue sash -(Laughter)- It is not the blue of FDC but the blue of Mother’s Union - I feel great, and proud!

On 25th March this year, when we celebrated Mother’s Union Day, all ladies were dressed in white and blue; not the FDC blue colour. We looked very smart; hon. Daudi Migereko was there. He said he had never seen smart ladies like those ones he saw that day.  This is all because of the late Janani Luwum. We are proud of that.

Lastly, I would like to quote the First Epistle to the Thessalonians 1:3. It says: “We continually remember before our God and Father your work produced by faith, your labour prompted by love, and your endurance inspired by hope in our Lord Jesus Christ.” The late Archbishop Janani Luwum did this; we shall always remember him for all the work he did. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

5.38
MR KENNETH ONGALO (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity, on behalf of the people of Kalaki whom I represent in this House, and on behalf of my family, to pay tribute to the late Archbishop Janani Luwum.

I would like to begin by agreeing with the hon. Abdu Katuntu that Ugandans are very forgetful of their history. A lot of history seems to have been forgotten in this House today.
Forty years ago, the streets of Kampala were awash in blood. During that time, nobody criticised the government and they wake up alive the following morning. The newspapers had ceased to exist in Uganda. There was no Parliament in Uganda. There were no politicians in Uganda. That is why the late Archbishop Janani Luwum took mantle upon himself to speak on behalf of Ugandans. 

In my view, it devalues the totality and meaning of self-sacrifice that the late Archbishop Janani Luwum made for this country to equate conditions, 40 years ago, to what we have in Uganda today. Just a moment ago, power went off in this House twice. If it had gone out 40 years ago, it would have not been by accident. It would have been because the State Research Bureau was coming in to take hon. Wafula-Oguttu out of this House. (Laughter)

Forty years ago, if power had gone off the second time as it did today, it would have been because the honourable member from Terego had falsely accused this Government of committing atrocities similar to those committed 40 years ago. Therefore, I would like us to believe that if the late Archbishop Janani Luwum was to come to this country today, he would agree with me that he did not lay down his life in vain. Certain steps have been made in the right direction. 

We may not be where we wanted to be, but we are certainly closer to it than we were, 40 years ago! I think we will get there if we learn to acknowledge the truth; if we learn to give credit where it is due; and if we agree that today one can abuse President Museveni and still go back to their home unescorted, wake up the following day and come back to this Parliament. I think this is something the late Archbishop Janani Luwum would be proud of.
 
I began by saying that I was paying tribute to the late, on behalf of my family. I do so because in January 1976, Archbishop Janani Luwum went to Bishop Tucker Theological Seminary and met my father, the Reverend Isaiah Obote and told him, “Isaiah, you better leave this college or change your name because bad times are coming.” 

My father opted to change his name. About a month later, the late Archbishop Janani Luwum was killed. That is the totality of his self-sacrifice. It gives meaning to John 15:13, “Greater love has no man than this that a man can lay down his love for others.” He knew what was coming and he told my father to get away before it got to him; but today, there is an Obote in the NRM and he has not been killed! Can anyone equate the situation 40 years ago, to what it is in Uganda today! I really feel we are doing injustice to the memory of the late Archbishop Janani Luwum.

5.43
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to support this motion in paying tribute to the late Most Reverent Archbishop Janani Luwum. 

I have been in very deep reflection that I started thinking about what moved a man from Mucwini to Kampala, to Rwanda, and to Boga-Zaire. It was basically the message of the Cross. He traversed this land telling anybody who cared to listen, “Repent and be saved for the Kingdom of God is at hand.”

Tonight, I want to imagine if he were here, he would repeat the same message for this nation. Sometimes when we talk about salvation in this House, we have all sorts of drama coming in. People are always screaming, “Amen” but for the sake of it. 

I would like to stand here, as a preacher of the Gospel, to tell this nation, like the late Archbishop Janani Luwum would have done, to repent for the Kingdom of God is at hand.

The late Archbishop Janani Luwum was murdered by a brutal dictator. Sometimes when I hear about the atrocities committed by President Idi Amin, I imagine he was an octopus with too many hands in Teso, Acholi, Lango, Buganda, Masaka, and wherever else. This was not the case. The man had one head, two hands, and walked on two legs. He committed these atrocities with the help of people - human beings! Some of them are still walking in this country. 

We need to caution ourselves. Sometimes we become dispensers of injustice to humanity and we think there won’t be a day of reckoning when each one of us will have to give an account for the caning. You caned people during elections; you think it will be somebody else. We cannot blame Amin for everything even where we did what we did. 

The monster in Idi Amin shot and killed the Archbishop. That was terrible, but there were also people in that same hall in Serena who screamed: “Kill him.” He often screamed: “Beat them! Cane them! And lock them up!” We are part of the murder problem. We need to warn ourselves that if we have any lessons to learn from that incident, let us not be the ones to repeat it in our times.

Mr Speaker, today I also reflect on the courage of the late Archbishop; the very courageous leader. He was courageous to stand for what he believed in. I keep asking myself, would we, in our times, be called courageous leaders? Can we, in the morning, vote ‘Aye’ and in the evening we vote ‘Nay’ on the same motion and same clause? Would the Archbishop call us courageous people in this day and era? No, he would not.

This country needs men and women of courage, and courage means sacrificing for a principle even if it costs your life. I hope that as contemporary leaders, as leaders of today, we will learn to be courageous, even when it does not pain, and even when you think it will cost you a constituency; Uganda needs men and women of courage.

Somebody asked a question that if the late Archbishop had lived a little longer, what would he find? I am impressed by the analysis and let me give you my view. If he had been around in 1986, 1987 and 1989, he would have confronted the Commander-in-Chief of the Uganda Armed Forces, and told him that it was wrong to put people in the wagon at Mukula and bake them - (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up

MS ALASO: I had set my alarm here; somebody just switched me off early. Anyway, as I was saying, he would also have confronted the leadership on the very many mass graves in Serere. So, I think we need to reflect on each and everything in our times.

Mr Speaker, I would like to talk to the leadership of the church. Where is your courage? The churches and religious leaders are now confronted with a situation where they cannot comment about typhoid in Kampala because they think that is political. Can’t you learn from you predecessors? Your forefathers in faith always said you need to be men and women not of the collar but of courage, to admonish leadership, where it goes wrong, and to embrace them where they get it right.

Lastly, I wondered when I read the second prayer, “Upholding democracy, rule of law, democratic principles and human rights” - I asked myself, “I hope the Rt Hon. Prime Minister will do everything it takes in his power, to advance this.” These days, it is literary criminal to have dissenting view. Actually you are called wolves, pigs, and enemies, whatever it is.

By the way, for the hon. Obote, my brother from Kalaki, you people from that side of the House sleep very comfortably in your houses in villages. Personally, I have not slept in my house in the village for the last 20 years. Every time I go there, gunmen come. Some of us this side are not assured of our safety. It may be obvious to you but tough for us.

Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.51
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity to contribute to this motion.

I would like to start by saluting His Excellency the President for two reasons: One, that he committed himself as a Christian, to be present in Mucwini, on the 16th February and indeed he was there. I would like to thank him for that.

I would also like to thank him for the fact that he acknowledged that during his regime, his army committed atrocities. Until you recognise that something has gone wrong, you can never correct it.

Mr Speaker, I must salute Parliament because it has given us this special sitting, to acknowledge the role that the leaders in our faith played; to lead by example. Indeed, the late Archbishop Janani Luwum is a hero of faith; a giant of courage; a symbol of fervent leadership. I think all of us - and it does not matter whether you are a Muslim or Christian - will not ignore the life of the late Janani Luwum.

The challenge we have, as leaders in this country is: what can we do to embrace the recognition that world Christians have given to the late Janani Luwum? What can we do to appreciate it? What can we do to embrace it? What can we do to demonstrate that indeed Uganda deserves to be recognised, not only because of the Ugandan Martyrs, who are already known, but also for martyrs who have continued to emerge in this country?

We must acknowledge one thing that God has a purpose in this country, and that these things do not just happen. God has a purpose and I would like to remind all those that do not read the Bible to try to read Genesis 50:20, which even the Moslems read. In that Chapter, it is said that Joseph, the Son of Jacob told his brothers who had attempted to kill him but did not manage to do so, but sold him off - they actually wrote him off as a dead person. When eventually the opportunity came for Joseph who had been exalted because of his faith, righteousness and steadfastness to the truth, to a position of Prime Minister of Egypt - that moment came, when Joseph revealed himself to his brothers. What a shame it was to the brothers.

However, Joseph said that: “You did it for evil; you wanted me to die, but God used it for good to save my life,” he told them. I must say that really Janani Luwum died in order to save this country. The whole world came to recognise that Idi Amin was a brutal dictator and that Ugandans needed to be saved from that brutality.

We need to thank this Saint; we need to thank the family that bore the pain; and we need to thank the people of Mucwini in Kitgum, who bore the shame and pain, above all, the pain of seeing a great man being buried like a dead dog. This is something that pained me when I played my role in Mucwini. It made me cry, but one thing I remember -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could you please wind up?

MS OGWAL: One thing I remember is that if St Janani Luwum was not buried in Mucwini, who on earth would have remembered that little known parish or village of Mucwini? It took the life of our saint to let the world know where Mucwini is. Indeed, Mucwini shall rise and shine in the myth of Acholi. That is a fact.

I have already spoken to the mover of this motion and told him that it is not just a question of paying tribute; we must do something to demonstrate that indeed we are going beyond just paying tribute. The family lost everything at the time; their father was brutally murdered. In line with the policy of the government to compensate the war affected victims, let the family of the Archbishop Janani Luwum be part of that. That is my plea.

I plead that in recognition of the fact that Mucwini is going to be a tourism site, where people will be paying pilgrimage every year, Government comes up with a package for developing it to give it a facelift so that it deserves the tourists that come to Uganda. I think that will be benefiting.

I would like to thank the Office of the Prime Minister that agreed to build a monument though that element is missing in the motion. However, that is not enough. We should go beyond that. We should build a faith-based university there so that people can come from all over the world to learn what makes Ugandans different. There is faith; there is God and our spirit is alive. Let people come and learn and they will do that if we build a faith-based university at Mucwini. May God bless you!  (Applause)

5.58
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me also take this opportunity to thank my colleagues for making very valuable contributions to this motion and also giving it overwhelming support. 

The late Archbishop Janani Luwum united us when he was killed. But he also still continued to galvanise us and unite us as indeed the debate in this House has very well demonstrated. 

I have one or two comments on what my sister, the hon. Cecilia Ogwal has said. It is true that this morning we had quite a long discussion on the issue. I would like to also say that the organizing committee for the late Janani Luwum Celebrations that we had in Mucwini did agree that there was so much that needed to be done and that the time was short. 

After the Mucwini celebrations, the committee would again meet and agree on a strategic plan to immortalise the life and contributions of the late Archbishop Janani Luwum. This committee has not met to do this work but is going to do so. It happens to be effectively chaired by Prof. Apolo Nsibambi and the co-chairs include me and a number of other friends like Ndugu Olara Otunnu and definitely the Deputy Speaker, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. There are quite other members – the late Jackson Obola should be remembered. 

This committee will sit and will bring the family, Government, friends, church and other critical players together so that we as a country and the friends from outside can be one team to ensure that a sustainable and affordable programme is put up in place without splitting hairs now. Let us leave to this committee to do its work.

The other point that has been made -(Interruption)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for giving way. I have been forced to seek clarification from you at this important juncture. On the fateful day the late Archbishop Janani Luwum was killed, there were two other people killed. Could it be right for the Prime Minister to give us a road map on how best the other two - because one was given a decent burial but the other has not yet been recognized by Government – will also be recognised so that the three can be recognized on the same day since this is going to be an annual event?

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The clarification I am seeking is about what the honourable member over there has just stated. I would like to know whether the other two were assassinated for the same cause. I mean, for spreading Christianity or telling the truth or it was other reasons so that we can forge a way forward. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Let me assist my sister, hon. Elizabeth Karungi, that indeed they were murdered more or less together and they were depicted and falsified together. Yes, this is a very legitimate point. It is so legitimate that I have been discussing it with hon. Jacob Oboth. 

But my view is that we have time at a later stage to address this specific and very legitimate issue. However, for purposes of this motion, we should concentrate on the life of the late Archbishop Janani Luwum.

The second point I would like to comment on is what my sister, the hon. Cecilia Ogwal, said that President Museveni did two great things; the first one being, accepting to grace and support the Mucwini celebrations and the other that he accepted that the army has committed atrocities. 

My sister is right. However, my sister should have added that unlike previous armies that committed atrocities at will with no one pointing a finger except receiving praises from those in authority, soldiers of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces and its precursor, the National Resistance Army, have been much disciplined. In cases of indiscipline and committing crime, they have gone through the rigorous accountability mechanisms within UPDF and the National Resistance Army before. You all know that many of these have been thoroughly punished and some of them who have committed more serious crimes have even been executed.

Therefore, the question of tolerating arbitrary killings is out of face, as far as the UPDF is concerned. That makes the fundamental difference between UPDF and the previous armies.

I take this opportunity to specifically thank Ambassador Olara Otunnu because he was the principal catalyst in pushing this important matter to both Government and friends. He played an important coordinating role. For that and for the fact that he was able to publish a book on the life of the late Janani Luwum - that contribution was very significant! It is again Ambassador Olara Otunnu who coordinated the invitation and communication with Archbishop Sentamu, the Archbishop of York. I would like to pay tribute to my good friend, Ndugu Olara Otunnu, for the critical role he played to ensure that we achieve this success. And he continues to be a very important person to this coordinating committee that I have already talked about. 

Of course, he did not do it alone. There were many other people. My sister, the hon. Cecilia Ogwal was in-charge of protocol. She had to travel to Mucwini to make sure everything was in order; she did great work without any doubt. The coordinating committee in Kitgum played a critical role. They were able to come down and coordinate with the Kampala committee and though the time was short, that degree of coordination helped the whole process to move forward. Many Members of Parliament who are here and a number of them who are not here, also played an important role in coordinating the exercise. 

Yes, my sister, the hon. Cecilia Ogwal, is right in saying that the Archbishop Stanley Ntagali; the Provincial Secretary, Canon Magezi, and many other church leaders, both in Kampala, Kitgum and in the north in general, played critical roles to ensure that the role of the church was at the forefront. Archbishop Odama, as you very well know, was a critical celebrant in all this. But also the success of this great occasion was a culmination of support from the wanainchi, Government, the church and from the international community and many other well-wishers.

I also agree with the hon. Cecilia Ogwal when she said that Mucwini is likely and is going to be a centre of pilgrimage and needs to be prepared for this purpose. Because many of the people who come from outside to pay pilgrimage, will be loaded in their pockets, they will promote tourism and also spend the money they will have brought.

In conclusion, my dear brother, Ndugu Speaker, I would like to personally salute you -(Applause)- for the special interest and guidance that you have given in the preparation of this debate and all the arrangements. You have continued to guide and will continue to guide us in future as we do more and more. You were our chair of this steering committee and we very much value your contribution.

There are many names I have talked about but I would like to take this opportunity to thank all of you and all the others outside this House, for the enormous contribution you made to the success of immortalising the life of the late Archbishop Janani Luwum. I thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have sat in this Chair; sometimes when we have a body lying in front of us; sometimes when we have tributes in memory of people who have passed on and whose bodies we were not able to bring to Parliament, but were recent occurrences. The debate today is as if we had a body lying in Parliament. The spirit of this debate energises everybody and puts the uniqueness of this debate in its perspective.

We have carried out this debate as if the late Archbishop Janani Luwum’s body was present in Parliament. And it is true he is present in this Parliament in spirit. His spirit is present in this Parliament yet he passed on a long ago. Today, we have seen that the late Janani Luwum is so tall in history and yet he lies low in a little grave in Mucwini. Today, the late Janani Luwum is speaking to us in an active voice yet his mouth was silenced by a brutal dictator many years back. Today, he is alive and yet dead. In his death as a country, we have hope in our self-renewal. In his death, we are inspired and we feel the challenge of leadership that is not about us but about other people.

That is the spirit with which we carried out this debate. That is the spirit that should be alive for all of us to inspire all of us to struggle and make this country a better place; firmly declaring that never again shall we have our country degenerate to those levels of criminality.

Honourable members, on that note, I ask the House to rise and observe a moment of silence in memory of his passing.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It should really be: “May his soul continue to rest in eternal peace.” 

I now put the question to the motion that has been very eloquently debated and that this House resolves as follows: 

    (1) That Parliament collectively pays tribute to the late Archbishop Janani Jakaliya Luwum, for his distinguished service and contribution towards the liberation of Uganda, spread of Christianity in Africa, as well as the development of Uganda.

    (2) That the ideals of democracy, good governance and the rule of law that the late Archbishop Janani Jakaliya Luwum advocated for should be upheld. 

    (3) That Parliament takes cognisance of the public holiday of 16th February, pronounced in Mucwini by His Excellency, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, in appreciation of the numerous contributions made by the late Archbishop Janani Jakaliya Luwum during his lifetime. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much, for the support to this motion. (Applause) Many thanks to the family that has been able to come from far and be present when this commemoration motion is being debated; when this tribute was being made in memory of a son that lives so tall -

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you so much. We made certain proposals, which were accepted. And I was hoping that in the conclusion, two things would be done: One, I did not want to bring in the element of acknowledging the personal presence of the Archbishop of York who is the second in hierarchy in the Anglican Church to be present and preside over Mucwini because I thought the mover of the motion would do it. I thought it would be undiplomatic on our part.

Secondly, I thought that the issues that came up by way of amending the motion would appear in the summary. Therefore, the fact that it has not come, how do we deal with some of those issues, which have already been -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this is a tribute motion and we have a format for tribute motions. All those matters that have been pronounced can be picked up from the Hansard and handled the way they normally handle businesses of this nature. This being a tribute motion, it cannot be anything else but a tribute. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.16 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 1 April 2015 at 2.00 p.m.)

