
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Friday, 25 March 2022

Parliament met at 11.42 a.m. in Kololo Ceremonial Grounds, Kampala.

The National Anthem

The East African Community Anthem

PRAYERS

(The Chief Justice, Justice Alfonse Owiny-Dollo, in the Chair.)

PROCLAMATION

11.47
THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Proclamation by the Chief Justice of the Republic of Uganda on the election of the Speaker of the 11th Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.

“WHEREAS Parliament of the Republic of Uganda received the sad news of the death of the Rt Hon. Speaker of the 11th Parliament, Hon. Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah, which occurred on the 20th day of March 2022, rendering the Office of the Speaker to Parliament vacant; 

AND WHEREAS under Article 82(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rule 5(4) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of the Republic of Uganda: “No business shall be transacted in Parliament other than an election to the Office of Speaker at any time that office is vacant.”;

NOTING THAT Article 82(2) of the Constitution and rule 5(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament provide for the election of the Speaker by Members of Parliament from among their number;

AWARE THAT Article 82(5) of the Constitution and Rule 5(5) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament mandate the Chief Justice or a judge designated by the Chief Justice to preside at an election of the Speaker;

NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Chief Justice under Article 82(4) of the Constitution and rule 5(5) of the Rules of procedure of Parliament, I hereby proclaim that Parliament shall sit at Kololo Ceremonial Grounds on the 25th day of March 2022 at 10.00 a.m. to elect the Speaker of the 11th Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.” 

Given under my hand and seal at Kampala, this 25th day of March 2022, Alfonse Chigamoy Owiny-Dollo, the Chief Justice of the Republic of Uganda.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Honourable members of Parliament, on Sunday, the 20th of March 2022, the country received the sad news of the death of the Rt Hon. Speaker of the 11th Parliament, the Rt Hon. Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah. Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah died in Seattle, the State of Washington, United States of America, on the 19th of March, their time, which was 20th of March East African standard time.

On behalf of the Judiciary and on my own behalf, I wish to convey our heartfelt condolences to the family of the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, His Excellency the President, the Parliament of Uganda and the nation at large, for the loss of such a resourceful and dedicated Ugandan.

The developments above have rendered the Office of the Speaker of Parliament of Uganda vacant. May I request, therefore, honourable members and other members here present, to rise for a moment of silence in honour of the fallen Speaker of Parliament of Uganda.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

Under Article 82(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rule (5)(4) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, no business can be transacted in Parliament other than an election to the Office of the Speaker at any time that office is vacant.

This is the reason for my coming here today, as the Chief Justice, to preside over the election of the Speaker in fulfilment of Article 82(5) of the Constitution of Uganda, which provides as follows: “The Chief Justice or a judge designated by the Chief Justice shall preside at an election of a Speaker, and the Speaker shall preside at an election of the Deputy Speaker.”

Now, let me explain the importance of carrying out this election. When the body of the Speaker arrives in this country, a number of things will happen - chief among which will be his lying in State in Parliament and Parliament honouring him. That will be a sitting of Parliament, which will be captured by the Hansard of Parliament. 

Accordingly, it will be a business of Parliament and the Constitution, as I have said, is clear that such an honour to the fallen Speaker, in this case, can only be done when there is a Speaker to do that. That explains what some people in other quarters have thought is rather a hasty process. It is important. 

The alternative is for the body of the Speaker to arrive and be taken to Omoro for burial. That would be too painful for all of you who have known him. We elected him and the last act you would want to do is to honour him in Parliament. This explains the election of the Speaker today, as provided for in the Constitution.

Honourable members, we are going to proceed as follows: I will invite the Clerk to Parliament to read rule 5 of the Rules of Procedure on election of the Speaker. Following that, I will call for nominations of candidates to the Office of the Speaker, and each nomination will then be seconded. I will then give an opportunity to the nominees to give their consent to the nomination. The electoral process will then follow. 

Since I have explained the important meaning of Rule 5, we will proceed right away to the process of nomination of candidates to the Office of the Speaker, followed by secondment. 

I see a hand there; please, proceed. I am not familiar with you, so, for today, you will not be called by name or constituency. I will simply point at you. 

I should report that there are 390 MPs in attendance today. I am assured this meets the requirement for quorum. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Chairperson, Your Lordship, I am the Chairperson of the Buganda Parliamentary Caucus – 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: What caucus are you chairperson for? 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: I am the Chairperson of the Buganda Parliamentary Caucus. 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Is that a constituency? 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: The constituency is Butambala County. 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Okay. Proceed.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Your Lordship, I am rising on a point of procedure. I am a chairperson of 126 Members of this House from the Central Region, a population of about 12 million Ugandans. 

A few days ago, Your Lordship, you were quoted in the press making comments to the effect that a particular group of people were tribalistic –(Interruptions)

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Let there be order in the House. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: And wicked. It was an indictment of the people of the Central Region. Your Lordship – 

MS NABBANJA: Mr Chairperson, is the honourable member in order to divert this House when we are handling a very important matter? Is he in order? 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Honourable member, you are simply not in order. Would you like to sit down?

Secondly, the Chief Justice has not made any remark here, which requires you challenging him as you are doing. Finally, the reason I asked whether your constituency is Buganda Caucus, which you said was not, is that in your constituency, I believe there are other people other than Baganda and so, you do not only represent the Baganda. (Applause)

Would you like to sit down? Thank you. 

MS MALENDE: Thank you, My Lord. I rise on a point of procedure under Rule 78(1)(d) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. We have two Members of Parliament currently jailed in Kigo Prison and that is Hon. Muhammad Ssegirinya of Kawempe North and Hon. Allan Ssewanyana of Makindye West. 

Under Article 28(3)(a) of the Constitution, every person charged with a criminal offence is presumed innocent until proven guilty or until that person has pleaded guilty. The two Members of Parliament have never pleaded guilty and no evidence has so far been laid against them. 

According to rule 5 of our Rules of Procedure, the Members of Parliament are entitled to participate in this selection. 

My point of procedure is, are we proceeding right when we have not established whether any fora has been put in place for the two Members of Parliament to participate in this election?

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Thank you for the point of procedure. I read nothing in the Article that you have cited that says that if anybody is incarcerated, then Parliament cannot proceed. I have not seen it anywhere in the Constitution. (Applause) What I know in the Rules of Procedure is that once there is quorum, Parliament proceeds. (Applause) 

Can we proceed with the nominations? We allow for freedom of expression. 

NOMINATION OF CANDIDATES FOR THE OFFICE OF THE SPEAKER

12.02
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Your Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, My Lord the Chief Justice and honourable members, my name is Robinah Nabbanja, Woman Representative, Kakumiro District. 

I beg to move under Article 82 of the Constitution and Rule 5 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament that Hon. Anita Annet Among, Woman Representative of Bukedea District takes the chair of this Parliament as the Speaker of the 11th Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. I beg to move. (Applause)

12.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Hamsom Obua): Your Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, My Lord the Chief Justice of the Republic of Uganda, honourable colleagues in your respective capacities; my name is Dennis Hamson Obua, Member of Parliament, Ajuri County, Alebtong District. 

I rise to second the nomination of Hon. Anita Annet Among for the position of Speaker, Parliament of Uganda. (Applause)

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Thank you. We will allow only one seconder. She has been nominated and seconded. Let us proceed to the next. Is there any other nomination?

12.04
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Your Lordship the Chief Justice, in compliance with Rule 5(9) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I hereby move a motion that Hon. Asuman Basalirwa, the Member of Parliament for Bugiri Municipality, take the Chair of this Parliament as the Speaker. I beg to move.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Any secondment?

12.05
MR JOEL SSENYONYI (NUP, Nakawa Division West, Kampala City): Thank you, presiding officer. I stand to second Hon. Asuman Basalirwa for the position of Speaker of the 11th Parliament. Thank you.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Any other nomination?

12.06
MR JONATHAN EBWALU (Independent, Soroti West Division, Soroti City): Your Excellency the President and My Lord the Chief Justice, I rise to close nominations.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Honourable member, you do not close; you move a motion for that purpose. 

MR EBWALU: My Lord the Chief Justice, I move a motion that nominations be closed. Thank you.

12.07
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent,	Ndorwa County East, Kabale): My Lord the Chief Justice, I second the motion to close the nominations. 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Okay. I will, therefore, put the question on whether nominations should be closed as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Honourable members, we have two nominees for the position of Speaker of Parliament: Hon. Anita Annet Among and Hon. Asuman Basalirwa. We ask, beginning with Hon. Anita Annet Among, whether they consent to the nomination or not. Let the House know what your view is.

I thought that in Parliament people don’t clap. I was in this Parliament so many years ago; we used not to clap; we used our feet to show applause.

MS ANITA AMONG: Your Excellency, the President of Uganda, My Lord the Chief Justice and honourable members of Parliament, I want to thank you for the confidence that you have shown me through this nomination. I will forever be indebted to you for this confidence by nominating me for the position of Speaker of the 11th Parliament.

It is with great honour and humility that I accept the nomination, and I am ready to serve the nation.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Thank you. Hon. Anita Among has consented to her nomination. Can we now have Hon. Asumani Basalirwa?

MR ASUMANI BASALIRWA: My Lord the Chief Justice, fellow party leader and Chairman of the NRM Party and honourable members of Parliament, I, Asumani Basalirwa, Member of Parliament for Bugiri Municipality, do hereby consent to the nomination as Speaker of Parliament. Thank you.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Thank you, honourable member. Before we start the election, we have to do verification of attendance against the electoral register. The Clerk to Parliament will call out a batch of 10 names of Members of Parliament till we get done. 

After that, I will ask each of the nominees to provide two polling agents. There is this plastic box in front of us; it will be opened in your presence for you to check for hidden      pockets or false bottoms. When you are satisfied, we will begin the electoral process. You will be here till the end of the process. We will count before declaring the results.

So, Clerk to Parliament, let us begin calling the names.

Yes, honourable member, do you want to say something?

MR SSEWUNGU: Your Lordship, I thank you for conducting this exercise. However, I rise on a procedural mater. According to the Order Paper, the President was supposed to arrive here first, which did not happen. However, in addition to that, I want to say that as we go to this exercise, I am not comfortable – 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Honourable member, is the arrival of the President in the Rules of Procedure of Parliament?

MR SSEWUNGU: According to the Order Paper –

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: No, is it in the Rules of Procedure of Parliament? You are raising an important matter and you called it a point of procedure.

MR SSEWUNGU: Can I continue, your Lordship?

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Yes, do so.

MR SSEWUNGU: Your Lordship, thank you and indeed I am right on my point of procedure. 

Anyway, Your Lordship, I am not comfortable to get into the elections while this vehicle that is part of the President’s convoy is still parked here. I am told that it has cameras that will scan through the ticking box. The honourable members, especially those from the NRM, are worried about the presence of this vehicle here because they want to vote freely. 

Therefore, Your Lordship, would it be procedurally okay and in good spirit to order that this vehicle with cameras for the President, who has arrived after us, be moved away.

I don’t know what the worries are – we have no phones on us yet the staff from the NRM Secretariat have their phones right there. So, would it be procedurally okay, Your Lordship, for this vehicle with a camera that is reading into what you are doing, to be moved away to some distance?

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Honourable member, have those cameras peeped into what you are saying? (Laughter)

MR SSEWUNGU: They are even peeping at me now, Your Lordship. (Laughter) And I am happy the President - one time - sent away an SFC staff; he accepted and I know he can also do the same by asking this camera here behind us to be moved away, so that we have independence, as we carry out the election of the Speaker of this House. (Applause)

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Okay. Can you now –

MR SSEWUNGU: I pray, My Lord.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Thank you, for exercising your right to speak. (Laughter) – Please, let us proceed. Thank you for exercising your right to speak. You are now satisfied that you have spoken; let us now proceed with the electoral process. (Applause)

MR MPUUGA: Point of procedure, Your Lordship. 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Yes? I am going to allow just that one procedure and we proceed with the election. I am not going to accept these procedures, guised as procedure. 

MR MPUUGA: Your Lordship and chairperson of this session, I will beg for your kind indulgence to allow this session be a free session that Members can really – I know you are close to that capacity to help us be free people and to vote in an environment that is allowing of a free people.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Yes.

MR MPUUGA: My procedural point, Sir, is in relation to rule 5(9), which -

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Rule what?

MR MPUUGA: Rule 5(9), which is to the effect that “a Member making a nomination shall move a motion that name … do take the Chair of this Parliament as the Speaker and shall give a brief statement of the background and qualification of the nominee.”

Your Lordship, my considered view and interpretation of this rule is that you could allow the nominators to briefly indulge into a little less more of their candidates, for the voters to appreciate these individuals they are going to cast their vote for.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Subrule (9) of rule 5 says, “A Member making a nomination shall move a motion, that is give the name, and shall give a brief statement on the background and qualifications of the nominee.” That is what you are referring to, not so? 

I also wish to point out that this is a peculiar situation, where –(Interjections)– please, honourable members, this is not a campaign rally. This is not a market place. Just like I have allowed you the freedom to speak, you will allow me to speak; you can raise your hand, if you disagree with me. 

If you are going to behave dishonourably, we can proceed. I read the rules better than you do, by the way. (Laughter) We can proceed, your deal of shouting notwithstanding. I think we need to behave here honourably. That is why we are called “honourable Members of Parliament.” (Applause) 

I have gone to great lengths – and I will continue to do so – to allow any one of you to speak but it must be done in accordance with the rules. If you bring the market here, it may be counterproductive. Let us behave responsibly, as honourable members of Parliament. The honourable Member of Parliament here has raised an important question on procedure. I am looking at the rules and please, allow the Chair to look at the rules and make his remarks. That is how things are done.

Honourable member, the rules say, “…the person making the nomination for the position of Speaker shall give a brief statement of the background and qualifications of the nominee.” and that is what you are asking for, not so? I will allow each of the persons nominating – this is a peculiar situation. 

Each of the persons – the reason, I think, they did not – and that is what I was saying before I was rudely disrupted - that this is a peculiar situation, where the Members are known and that is why the people making the nomination did not bother to speak about people who are already known. 

That notwithstanding, I am calling each of the persons who have nominated the two to please use three minutes; no more than three minutes to speak about the candidates they have nominated. Thank you.

12.02
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Your Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, Your Lordship, the Chief Justice of the Republic of Uganda and honourable members. In accordance with rule 5(9) of our Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, I move that the Rt Hon. Anita Annet Among, the woman representative for Bukedea District, take the Chair for this Parliament, as Speaker. 

Today is yet another significant day. It is a day when we seek to choose a person who will replace the fallen, energetic and tireless leader, a brother, father and indeed friend, the late Rt Hon. Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah, the former Speaker of the 11th Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.

Honourable members, in this bid, I present to you the Rt Hon. Anita Among, the woman representative, Bukedea District, to be our leader and Speaker in the 11th Parliament. Your Excellency and honourable members, we want a Parliament that delivers results for the people of Uganda; a Parliament that opens up opportunities for lifting lives.

In electing the Rt Hon. Anita Among to the office of the Speaker of the 11th Parliament, our Parliament will be refreshed and our democracy will be strengthened by a champion of transformative class of politics.

Your Lordship, in the hands of the Rt Hon. Anita Among, we have a leader who is tested. (Applause) Her manner of handling the House is beyond reproach. It is balanced and gives everyone an opportunity to speak for his or her people. She is true to the mission they set off to accomplish with the fallen comrade, Jacob Oulanyah. He called it “a people-centred Parliament”.

Your Excellency and honourable colleagues, it is on record that Hon. Anita Among has spearheaded oversight programmes, intended to help the poor and achieve socio-economic transformation.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: You have one more minute remaining. I gave you only three minutes.

MS NABBANJA: As you may recall, honourable colleagues, Hon. Anita Among sent the House on recess to conduct oversight on the Emyooga programme, which is the cornerstone of the Parish Development Model. 

Honourable members, I want to inform you that I have always argued that the silent multitude of the rural Uganda, who sincerely fairly play to the hallmark of our society, needed support and encouragement available from only proactive leaders. I consider Hon. Among an embodiment of this attribute; the reason I stand to propose her for election to the office of the Speaker.

Honourable members, allow me, once again, to inform you that I seek your support to vote the candidate I propose, Hon. Anita Among, for the position of Speaker of the 11th Parliament. I beg to move.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Thank you, honourable Member. Can we have the person who nominated Hon. Asuman Basalirwa using not more than three minutes to speak about him?

MR MPUUGA: Thank you for your indulgence, Your Lordship. The President of the Republic of Uganda, colleagues, Members of Parliament, I would require a day and a half to enumerate the impeccable qualities of Hon. Asuman Basalirwa. But suffice to utilise less than three minutes to speak about this honourable gentleman, born on 17 November 1977 in Bugiri District, he attended Mwiri Primary School and Kiira College Butiki for his O’ and A’Levels. He did his Bachelor of Laws at Makerere University. He also holds a Diploma in Legal Practice from the Law Development Centre.

Hon. Asuman Basalirwa also holds a Master's degree in Law from Makerere University. He is an advocate of the courts of Judicature in Uganda, a Commissioner for oaths and a notary public. 

He is vastly schooled in law and therefore, well versed with the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, having served a number of years as a member of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, and on the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. 

Your Lordship, Hon. Asuman Basalirwa brings a wealth of experience to the Office of the Speaker, having practised law for more than 10 years and has vast experience in leadership and management. He is also currently the President of the Justice Forum and is the JEEMA Whip in Parliament. 

Your Lordship, Hon. Asuman Basalirwa was a Member of the 10th Parliament and is currently serving his second term as the Member of Parliament for Bugiri Municipality. He has been a teacher of the law at the Islamic University in Uganda, Busoga University, and Kampala University, among others. He also served as a member of the Makerere University Council - 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Member, you have one more minute to complete.

MR MPUUGA: Your Lordship, Hon. Asuman Basalirwa exudes a very calm demeanor that is very key at steering the House of Parliament. His depth at matters obtaining to procedure is impeccable. In a House that is highly divided and partisan, you need somebody who can motivate it to move to the centre and that is no one but Hon. Asuman Basalirwa. 

Your Lordship, Hon. Asuman Basalirwa, as a typical African man, is married with wives and children. (Laughter)

Distinguished colleagues, I, therefore, have the honour and privilege to present to you Hon. Asuman Basalirwa, to be elected as Speaker to replace the fallen giant of Uganda, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. I beg to move, Your Lordship.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Thank you. I would like to thank both persons who made the nomination, for using exactly three minutes each to speak about their candidates. Thank you very much. That is very orderly. It deserves commendation. 

Honourable members, I am made to understand that verification has already been done; every Member who is here has signed on the register. We have 390 Members and the quorum is 176. So, we are well above quorum, as I said before. 

This is how we will proceed: The Clerk to Parliament will read out the name of each honourable member eligible to vote. The Member whose name has been read will move towards the Table of the Clerk, pick the ballot paper and then write the name of his or her candidate and insert the ballot paper in the ballot box provided in front. 

Ex-officio Members of Parliament are not entitled to vote; it is just a matter of clarification. 

Now, can we have the two agents of each of the nominated honourable members to come here in front, we inspect the ballot box and then the Clerk takes over from there to begin reading out the names.

Honourable agent, can we have the Office of the Clerk have your names for the sake of the record? Please, kindly, walk over and give your names and who you are an agent for. Then you will - Clerk, can you have an official open the ballot box? When they have done that, it is inspected and we will proceed when –(Member rose_)-   I will attend to you; just a moment. We will proceed when we are happy with the ballot box as it is. It is only two members per person; please, not three. It is two agents per person. 

Yes, honourable member, you wanted to raise something?

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Your Lordship. My name is Gilbert Olanya. I am rising on a point of procedure, Your Lordship. We are about to go for a very important exercise - that is voting for our Speakers.

The situation we are in currently and the position where Members are supposed to write the names of their preferred candidate - looking at the vehicle behind us and the camera and someone is inside that car monitoring what is going on, I feel that Members should be free when they are casting their votes. I request Your Lordship, let the vehicle be parked in a different position and they should move away. 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Hon. Gilbert Olanya, since the camera cannot go through you, turn your back to the camera and then write the name of your candidate and insert it in the box. Thank you for your point of procedure.

Now, have you gone through the process of opening the ballot box? Sorry, I was attending to the point of procedure. So, can we begin with honourable members, please? The Clerk is going to call out each one of you to exercise your right to vote. Mr Clerk, please.

(Members voted by secret ballot.)

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: I have been made to understand that Hon. Joyce Acan, the PWD Representative, cannot come over to vote. Can I have one agent, from each side, to accompany the electoral officials to take the ballot paper to Hon. Joyce Acan and be satisfied that she is the one voting?

(Voting by secret ballot continued.)

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Honourable members, let us have order. If they have not yet called your name, please, remain in your seat so that we do not have a crowd. You should come along when they have called your name. 

(Voting by secret ballot continued.)

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Honourable members, if there is anyone present here who has not voted and is entitled to vote and their name has not been called, please, come over and we do the verification so that you can vote before we start the counting.

I will now take it that everyone, who is entitled to vote and is actually here, has voted.

Honourable members, when we started our proceedings at 11.55 a.m., there were 390 Members in the House. Along the way, more Members came and by 12.43 p.m., the Members present were 433. Therefore, expect the votes to be out of the 433, unless there is some other explanation.

Now, I ask the Clerk to proceed to empty the ballot box. I ask the agents to, please, be present where they are going to empty the ballot box. Be careful about the wind. Have the ballot box emptied and proceed to the counting of the ballots. Can you find a solution to the issue of the wind so that the ballots are not blown away?

I would like Members to know that we have reached a decision, together with the respective agents, that the ballot box will not be emptied the way we had thought. However, the ballots should be picked one by one, verified by the agents and put aside in accordance with which of the candidates has earned the respective ballot. This is because of the wind. If they overturn the box, we might have to run around to pick the ballots. So, can we begin?

Honourable agents, the only persons to touch the ballot are the officials but you have to be satisfied that it belongs to “A” and the one for “A” has been put where the one for “A” is supposed to be and the one for “B” is put where the one for “B” is supposed to be put. Let us not all get involved in touching the ballots.

(Vote counting/tallying commenced.) 

DECLARATION OF RESULTS 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Honourable members, please - after a tally of the votes, these are the results: 468 Members of Parliament voted. Out of these, one Member cast an invalid vote, meaning it was not considered for either party in the contest. 

Hon. Asuman Basalirwa gathered 66 votes. (Applause) Hon. Anita Annet Among gathered 401 votes. (Applause) 

Pursuant to this and by virtue of the powers entrusted to me under Article 82(5) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, I hereby declare Hon. Anita Annet Among as the duly elected Speaker of the 11th Parliament. (Applause)

Honourable members, there are procedures to follow. Clerk to Parliament, please.

THE CLERK TO PARLIAMENT: Thank you, My Lord the Chief Justice. Your Excellency, the President and honourable members, I have, in accordance with Article 82 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, received a letter of resignation from the Rt Hon. Anita Among from the position of Deputy Speaker. I now have the pleasure to declare the position of Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda vacant.

3.04
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA	(JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): My Lord, the Chief Justice, the newly elected Speaker, the Rt Hon. Anita Among, my colleague, fellow party leader and chairman of the NRM, and honourable Members of Parliament.

First of all, permit me to thank all of you for participating in this process. I am greatly indebted to every single Member of Parliament who has taken time to be part of this democratic process. We salute and thank you for the spirit and gesture.

Permit me in a special way to appreciate the 66 Members of Parliament that have bestowed upon me a title - which is not expressly provided in the rules, but which I am glad to call myself - of “Shadow Speaker”. Thank you very much.

In this regard, colleagues, I want to congratulate the Rt Hon. Anita Among upon your election. I want to confirm that the process has been open, it has been free and it has been democratic. 

Unlike other processes known in this country, this particular one has been free and transparent. (Applause) I want to thank you. I want to commit my total support; I am available. If you think I can add value to your leadership, I am available and I want to commit that we shall work together, for the good of the country. I thank you. (Applause)

REMARKS BY HIS LORDSHIP THE CHIEF JUSTICE

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Thank you, Hon. Basalirwa. Although you did not thank the person who made the process democratic, free and fair, but nonetheless, thank you. 

Your Excellency, the President of Uganda, the Rt Hon. Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda, honourable Members of Parliament of Uganda, other members here present in Parliament today. I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the Rt Hon. Anita Annet Among for the confidence and the trust the honourable Members of Parliament have exhibited in electing her as Speaker of the 11th Parliament.

Rt Hon. Speaker, you are a Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda. You are not a Speaker for a section of Parliament or for a particular political denomination. You are a Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda and it is in the Parliament of Uganda that we, Ugandans, are gathered, through our representatives, to chart the way forward for our country. (Applause)

Let me take this opportunity also to hail Hon. Asuman Basalirwa for his gracious concession. In doing this, honourable member, you have demonstrated a rare maturity not known in this country; that in saying this was free and fair and then, accepting that for today’s contest, your colleague Member of Parliament had better favour than you, you exhibited maturity and you have attained a very high moral ground, as an honourable Member of the Parliament of Uganda. 

Now, Rt Hon. Speaker and honourable members, as you very well know, you have your responsibilities cut out for you by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. Key are your mandate for legislation and then, oversight, pursuant to your responsibility to play out, together with the three arms of government, the duty to check and balance the running of the State. 

Please, I appeal to each one of you, honourable Members of Parliament, let us put our country above politics. We do not have any other country we can truly call home, other than Uganda. This is our true home; we belong here. We own this country collectively; nobody owns this country more than the other. We are equal stakeholders in the prosperity, development, peace and unity of this country and we all have to work together for it, in accordance with our constitutional mandate. 

Now, the Constitution provides for separation of powers - that is well known - but more importantly, the letter and spirit of the Constitution demands harmony in the workings of the three arms of government, namely: the Executive, the Legislature - of which you are privileged to be members now - and the Judiciary.

We have our duty to exercise our respective mandates in the knowledge that like the three cooking stones, where the pot is placed in the countryside, no arm of Government can do without the other two. 

Speaking as the head of the Judiciary, I would like to assure the honourable Members of Parliament that we will zealously guard our independence, ensure that we foster harmony in our relationship with the Executive and Parliament, and then to this end, I urge that the three arms of Government foster a relationship where we have frequent forum discussions on how best we can take this country forward. May the good Lord shower all of us with His grace and blessings. Thank you all. (Applause)

I now have the honour of handing over to you, your Speaker of Parliament and my task and responsibility for the day is ended. I thank you for showing that maturity and responsibility, which has resulted in the election of the Speaker. Thank you. (Applause)

ADMINISTRATION OF THE OATH TO THE SPEAKER BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF UGANDA IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 82(10) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND THE SECOND SCHEDULE OF THE OATHS ACT, CAP. 19 OF THE LAWS OF UGANDA

The oath was administered to Ms Anita Annet Among. 

HANDING OVER THE INSTRUMENTS OF POWER BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA TO THE RT HON. SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT

(The Instruments of power were handed over to Ms Anita Annet Among.)

REMARKS BY THE SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT
3.15
THE SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT (Ms Anita Among): Your Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni; Your Excellency, the Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda; Your Lordship, the Honourable Chief Justice of the Republic of Uganda; the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Cabinet ministers and state ministers; my honourable colleagues, honourable Members of Parliament, the Clerk to Parliament; fellow countrymen and women; not forgetting our gallant Leader of the Opposition.

Your Excellency, for the record, my name is Anita Annet Among, a qualified accountant and lawyer. I hold a Bachelor’s Degree in Law – first class. You came to the function as a parent. I hold another degree in Accounting. I am also a holder of a Master’s Degree in Business Administration. 

I have previously worked as a senior banker and university lecturer. I am also an education entrepreneur, as you heard yesterday. While in the 10th Parliament, I chaired the famous committee, COSASE, which did a very good job for this country. Until today, I was the Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda, which position I have resigned.

Before I forget, honourable colleagues, join me in thanking the Chief Justice for his exemplary wisdom and driving this House today, where we have had a democratic process. I would also like to thank my brother, Hon. Basalirwa, for participating in this very democratic process. Thank you. 

I take this singular honour to thank the former Speaker of Parliament, the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, for creating and leaving a legacy in the Parliament of Uganda. Thank you. (Applause)

I also take this opportunity and honour to glorify the Almighty God for the gift of life, wisdom and the opportunity that he has bestowed on the President of Uganda and for the work that he has done in this country. Your Excellency, we are very grateful and we thank you. (Applause)

Let me also take the opportunity to thank God for the life of our late Speaker, the Rt Hon. Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah. We talk about the Rt Hon. Oulanyah Jacob today because we would not be here undertaking this exercise, had he been amidst us. That is why we are referring to the Rt Hon. Oulanyah in each and every speech. 

Your Excellency, I take the opportunity to thank you for everything that you humanly did in ensuring that you could save the life of the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. However, God’s timing is never our timing. We thank you, as Parliament and the people of Uganda. 

Today is a day of mixed emotions. It is a day when we continue to mourn our fallen leader, friend, father and twin brother to me – as he always referred to me – yet the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which we swore to uphold, dictates that the constitutional process must be undertaken. 

Your Excellency and honourable members, this is a day I never imagined would happen this soon, especially because I believed that for the next five or 10 years, I would still be the Deputy Speaker and Rt Hon. Oulanyah would be the Speaker. I would have had a stronger mentor and leader in the Rt Hon. Oulanyah, but we thank God for everything.

As the Parliament of Uganda and the country, we can only celebrate his life by taking forward the aspirations that he had promised the people of Uganda and I promise the country that I will do that. (Applause)

At this moment, may I humbly request that we rise and observe a moment of silence in honour of our fallen leader, brother, father, mentor and friend, the Rt Hon. Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is a great honour and privilege that I stand before you to extend my sincere thanks and gratitude for electing me to the Chair of the Speaker of the 11th Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. I sincerely thank you. 

I take the opportunity to thank the following people: 

    1. His Excellency, the President, for identifying, supporting and believing in me. I am forever grateful.

    2. My Lord the Chief Justice, for conducting this process in a very democratic way. Thank you very much.

    3. The Members of Parliament for the love and unconditional support that you have showed me in the last nine months and even today. Thank you very much. I am forever indebted to the Members of the 11th Parliament.

    4. The people of Bukedea for electing me to be in both the 10th Parliament and the 11th Parliament. My people of Bukedea, I am forever grateful to you.

    5. My family for the support, despite the countless times I have always not been there, especially when we had Bills in the House and I had to be in the House up to 10.00 p.m. 

    6. Hon. Basalirwa, for participating in this process. Once again, I want to thank you very much. It would not have been a good process without you. Now, it is a very credible process and a democratic process.

    7. Colleagues in the Opposition, thank you for giving Hon. Basalirwa some 66 votes.

    8. The staff of Parliament. Your Excellency, we have very excellent staff of Parliament. Staff, I thank you for the work that you have done. 

With humility and respect, I would like to say eyalama noi. (Applause) His Excellency has always said proverbs in his language and now, I am also saying “thank you” in my language: eyalama noi. 

These have been challenging times with the negative economic effects from the COVID-19 pandemic and, even more recently, the long unavailability and eventual demise of the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. The fatigue, stress, grief, sorrow and pain took a toll on us but we have instead responded with courage, belief and resilience. Once you the courage, you will always manage these challenges. 

The leadership of the 11th Parliament will continue to be guided by the vision to have a people-centred Parliament that is anchored on evidence-based debate. Honourable colleagues shall base all their decisions on facts, reason, sound and logic presented to the House, and not debate based on hearsay. 

Ours shall be a Parliament where the needs of the common man take centre stage, as already said by the Chief Justice, in order for us to achieve the socio-economic transformation that the NRM Manifesto strives to achieve. 

Honourable members, you have been and you have walked the journey with me. It has not been an easy journey. We have walked together in this leadership journey. I am here and I am ready to serve. I request that you continue walking with me the same journey for the good of our country. 

I am also alive to the fact that the House is a composition of different parties and other shades of opinion. I will strive to ensure equitable debate and service delivery. I implore everyone to be tolerant to exhibit decorum and have mutual respect for each other. 

A better Uganda is good for everyone, irrespective of your political affiliation, which is the reason we have reached out to all parties in Parliament to work for our country. I will be a Speaker for Uganda and everybody, not for a party and I will ensure whatever we do in Parliament will be for the good of the common person. 

I trust that with the guidance of the Lord, I will steer the House in a manner that will not only satisfy and inspire Ugandans but also, make the party and yourself a better choice for the people of Uganda and your constituencies. 

I pledge to support all the Members of Parliament in their constituencies for them to remain in Parliament. It is the greatest honour of my life, Your Excellency and Members of Parliament, to accept the responsibility to serve the 11th Parliament and, indeed, the Republic of Uganda. 
I say all this For God and My Country.  

Honourable members, the President is supposed to make his remarks but we have requested him to make the remarks after the next session. I, therefore, adjourn the House for five minutes and then we come back for the next session. 

(The House rose at 3.30 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 25 March at 3.35 p.m.) 


 



