

PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Tuesday, 29 March 2022

Parliament met at 2.01 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE deputy SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, let me take this opportunity to welcome you to today’s sitting. It is a very short one. It is the First Sitting we are having since the demise of our senior leader - the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. It is true we had a sitting at Kololo, you know the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah loved these Chambers. Whenever he was here, we always felt him.

Although we already paid tribute in terms of observing a minute of silence at Kololo, I request, for our First Sitting in this Chamber since his demise, we stand up and pay tribute.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

The Deputy Speaker: Colleagues, you will forgive me today. The session is very short. Normally because of what we are going through, we would not have any session, but we have statutory deadlines that we must meet. Therefore, today and on Thursday, we are forced to have sessions in order to meet the deadlines. It will be a very short session. I hope whoever is on the Order Paper is ready. I will not have matters of national importance today. Most of you have called me and I have checked with the Speaker. However, I request that we wait until the situation normalises. 

What we will do in the meantime is that if you have issues, which are very urgent and require urgent attention of the ministers or the State and maybe you are not able to reach out to the minister, kindly reach out to me and the Speaker. We shall intervene in those matters to ensure that we arrange a meeting with the minister responsible or officers, relay the matters to the Prime Minister and they are handled. Those are matters, which require urgent attention like Hon. Enos Asiimwe from Kabula today reached out to me in regard to his school and we are already following up on that matter.

Also, as you know, section 15 of the Public Finance Management Act requires that we should have already received the ministerial policy statements. We have ministers who did not submit theirs and so, we are giving them another chance today. However, honourable ministers, you will be required to explain on the Floor of the House why you were not able to submit the statement on time. I think it is a very good culture for accountability purposes for the whole House to know. It should not be just a matter for the presiding officer. That is very important.

We shall also be receiving alternative statements as per rule 147 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. Under that rule, it is voluntary for the Leader of the Opposition and team to do that. I am glad the Leader of the Opposition has done a tremendous job and they will be ready to submit. So, at the right time, we shall ensure that is done.

Honourable colleagues, like I told you, on Thursday, we shall have a sitting. Section 13 of the Public Finance Management Act and rule 148 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament require that we receive the final budget estimates or proposals from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We do not have time to wait. We would have done it on Friday, but then, the body of our colleague will be returning to the country and so, we shall have to do it on Thursday.

Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I hope we shall be ready as per section 13 and Rule 148 to receive the final budget estimates, the revenue and Tax Bills, if you have any. Also, Minister on that day, I expect you to have published the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility as per section 5 of the Public Finance Management Act. We have laboured to check and you published it on your website, but you never gazetted it. You had only a month after approval by Parliament to have it gazette, but you have not yet done that. I request that you do it. On Thursday, please, table it on the Floor. 

I also expect you to table the final Budget Framework Paper. These will help the committees when they are processing the ministerial policy statements. We shall have a very good flow for all Members of Parliament, when they are doing their work. Therefore, I expect you to do that on Thursday. I am sure the Speaker must have already communicated to you. 

Without wasting further time, I just want to ask you, colleagues to allow me and my sister to congratulate you on elevating us to these positions. (Applause) It is humbling. We shall try to foot the bill. We are ready and we are going to move as a House. Our principle is what the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah told us to do; “It shall be ‘we’ not ‘I’.”

The moment the presiding officer fails, the Leader of the Opposition has failed, the Leader of Government Business and the whole House have failed. We shall all be judged together. Therefore, let us work towards ensuring that we succeed as a team. Then, someone will say, the 11th Parliament was super good and we move around proud of what we have achieved as a team. With that, we can have the next item.

Laying of papers

Ministerial policy statements and budget estimateS for thE Ministry of Tourism, wildlife and ANTIQUITIES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable minister, it will be a brief explanation as to why you failed to lay it on time. My brother, Hon. Silas Aogon, I want this to take a short time.

2.10
Mr SILAS aogon (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Mr Speaker, first of all, it is very important that I congratulate you. (Applause) I want to be the first person to congratulate you officially in the Chamber. (Laughter) You know how we have grown up together in this House, but from nowhere, you have left me and gone the other side.

The procedural matter that has made me to rise up is that I believe in our Rules of Procedure. There is a demand that if you are going beyond the deadline to submit what you are submitting this afternoon, you ought to seek authority from the Speaker. For purposes of making sure that we do not flout any rule, wouldn’t it be procedurally proper that the Government lays evidence on Table, of seeking authority from the Speaker? All of us understand the challenges we have – we know the current situation. I am just seeking your guidance, Sir. Thank you. 

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you, Hon. Silas. The Order Paper belongs to the Speaker. By the time I put you on the Order Paper, it means I have already allowed you to do what you are doing. However, for accountability purposes, that is why I wanted the explanation to be in the open so that all Members buy in and other ministers learn from it so that we do not have such an incident next time.

2.12
The minister of state for tourism, wildlife and antiquities (Mr Martin Mugarra): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Hon. Silas stole my opportunity. I thought I would be the first to congratulate you, but all the same, I think I am going to be the first minister to congratulate you upon your victory. (Laughter) Of course, on behalf of the tourism sector, we congratulate you. We know how supportive you have been to the sector. We hope you will continue helping us so that we achieve or better the sector. 

Mr Speaker, in line with section 13(13) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I hereby submit a ministerial policy statement for Financial Year 2022/2023 for the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities – Vote 022 and Vote 117. 

Mr Speaker, we were not in position to lay this document on the Table by the 15th. This was a result of the delays in the online budget system which, in some cases, did not reflect inputs in the output reports. This required making several trials to obtain the desired results. 

However, I do not think that there is any sufficient explanation that would make us convince this House as to why we did not submit on the 15th. However, like I am saying, all of us are in a learning process and hope to get better as we go forward.
 
Thank you for accepting to receive this statement despite the delay. (Applause)

The Deputy Speaker: But you have not laid it. (Laughter)

Mr mugarra: Mr Speaker, I therefore, beg to lay the statement of the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities – Vote 022 and Vote 117 - for Financial Year 2022/2023. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you, honourable member. Like you said, we are all learning. The statement is referred to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry.
 
MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023 FOR Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives

2.15
The Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives (Mr Francis Mwebesa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First and foremost, I beg to lay the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives for Financial Year 2022/2023. 

Before I do that, I have a duty to explain the reason for not laying the policy statement on 15 March 2022. Honourable members, the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives’ ministerial policy statement for Financial Year 2022/2023 was not laid on 15 March 2022 because by the time it was delivered to Parliament, the House had adjourned for that day. 

However, effort was made to deliver the copy to the Office of the Clerk to Parliament on the very day, awaiting this opportunity to have it formally laid before the House. Thank you. The statement covers Votes 015, 136, 154 and 500. I beg to lay. Thank you.

I also want to congratulate you, Rt Hon. Speaker, on being the Deputy Speaker of the august House. (Applause)

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you, honourable minister. Colleagues, these are challenges we all go through. The statement stands referred to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry.

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATE FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023 FOR Office of the Auditor-General

The Deputy Speaker: Colleagues, the Auditor-General is under the Parliamentary Commission. It is an office of Parliament. So, we must explain why we delayed.

2.19
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Mr Speaker, I want to wholeheartedly congratulate you on your becoming the Deputy Speaker of this great Parliament. (Applause)

Allow me to apologise on behalf of the Office of the Auditor-General because the day the report came, the House had already been adjourned. This should not be the practice. Next time, at least the report of the Office of the Auditor-General will be early. It was very unfortunate and we regret. 

I, therefore, beg to lay the ministerial policy statement for the Office of the Auditor-General – Vote 131 – for Financial Year 2022/2023. 

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you, Commissioner. The statement stands referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023 FOR Ministry of Foreign Affairs

2.20
The minister of state for foreign affairs (Regional Affairs) (Mr John Mulimba): Mr Speaker, permit me to join the rest of the speakers to extend our warm congratulations to you and Madam Speaker for making it to the very high office of this Parliament.

I want to begin by sincerely apologising, on my behalf and on behalf of Minister of Foreign Affairs, for late delivery of the ministerial policy statement, which ought to have been delivered here by the 15th of March. Circumstances leading to that arose from the late travel from Kyankwanzi where we were holding a retreat of all the ambassadors and high commissioners designate. 

You all recall that we also had trouble in getting and compiling data from our European missions, especially those around Ukraine. We sincerely apologise. 

Having said that, I wish to lay the ministerial policy statement for Vote 006: Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Votes 501-536: Ugandan Missions Abroad for Financial Year 2022/2023 and the attendant attendant estimates of revenue and expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. I beg to lay, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The statement is referred to the Committee on Foreign Affairs. I would like to make a correction. The statement from the Auditor-General is referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and not the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Thank you.

THE MINISTRY OF EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS

2.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Magode Ikuya): Mr Speaker, I have the misfortune of being here on my maiden day, on this particular day. This is as a result of circumstances, which, in French, we would call fossi mazzou –(Applause)– it kept me off participation all along - and therefore, I was even unable to convey my gratitude to you, to your Office and to the honourable House for allowing me to be a member of this House.

Since I was allowed - I have never been here –(Applause)– and it is quite a privilege to be a member of this House because I had to come in through Ex-officio measures. 

Allow me, therefore, to express my congratulations to you. I join the other speakers who have been here before me, to congratulate you on this very great achievement and I hope that your being there will give some of us who are new, the necessary stewardship to participate even further in what we are doing. 

Mr Speaker, we recognise that we should have laid our ministerial policy statement on 15 March 2022 as per the stipulated timeframe for submission. Unfortunately, we were not able to do so because of some technical inadvertence. I call it inadvertence because we could not - I am told you must go through certain rigmaroles to get things going and once technical things fail, you are, therefore, late by one minute or two in doing that thing in time. 

We wish to regret this unforeseeable delay and promise to do much better next time. We want to be good students so that we do not have to do that again. 

Mr Speaker, pursuant to section 13 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I hereby present to you the ministerial policy statement and expenditure proposals for Vote 21: Ministry of East African Community Affairs, for Financial Year 2022/2023 for consideration and approval. I beg to lay. (Applause)

I hope I am being a good student.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we are glad to see you in a much better health situation. Our Mzee Magode Ikuya, the Minister of State for East African Community Affairs - we are glad to see that you are doing much better, healthwise. The statement is referred to the Committee on East African Community Affairs. 

MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a procedural point. I am happy, being the Shadow Minister for East Africa Community Affairs, to see my counterpart, the Minister of State for East African Community Affairs in the House, for the first time. If it is procedurally okay, may you allow him to introduce himself and maybe remove the mask so that I can know him personally? 

Unfortunately, I have never seen all my ministers in the House since this House started. I beg to request.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Gilbert Olanya, I thought you were going to say you are inviting him for a cup of coffee since you have seen him for the first time, so that you can do the introductions outside? Let us continue with the business.

THE JUDICIARY

2.27
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Mr Speaker, allow me to take this opportunity to congratulate you and assure you of my support, and to tell you that I am glad to see you in that Chair. 

On behalf of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, I beg to lay the ministerial policy statement for Vote 101, for the Financial Year 2022/2023. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we need an explanation as to why you did not meet the statutory deadline, like other ministers have been doing, for record purposes.

MR KAFUUZI: Mr Speaker, at the appropriate time when we were expected to lay, other votes from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs were laid, but this particular one still had a few nitty-gritties to be attended to. Be that as it may, we have brought it. We apologise for coming late, but here we are. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I think it is very important to meet the deadline next time because as the Judiciary, you are the custodian of the law. So, setting a very good precedent is paramount. This statement is referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

Hon. Sarah, if you could just give me a minute. I have more statements - I know there are some agencies whose statements are not yet here and so, I will give you a chance after. 

UBOS, you have not yet laid and even Equal opportunities Commission. If they are ready, please, let us give them a chance.

2.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues, on behalf of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, to congratulate you upon your elevation to that high post of the Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda. Congratulations! 

In the same vein, allow me to lay on the Table, the budget policy statement for Vote 143: Uganda Bureau of Statistics, for the Financial Year 2022/ 2023. I beg to lay.

The reasons for the delay were actually technical hiccups on printing the statement off the broader system, the PBS. They were ready on the same day, but by the time they were delivered here, the House had adjourned. We would like to more sincerely apologise for that failure on our part.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. The statement is referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

THE EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES COMMISSION

2.31
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative): Mr Speaker, I would like to join the Members who have congratulated you, on behalf of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, and thank God for putting you in that seat. We pray that he gives you wisdom to steer this House. Congratulations. (Applause) 

I need to make an apology; the Equal Opportunities Commission is under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. On the day we laid the ministerial statements, they were a bit late. They stay a bit far from us and at the time they arrived here, we all know what happened, the House was already adjourned –(Interjections)– of course, the jam was there, but they arrived by 4.30 p.m. and it was already late. (Laughter) The report was already given to the Clerk to confirm that it was brought on that very day. Next time, I think they will do better. 

Mr Speaker, allow me a ministerial policy statement for the Financial Year 2022/2023, Vote 124 - Equal Opportunities Commission. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. The statement is referred to the Committee on Gender. Colleagues, as you have seen, the Opposition is not able to quickly process alternative statements for these ones that have just been presented. 

I, therefore, guide the Leader of the Opposition to study these statements and then, your shadow ministers - when the statements are being processed in the committees - give their substantive alternative positions. The alternatives can be submitted directly to the committees without coming back to the Floor. 

Hon. Opendi, did you have an issue? 

MS OPENDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural issue. Allow me, on behalf of my people in Tororo and the men and women in this House, to congratulate you. (Applause) UWOPA has both women and men. We would like to appreciate you and we shall be visiting you soon, Mr Speaker. “We” means the male and female Members of Parliament. 

The ministerial policy statements for the next financial year have been laid. However, you recall that the Supplementary Appropriation Bill No. 4 was laid before this House. This House approved the supplementary expenditures. However, to-date, the local governments, the new administrative units and the subcounties have not received any funding. It is nine months now down the road and the chairmen LC III in my district and I believe in all the other districts, where these new subcounties were created have not received any money either to run these administrative units or even their salaries. 

Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for us to receive these policy statements without knowing why funding has not been extended to these local governments and yet, we are about to conclude this financial year? The Minister of Finance is here. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for him to explain why money has not been sent to these local governments and yet, Parliament appropriated and passed the supplementary? (Applause) Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, you remember on 15th March, when we had a sitting here, the Minister of Finance laid on Table a request to borrow domestically in order to fulfil the requirements or to fund the supplementary budget, which was tabled here. Shortly after tabling that, we got into this crisis and the committee has not been meeting. 

When you read the report, one of the sources of financing the supplementary budget was domestic borrowing and we have not yet approved that aspect. I would like to use this opportunity to call upon the Committee on National Economy. We already talked. Yesterday, the Speaker, myself and the Clerk spoke. We agreed that the Committee on National Economy should meet urgently to process that request so that you have the report ready when we resume normal sessions. After the mourning period, we immediately approve or reject that request, as tabled by the Ministry of Finance. 

The Committee on Natural Resources is also required to meet urgently and finalise the Electricity Bill because we need it urgently. We need the report to be ready so that once we resume normal sessions of the House, we also process that report very quickly. Those two committees should do their work quietly. You do not need to move around that much. Do it quietly, but process it. 

In the meantime, like hon. Opendi has said, this was one of the most urgent issues because we have already started the Parish Development Model. We have already launched it. Some districts have already received money. Ministry of Finance, what are you doing about that? The Members want to know if there is anything you are doing with the new administrative units or we are going to wait until we approve the domestic borrowing. 

2.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me also take this opportunity to congratulate you upon assuming that Chair. I would like to express my gratitude and happiness in seeing you in that Chair. Congratulations. 

It is true we laid the loan request to finance the supplementary budget, which was earlier passed by this Parliament. Shortly after, we laid the request and the circumstances we are in happened. However, I would like to report to the House that I am in touch with the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy and also your office. We have worked out a mechanism under which we shall quickly process the report and shortly after these circumstances have passed, we shall be able to come back here and process the report before the House. 

Mr Speaker, included in the supplementary, which we passed, was funding for operationalisation of the new administrative units. We are constrained considering that we have no resources until this request passes. We are constrained to send monies to the respective local governments for operationalisation. 

Therefore, I would like to implore colleagues and all other stakeholders out there to be patient with us. I am sure in the shortest time possible, as soon as we pass the request, we will be able to send money to the respective local governments. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

2.41
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I congratulate you. I am the shadow minister for finance and I have been looking through some of the policy statements. It is disheartening that a Government agency comes here, lays a ministerial policy statement whose details were for the last financial year.

The Ministry of Health laid a document here - apart from one or two opening pages, the details in that policy statement are for the last financial year. So, how do we go around looking at projections of that quality of work? It is inconceivable; how do you respond? What do we do with such a ministry - of all, the Ministry of Health? To the extent that they even report performance in that policy statement? 

We have looked at the details of the Ministry of Health, for example, and you realise it is that terrible. So, how do our ministers respond to a policy statement for next year or this year? (Hon. Batuwa rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information to who? Please hon. Batuwa, let us follow the rules; he is already off the Floor. Information is to the Member who is on the Floor. You cannot give information anyhow. Let us be organised.

I get your concern, hon. Kivumbi, but it seems you have already done the work of the committee. That is what I expect the committee to report - to say; “You brought a statement, we processed it and we found gap A,B,C,D” and all that. Now, if what you have done - the report you have given is the report I expect from the committee - In addition, there is no way we can have such a report on this Floor, there is no way we know because now, it would be your word against someone else’s.  (Members rose_)

Please, let us be orderly. I get your concern, honourable; the ministers are here, the Leader of Government Business has taken note, they can go and revise. However, let that work be for the committee not on the Floor, where we are not sure whether the statement is right or not. Next item. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

ALTERNATIVE POLICY STATEMENTS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, you will guide us and take us through with your shadow cabinet because I did not receive a list of who has what statement. I give you the opportunity to take us through.

2.44
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. It is my singular honour to congratulate you. I know that transfiguration is Divine. However, you know, as humans, in a way, we can be transfigured just the way you moved away from where we aspire to be now to being the referee. I would like to wish you the best in your new role and pledge our support as the Opposition in ensuring that this House is indeed, the House of the people and we process business on behalf of our people. 

Mr Speaker, certainly like you have observed, whereas the rules say “may”, in the Administration of Parliament Act, particularly section 6(e)(4) is “shall”. Therefore, it does not leave room for us to presuppose to do or not to do. We are here to comply with the rules and the law that gives birth to the rules, to lay our alternative policy statements.

Also for the attention of the House, we take note of the fact that we worked without a final Budget Framework Paper and without a finally printed Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. I hope you indulge the Ministry of Finance so that in future, they do not lead the House into speculation - that we work with final figures. 

In addition, Mr Speaker, in the absence of alternatives that have been laid today, we worked using the indicative figures and the BFP initially as proposed, to come up with our policy alternatives. Therefore, we are ready to literally lay all the alternatives. May I invite my alternative chancellor to lead the team to lay the alternatives.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, we do not have that title in our laws and rules, so we do not have an “alternative chancellor”; we have a shadow finance minister. So, shadow finance minister.

2.47
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Muwanga Kivumbi): Mr Speaker, as instructed by my boss, I take the opportunity to lay first the alternative policy statement for the Ministry of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development for the Financial Year to 2022/2023. I beg to lay.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable shadow minister. It is referred to the Committee on Finance. And colleagues, please, these alternative statements will help you. I request you to read them, compare them with the Budget Framework Paper and with the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility. Then when we are discussing the budget, and the reports, you will really feel you got details from each and every aspect and put together a very good report. Leader of Government Business -

2.48
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Justine Lumumba): Rt Hon. Speaker and honourable members, I take this opportunity on behalf of the Government to congratulate you and the Speaker, Rt Hon. Anita Among. Congratulations. 

You have become leaders to head an arm of Government - the centre of politics in this country - at an age where both of you are within the 40s, which is a blessing. You are inspirational figures to the majority of Ugandans who are young. Because of that, we have to work together to give the best examples to our children and grandchildren. 

I take this opportunity to regret on behalf of the Government, and on behalf of the Prime Minister, that we were not able to submit some of the policy statements in time. 

I have also taken note of what has been raised by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi - the issue of the policy statement of the Ministry of Health. We shall follow it up. If it is so, then we shall have a discussion with all the stakeholders that are in charge of that Ministry, the Speaker, and the appointing authority because that will have grave implications on our work as ministers, but also as leaders. 

I once again congratulate you. On behalf of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we pledge to work with you to make Uganda better, especially during your time. Please, let us extend the horizons as we serve all, leaving nobody behind and making sure we reach the farthest in this country. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you hon. Lumumba. Time will come when I will come here on the Floor and I will give you my do's and don'ts. I do not want to go into how I will be running the House whenever I am given an opportunity. That time is going to come because I want it orderly so that we follow the rules, but most importantly, listen to each other. 

I have seen, on several occasions, that a Member stands up and before he or she even utters two words, you hear someone else asking to give information or clarification. You are not given chance to shine even when you have done some research. It discourages many Members from doing research because if you have only two minutes, you need to use that time productively. 

I will be coming back to give you my own guidelines on how I will be running the House within the confines of the rules and the laws of Uganda. Let us continue. 

THE ALTERNATIVE POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE MINISTRY OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023

2.52
MS HANIFA NABUKEERA (NUP, Woman Representative, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my honourable colleagues in congratulating you upon attaining that office. I rise under Rule 147 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament. I, being the shadow minister for human rights, beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for the financial - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Shadow minister for human rights? Is that how you captured it? 

MS NABUKEERA: Yes. I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs for Financial Year 2022/2023. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. The statement is referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. 

THE ALTERNATIVE POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE MINISTRY OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023

2.53
MS FORTUNATE NANTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for the Financial Year 2022/2023. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The statement is referred to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I represent Bugabula South Constituency, which is in Kamuli District, where the Woman Member of Parliament is the Rt Hon. Alitwala Rebecca Kadaga (Laughter)

The point of procedure I wish to raise concerns the last three colleagues who have laid papers. This is because they are new to many colleagues. Would it be procedurally right that whoever comes on the microphone introduces him or herself as a matter of courtesy, so that those who have come for the first time and those who have been there can know them? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is optional. If you are very attentive, the names of every Member who stands up here are displayed on the screens. If you are not sure of the Member’s name, always check on the screen and you will see the name. 

THE ALTERNATIVE POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE MINISTRY OF PUBLIC SERVICE FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023

2.55 
MR HILLARY KIYAGA (NUP, Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Congratulations, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for the Ministry of Public Service for the Financial Year 2022/2023. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Kiyaga. The statement is referred to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. 

THE ALTERNATIVE POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE MINISTRY OF THE PRESIDENCY FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023

2.56
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Mr Derrick Nyeko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My name is Derrick Nyeko, the shadow minister for the presidency and a Member of Parliament for Makindye Division East. Before I lay the alternative policy statement, I must mention that the minister did not lay the policy statement. This docket has very key important votes that include the Office of the Presidency – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let us make this clarification. I was standing here when Hon. Milly Babalanda laid the statement here on 15 March 2022. If you were not in the House, then you are to blame, but the statement is available. Clerk, please avail the shadow minister the statement. 

MR NYEKO: Mr Speaker, I made my appeal in the policy budget framework. I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for the Presidency for the Financial Year 2022/2023. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Nyeko. The statement is referred to the Committee on Presidential Affairs. 

THE ALTERNATIVE POLICY STATEMENT FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023

2.57
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR KAMPALA (Mr Abubaker Kawalya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me also join other Members to congratulate you. For record purposes, I am the shadow minister for Kampala. I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for Kampala Capital City Authority for the Financial Year 2022/2023. I beg to lay. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The statement stands referred to the Committee on Presidential Affairs. There is clarification I would like to make, Members. Shadow ministers do not make ministerial policy statements. They make alternative policy statements. For purposes of the Hansard, what you are laying on the Table is an alternative policy statement, not an alternative ministerial policy statement. 

THE ALTERNATIVE POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023

2.59
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE (Dr Abed Bwanika): Mr Speaker, I am the Shadow Minister for Agriculture. I beg to lay the Alternative Policy Statement for the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for the Financial Year 2022/2023. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. The statement stands referred to the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

THE ALTERNATIVE POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE MINISTRY OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023

2.59
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Brenda Nabukenya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am the Shadow Minister of Education. I beg to lay the alternative policy statement for the Ministry of Education and Sports for the Financial Year 2022/2023. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The statement stands referred to the Committee on Education and sports.

THE ALTERNATIVE POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023
 
3.00
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa): Mr Speaker, receive my congratulations. On behalf of our Shadow Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs, allow me to lay the alternative policy statement for the sector of defence and veteran affairs for the Financial Year 2022/2023. I beg to lay. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Nambeshe. The statement stands referred to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs.

3.01
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Abdallah Kiwanuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take this opportunity to join my colleagues to congratulate you upon ascending to that office. 

In accordance with Rule 147 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I beg to lay the alternative policy statement for the Ministry of Internal Affairs for Financial Year 2022/2023. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. The statement stands referred to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs.

THE ALTERNATIVE POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023

3.02
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Timothy Batuwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to join the honourable gentlemen and ladies who congratulated you upon getting to that office. I pray that you evoke your powers to ask one of your clerks to go to the Library and bring to you the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Health, such that you ascertain our claims. While preparing the alternative policy statement, I had to interact with it and, sincerely speaking, it was not helpful. You are the Speaker for both the party in Government and us in the Opposition. Therefore, we need to protect this Parliament

Under rule 147 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and as the Shadow Minister of Health, I beg to lay the alternative policy statement for the Ministry of Health.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member.  The statement stands referred to the Committee on Health. Honourable member, I have taken note of your request. Unfortunately, we already referred that statement to the Committee on Health. The House cannot come to constitute itself into a body that is going to scrutinise it. What you want us to do is to scrutinise it. We cannot do it as a House. That is the work of the committee.
 
Therefore, let us wait for the report of the committee, where you sit. Ensure that, indeed, all those issues are brought out for better improvement next time. (Applause)

THE ALTERNATIVE POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE MINISTRY OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023


3.04
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Yusuf Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I also wish to join others who have congratulated you. I am the happiest, as your former lecturer and colleague in one of the biggest parties in the country. I have no doubt that you are going to do a very good job. (Applause)

I would like to take this opportunity, as the Shadow Minister of Works and Transport, to lay the alternative policy statement for the works and transport sector. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Hon. Yusuf Nsibambi was my lecturer at the Law school, Makerere where he taught me Commercial Law and I was a very good student. (Laughter) The alternative statement stands referred to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. 

THE ALTERNATIVE POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023

3.05
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Nkunyingi Muwada): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In your opening statement, you instructed the ministers, including the Minister for Finance, to explain circumstances under which they did not lay the policy statements. It is instructive within our laws - and it is good you mentioned that you studied Law - that presentation of policy statements is a matter of law and the requirement of this House.

The Minister of Foreign Affairs came to the Floor and, in his explanation, mentioned that he was in Kyankwanzi, together with the ambassadors. 

Mr Speaker, there is no requirement within our laws that ambassadors, first, have to go to Kyankwanzi. It cannot be an explanation by the Minister of Foreign Affairs that they could not lay a policy statement within the timelines just because they were in Kyankwanzi. (Applause)

I wish to add that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has three ministers. They had all the time to prepare and present a policy statement in time. It is regrettable. 

Mr Speaker, rule 52(3) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament states that a statement in explanation of any matter by a minister must be made in writing. They made oral explanations and the rule is very instructive. The statement explaining circumstances under which they failed to comply with the requirement of the law must be in writing. 

I pray that the ministers are instructed to deliver written statements in explanation of the circumstances under which they were unable. As the Shadow Minister of Foreign Affairs and on behalf of the Opposition, we reject the explanation that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs was camped in Kyankwanzi with ambassadors. That is unacceptable and not within our laws.

That notwithstanding, I am the Shadow Minister of Foreign Affairs –(Interjections)– As requested by Hon. Kibalya, I represent Kyadondo East, formerly represented by president Robert Kyagulanyi Ssentamu. 

Under rule 147 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, being the Shadow Minister of Foreign Affairs, I beg to lay the alternative policy statement for the sector of foreign affairs. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, sometimes, we shall be leaving you to speak so that you go when you are satisfied. Hon. Muwada had his issues and felt they should go on record. However, what I want to tell you is that we shall be having a meeting with the Leader of Government Business to see how this can be done better so that, next time, we do not have such a situation. (Applause)

Ministers have written, explaining to the Speaker why all this has happened, but I felt it would be fair, instead of it remaining between us the presiding officers, for it to go on record for Members to hear why it happened. Otherwise, if we do not do it that way, it might be business as usual.
  
However, we are going to work together. We are not competing to see who has squeezed who here. No. We are going to work as a team to ensure that both the Legislature and the Executive work together for the benefit of Ugandans. I think that should be our focus – both sides of the House. I am happy that the Leader of Opposition has really helped with this. 

The statement stands referred to the Committee on Foreign Affairs.

THE ALTERNATIVE POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE MINISTRY of LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023

3.10
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Ronald Balimwezo): Mr Speaker, in accordance with Rule 147 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I beg to lay the alternative policy statement for the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you, honourable member. The statement stands referred to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure.
 
THE ALTERNATIVE POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE MINISTRY OF energy and mineral development FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023

3.11
the shadow minister of energy and mineral development (Ms Asinansi Nyakato): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  On behalf of the people of Hoima City, and Forum for Democratic Party, I congratulate you on your elevation to the position of Deputy Speaker of Parliament. 

Under rule 147 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, I beg to lay on the Table the Alternative Policy Statement for the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you, Hon. Nyakato. The statement stands referred to the Committee on Natural Resources.

THE ALTERNATIVE POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE MINISTRY OF tourism, wildlife and antiquities FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023

3.12
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR WILDLIFE, TOURISM AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Karim Masaba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. For clarity to my brother, Hon. Morris Kibalya, I am Masaba Karim, the Member of Parliament representing Industrial Division in Mbale City and the Shadow Minister for Wildlife, Tourism and Antiquities. 

I would like to take this opportunity to add my voice to that of the honourable colleagues in congratulating you, Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, on your ascension to the second highest position in this institution of Parliament. I do pray that the Almighty God leads and guides you as you serve the country.
 
I move under Rule 147 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities for the Financial Year 2022/2023. I beg today.

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you, honourable member. The statement stands referred to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry.

THE ALTERNATIVE POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE MINISTRY OF trade, industry and cooperatives FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023

3.14
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF trade, industry and cooperatives (Mr Francis Mwijukye): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  On behalf of the people of Buhweju, I want to congratulate you on your election as the Deputy Speaker of the 11th Parliament. 

I rise to lay on the Table the Alternative Policy Statement for Trade, Industries and Cooperatives for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you, honourable member. The statement stands referred to the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry.

THE ALTERNATIVE POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE MINISTRY OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023

3.15
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Ms Shamim Malende): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I am Shamim Malende, the Shadow Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs and also Woman Member of Parliament for Kampala District. 

I bring you greetings from the people of Kampala. They are looking forward to your leadership and have told me to convey this message to the effect that, they hope that this Parliament is going to look at the issues affecting the people of Kampala and those from other regions for the betterment of this country, Rt Hon. Speaker.

I rise under rule 147, on behalf of the Shadow Minister of Water and Environment, Hon. Christine Kaaya Nakimwero, to lay the Alternative Policy Statement for the Ministry of Water and Environment for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you, Hon. Malende. The statement stands referred to the Committee on Natural Resources.

THE ALTERNATIVE POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE MINISTRY OF local government FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023

3.16
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Betty Naluyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am an MP for the district that everyone needs to go through to come here - Wakiso District. I am also the Shadow Minister for Local Government. 

Allow me to join the rest of the Members of Parliament and all Ugandans to congratulate you on the assumption to the Office of the Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda. Similarly, I congratulate Rt Hon. Anita Among on the assumption to the Office of the Speaker of Parliament of Uganda. 

Just before I lay on the Table, the Alternative Policy Statement for Ministry of Local Government for the Financial Year 2022/2023, I request your office to indulge in a matter that was earlier resolved by parliamentarians seated here as we asked your office to ensure that local governments are catered for. Also, that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic stops the system that it has put forward to ensure that the little that is collected - that revenue that is collected by local governments - has to first go to the Consolidated Fund; they can then access it for any service they need. 

As we discussed it here, we gave it time. May the Rt Hon. Oulanyah rest in peace because he presided over that matter and we were all in agreement. I thank you, Members, for standing with the local governments. Let us give issues of local governments that due diligence they need –(Applause)– it was even very clear amongst every one of us here. We have just seen these matters again come up. 
My appeal is for us to give due diligence to these matters. In accordance –(Interruptions)

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members, let us be courteous to each other. We lose nothing, isn't it? Anytime, any of you will be on the Floor so it is good to listen to each other. We shall have a good flow because sometimes when we move outside there people say, “But what were you doing? This one was shouting from here, the other from there.” So, let us listen to each other so that whoever is listening to us outside there can follow the debate promptly. 

Ms kaaya: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  In accordance with Rule 147 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I beg to lay the Alternative Policy Statement for the Ministry of Local Government for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable minister of finance, I hope you have taken note of the Member’s concern. Same with the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. 

In relation to the motion, which was passed by this House urging Government to let the local governments have their money, not for it to be deducted at source - it first goes to the Consolidated Fund, appropriated, then sent back to the local governments. 

I request that you go and study the motion that was passed here. Then, when we are processing the budget, you need to update the committee on what you have resolved as Government. Honourable minister, do you need to respond to this? I did not want to raise debate here over it.

3.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, I am not trying to raise the debate. However, this is a question of law. I would have to go to the committees, like we were guided, and eventually come back to this House. 

There is a mechanism we are putting in place to see that the challenges, which have been happening in the past, do not happen in the next financial year. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The statement is referred to the committees on Public Service and that of Local Government.

THE ALTERNATIVE POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2023

3.21
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Ms Joyce Bagala): Thank you, Mr Speaker and congratulations on your new mandate. My name is Joyce Bagala Ntwatwa. I am the woman Member of Parliament for Mityana District and the Shadow Minister for information and anti-corruption. I beg to lay the alternative policy statement for the Ministry of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance for the Financial Year 2020/2023. I beg to lay. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable. The statement stands referred to the Committee on ICT.

THE ALTERNATIVE POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE MINISTRY OF EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2023

3.22
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Gilbert Olanya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to join my colleagues in congratulating you on behalf of the people of Amuru and Acholi in general.

Allow me to lay the alternative policy statement for the Ministry of East African Community Affairs. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Gilbert. The statement stands referred to the Committee on East African Community Affairs. 

Honourable Attorney-General, if you are here, Hon. Gilbert has an issue he would like to raise on the Floor. However, considering how I had prepared for today's session, I request you meet with the Prime Minister and discuss that issue. If you are not satisfied, then we shall get space next time on the Order Paper. 

Are they done? Yes. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I have taken note that most of the ministries just submitted one copy. They have not submitted sufficient copies for Members to go study so that they will be able to contribute to the debate. And that is the practice; they should always present enough copies. 

Therefore, I request that all ministers who presented the ministerial policy statements, please, make sufficient copies. Clerk, I think you should write to the ministers to guide on this - how many copies are needed - so that we ensure the copies are received in time for Members to be able to read and process the statements effectively. 

Colleagues, I have an issue that came up. I would like to beg your indulgence that we amend the Order Paper to accommodate it. I do not know whether the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has finished with the Shadow Minister of Finance; I had given them a minute out. However, we have an emergency situation whereby as Parliament, we need to revise our statutory budgetary provision to accommodate an emergency that came in. I had requested the Minister of Finance to lay it on the Table because we have an emergency which cannot wait even for Thursday. 

Therefore, let the Minister of Finance come and lay because it is for noting by the Parliament; the rest, we shall administratively handle. If we do not do it now, then both on the government side and on our side, we will find ourselves in a much deeper crisis. So, I would like the Minister of Finance to lay on the Table with clear figures indicated. 

3.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a statement on the Table on the statutory revision of the budget for Vote 104 - Parliamentary Commission, for the Financial Year 2021/2022 by Shs 1,812,726,300 to facilitate the burial expenses of the late Speaker of Parliament, the Rt Hon. Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. This is for noting and we have received it. The House is adjourned to Thursday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 3.36 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 31 March 2022 at 2.00 p.m.) 

