

Thursday, 19 March 2020

Parliament met at 2.37 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I have a few issues to communicate. One, we have been waiting for the Head of State to speak to the country on the measures to manage Coronavirus. We thank him for having handled that last evening and for having given guidelines on how we should move.

That notwithstanding, honourable members, the Third Meeting of the Session is the Budget session. Therefore, we are still obliged to carry out our responsibilities to ensure that the Budget process is completed. However, we shall work out different measures on how we are going to proceed. 

The first issue is that Coronavirus is a disease of congestion. Therefore, one of the things we are going to do is to limit visits and tours of this House. There have been tours of schools and delegations. For the next 32 days, visits and tours will not be permitted. We are also going to have closure of certain facilities. For instance, the gym will not be available for the next 32 days. 

With regard to the work of committees, we are proposing that when the ministries come, they should come with four people only; the minister, the permanent secretary and two other key officials in the ministry so that they do not come with 100 people as they normally do.

We also propose that as much as possible, we should handle issues electronically and limit the sittings to one for each sector; not two, three or four times a day. The committees can work out the details with the Members. 

I have instructed the Clerk to transmit the policy statements to the Members electronically so that you can make your comments to your chairpersons and then only meet when it is necessary. We hope that if we do this, within two weeks, we shall be able to complete the Budget process. This is on the understanding that the Budget will be laid next week without fail.

The Government has put in place a national taskforce and from Parliament, we have also nominated the following Members to join that team because they are going to meet every day to evaluate the situation and advise us: 

    1. Commissioner Arinaitwe Rwakajara
    2. Commissioner Francis Mwijukye
    3. Hon. Esther Anyakun
    4. Hon. Benard Atiku
    5. Sergeant-at-Arms – Mr Kagoye
    6. Sen. Medical Officer, Parliament - Dr Fred Bawulira Kapata. 

These will be the people to work with that taskforce. They will be giving us daily briefs on the development of COVID-19 and guide us for future action.

The Commission has requested for temperature guns from the Ministry of Health. Starting at 8 o’clock tomorrow, they will be available at all our entrances and on all the floors so that anybody, including Members and staff, will have their temperature taken before they can venture into the different parts of Parliament. We have also instructed that more sanitisers be provided, not just at the entrance but also in the offices and other access points. The Clerk is instructed to do that. 

I have also noticed that there are no sanitisers in the lifts, despite my instructions. I think the Clerk should assign someone to either remain in the lift and do the sanitisation or go in, from time to time, so that the facilities are sanitised. 

We are also suspending interns, personal assistants of the Members and staff of parliamentary fora, effective tomorrow. Therefore, the Sergeant-at-Arms and the police commander are informed about that directive.

Honourable members, since Coronavirus is a disease of congestion, we may have to vacate this Chamber and go and sit in the Conference Hall. We understand that we are required to sit one metre apart – Yes, I am lucky. (Laughter) Therefore, we may have to abandon our Chamber and go and operate from the Conference Hall. We expect that the Clerk will be able to handle that so that we are able to move next week. Of course, the measures will be reviewed countrywide on a daily basis and we shall be advised.

Additionally, I have instructed the Clerk to design the standard operating procedures. It is not something we anticipated and therefore, no one has a lot of experience. The standard operating procedures will be announced. Again, in the meantime, the canteen will be strictly for Members and staff; non-members will not be allowed there. 

I also advise honourable members not to conduct fundraisings in your constituencies, do not organise football matches, do not organise anything, as you have been told by the President. 

Therefore, no personal visitors will be allowed. Deliveries of mails and others will be done at the main gate. I have instructed the Clerk to assign an officer to continuously shuttle between the main gate and the main building to ensure that mail has arrived.

Additional hand washing facilities will be put in strategic places. This morning, members of the Commission demonstrated to the country what should be done. I hope honourable members, that you can also do your own demonstrations and speak to your electorate on radio and television. 

We also expect, ultimately, to scale down even on the staff. Those who are not very critical will have to work from home. In any case, the Members have iPads. I am not sure whether all the staff have them but we encourage those who will not be on critical duty to operate from home. The Clerk will be handling that part to ensure that we have scaled down on the numbers. The Sergeant-at-Arms will handle the issue of cleaning staff.

Honourable members, those are the measures we thought about in less than 24 hours. However, our team, which is going to join the national taskforce, will be giving us advice on what to do from time to time and they will brief us on a daily basis.

Just to inform you about the Coronavirus situation in the world; the Africa region has 233 confirmed cases with four deaths. The Americas have 4,979 confirmed cases and 68 deaths. Eastern Mediterranean region has 18,000 confirmed cases and 1,010 deaths. South East Asia region has 588 confirmed cases and nine deaths. The European region has 74,760 confirmed cases with 3,352 deaths. The Western Pacific has 91,845 confirmed cases with 3,357 deaths; that is high for that region. Globally, there are 191,129 confirmed cases and 7,800 deaths, as of yesterday. Africa has 283 confirmed cases with four deaths. That is not to say that it will not happen here.

Honourable members, there were some matters of national concern. 

2.47
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. From your communication, I felt we should urge the task force that the one thing that China tried was how aggressively they handled fumigation. I think this is one of things the Sergeant-At-Arms should handle; there should be regular fumigation of the parliamentary precincts and all the places we use. Otherwise, we do not want to fall victim.

This morning, on BBC, the Deputy Speaker of Burkina Faso fell victim. He was diabetic and he passed on. I, therefore, think that all necessary measures need to be taken to minimise the chances of the virus getting to us. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate you on the issue of the lift.  Members keep pressing the lift and it is one of the things that we saw in China, where some people were mercilessly coughing on the lift buttons. You have to be careful as you keep pressing the lift buttons. In fact, those who are strong enough should be encouraged to use the stairs instead of the lifts, if we cannot fumigate them regularly. Even the rails of the stairs should be avoided. Those are some of the things that should be encouraged. I thought I should add that. Thank you.

2.49
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Commission, under your leadership for putting in place mechanisms, which will protect and provide safety to the Members and staff of Parliament.

In addition to what hon. Okupa has said, we are fond of opening doors. You cannot enter an office without opening the door. So, this team, which the Clerk is going to put in place, should ensure that door handles are regularly sanitised. Otherwise, we are now afraid of opening the doors yet we have to enter. It is really a complicated situation. 

Madam Speaker, the doors to the washrooms are accessed by everyone. The door to my office is accessed only by me and my personal assistant, who will be going on leave. However, for the places of convenience, I request that –(Interruption)

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, as we talk about the doors, what about the microphones we are using? I do not know whether we are   going to sanitise the microphones every after another Member has spoken and or get someone to come and clean them.
	
MS BINTU: Madam Speaker, these are some of the salient issues, which possibly the Clerk and the Sergeant-At-Arms should look at so that we are sure and secure of ourselves.

Madam Speaker, allow me to thank you. Today, we were supposed to have a workshop organised by the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association – Uganda Branch. We had invited all the members of the Parliament and staff to attend this workshop at the Golf Course Hotel. I would like to inform Members that we have called off this workshop. I would like to also assure the Members that as soon as we are declared free, we shall go ahead with this workshop and other workshops.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for taking prompt action. Otherwise, you never know at the hotel - we may be saying here that we are okay when we are not sure of other places. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. As we said, this is a learning process. No one was prepared for this. We shall continue to learn day by day. Hon. Onzima. 

2.54
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank you for the measures you have put in place and the President for the guidelines he put yesterday across the country.

There is a complaint from some groups of people, particularly students, who have come from outside the country. Most of these students were quarantined in some hotels and initially, the understanding was that Government would take over the costs. However, yesterday after the President’s announcement, most of them said they were given bills to be paid in these hotels around Entebbe. They said that the cheapest hotels range from $50 to $100 and this has taken them by surprise. I am, therefore, asking the Government if there is any possibility or arrangement made.

The President made a lot of directives for those who are already in the country on what to do. Madam Speaker, this is an overseas sickness, which may come to this country from outside. We seem to have left the borders open and allowed people to come and that as they come, they should take care of their costs. The actual prevention, where we should have shut down our borders, has been left open. 

My major concern is that the students who have come but have been quarantined in hotels, where they are supposed to meet their bills – the bills are very expensive. They say these hotels are charging them for accommodation and meals yet the meals range from $30 onwards. This might be too much for these students. I, therefore, think that we need to categorise people coming into the country and find out those who are able to meet their costs. However, for the students, Government should find a way – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, during the Commission meeting this morning, we raised this matter to the Prime Minister, who was present. This is one of things the task force will address.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give to my colleague is that quarantine is detention. Nobody can be detained at his or her cost. It is the Government that is detaining you in public interest –(Interjections)– there is no difference. The custodian of public interest is the Government. It cannot be the individual.

MR ONZIMA: Madam Speaker, as I conclude I would like to talk about those who are supposed to self-quarantine themselves. Who is supposed to supervise them and enforce self-quarantine? I think - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us first concentrate on the parliamentary issues, which I have communicated. We are aware about the others but let us first discuss this one. I said Government is going to make a statement. Hon. Itungo.

2.55
MR NATHAN TWESIGYE (NRM, Kashari South County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the issue on sanitisation. A Member was worried about the microphones and the doors we use. However, there is something more; the canteen from where we eat food.

Madam Speaker, before you pick a plate of food, you have to place your finger, get a ticket and then go and pick food. I do not know how safe that machine –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, just yesterday, His Excellency the President communicated to the world and one of the precautions that he advised us against was touching around things.

Madam Speaker, as leaders, we must lead by example. When I looked at my brother, hon. Nathan Itungo, he was holding onto the Table. Is he in order to display bad behaviour? (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the statement came last night. We still have to adjust. 

MR TWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, as we think about the microphones and the doors, we should also think about touching when we are going to get food. 

2.58
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Once again, I would like to thank you for the measures you have put for us.

Whereas, this disease requires people to be separate, there are certain problems that we can only solve when we are together. The measures, which the Speaker has given to us on how to work together, should be maintained but I think we need a moral question.

Everybody here becomes a real patriot; we move around the world and if you think that you have moved through suspicious channels and think that you have a problem, protect the rest. Even when you are dying - I will go - but I should protect the rest of my countrymen.

We have watched how this disease spread; worse still, some people went deliberately touching those sensitive places with the aim of infecting others. Honourable members, let us protect our colleagues; even if we become victims, we need to protect the rest.

Lastly, let us look inward and use this opportunity to improve our health systems within Uganda. Whereas it is bad that the opportunity has come in this calamity, for the down-trodden Ugandans, even those who are able will not go abroad to look for treatment; we have to improve our own health systems within Uganda because if you go to Germany, they will reject you. If you go to USA, you are a suspect.

Instead of going out, let us build Mulago, Arua, Gulu and all our regional referral hospitals to the extent that they should be able to handle even the President, a Member of Parliament or a minister without going abroad.

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, now that you have introduced the communication from the President, my bone of contention is that the communication was elaborate as to the health needs. However, following that statement, the country will need to hear from the minister of finance because the communication has tremendous effects on the economy. For example, there are people -

THE SPEAKER: We had agreed that today, we shall get a statement on the impact on the economy.

3.00
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank you and the Commission for coming up with measures to protect us as we do our work here.

Perhaps the team that has been selected should critically look into the issue of members of Parliament who have travelled outside this country. You stated clearly that they must go on self-quarantine but not all of us are very keen. Yesterday, I was very shocked when one of the Members was leaving Parliament but he had just returned from the US.

How many people had he greeted and how many people had he interacted with? The team should critically look out for members of Parliament who went out, which country they went to and whether they have gone for self-isolation and in which places and if they had completed the mandatory 14 days, for us to know whether they have the virus or not.

Apart from that, we will do all these things but will keep the virus around us.

THE SPEAKER: I will instruct the Clerk to give me a daily report. At first I said no travelling but now I would like a daily report about the Members and staff who are out and those who have returned.

3.01
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for reintroducing this matter because it is very critical and it is where none of us should play jokes.

I would also like to thank His Excellency the President for his communication yesterday. Whereas I would ordinarily not be inclined to support the President, I will support the message. The reason I will support the message is because this calamity has attacked without distinction. However, one thing which I found a little wanting that needs to be addressed is that this is not a disease locally born.

Our policy on borders still needs some tightening. We have porous borders especially with some of our neighbours that I would not like to mention for diplomatic reasons but they are known.

The second we still allow flights that bring in people and without racial profiling people from affected countries, so if we are talking about these 32 days or the 14 days –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I would like you to concentrate on our measures first. We will talk when the minister of finance has brought his statement. Do not go into issues of the airport, market.

3.03
MR OKIN OJARA (Independent, Chua West County, Kitgum): Thank you, I will try my level best to restrict myself to the measures that we have devised as Parliament. I take this opportunity to thank you and the President for what transpired yesterday and today. 

Yesterday, we had an opportunity to interact with the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Health and she indicated that one of the methods through which this disease is spread is airmails.

I have just seen some of the mails passing around like writing notes and submitting to others; we need to take precaution because mails are coming into our pigeon holes. We take and open them; that could be one of the ways in which we can contract the virus.

Secondly, we have teams to join the task force but we are employing preventive measures. We are not looking critically at case management. On the assumption that we have an infection or maybe an upsurge of this virus, we shall fail to manage.

I urge the taskforce to go and suggest the issue of case management. How do we manage in the event that we have a case of this virus? They should look into that as well. Thank you, very much.

THE SPEAKER: You area suggesting that we should have facilities here as well.

3.03
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, the measures that we are trying to prescribe are so many and difficult to attain. The best thing you would do is to suspend the House for at least sometime. 

When we go to the canteen, we sit around a table of five people within close range of less than a metre. We go to get a receipt and when people are eating, the hand goes so close to the mouth even when you are using a fork because the President emphasised that we should not touch the soft openings without washing hands with soap and water.

I would like to emphasise that the most serious issue we have here is behavioural change of making people accept that we must wash hands with soap as many times as possible. It is very difficult.

We can even spray this place and fumigate the ceiling and even the floor here. However, if people do not adhere to washing hands with soap and avoiding touching their faces, I do not know if it will work. The relationship between the hands and eyes, the hands and nose and the hands and the mouth is so huge that it is very difficult to separate. I do not know what we are going to do.

Madam Speaker, my thinking was to suspend the House for some time. It would do –(Interruption)

MR WATENGA: Thank you, my brother. Madam Speaker, I expected to find a machine at the checkpoint. There is a machine they point at you like this –

THE SPEAKER: It will be here at seven o’clock in the morning tomorrow. 

MR WATENGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, because I was getting more worried. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as we said, no one was prepared for this disease; no one was ready. So, we are taking it one day at a time. However, on the issue of eating together, this is self-discipline. Why do you crowd on one table? Go and stand in your corner and eat from there. (Laughter) Discipline! No kaboozi at lunch time. (Laughter)

3.09
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank you, together with the Commissioners, for coming up with strategies to make sure that we prevent this deadly virus from infecting us. There must be people – both staff and also members of Parliament – who are outside the country right now.

Madam Speaker, it is good that you have suggested that they give you the names but I think that we need to pin those names in a conspicuous place. By the time you get to know that someone has just come, they will already be in the House but with the security checks, we can know. You know, at times we are selfish. Someone will come back and behave as though nothing has happened.

I was talking to someone who told me that he was stuck in Abu Dhabi and that there are no flights but he is one of us. So, in such cases, we need to have those names somewhere at the checkpoint so that people can know – because someone can decide to – like my sister mentioned someone who had just come from the USA and was leaving Parliament.

At times human beings are selfish; that is why we need to make sure that we remind those people to stay away and quarantine themselves until there is a change. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  

3.10
MS SILVIA AKELLO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to join my colleagues by saying that in most cases, actually ladies are the ones who touch their faces most and wear lipstick. (Laughter)

I also request –(Interjections)– Yes; if it is possible, we also wear gloves because if someone is wearing gloves, you will find it hard to touch either your face or mouth. (Laughter) That would also help us a bit, Madam Speaker.

I also suggest that as they form the committee – in most cases, communication will be a little bit harder to the constituencies. I wish these Members on the task force are given days so that they can update the country – the radio and television stations in the rural and urban areas can host these people so that information from the House can reach every citizen of Uganda. I think this would also help. Even though we are here, the public will still know how far we are also working as Parliament. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Are you proposing a daily bulletin from Parliament? Are you proposing a message from Parliament?

MS SILVIA AKELLO: Yes, I propose that the message from Parliament to the public - because we cannot go to all rallies to inform people about what is happening on the issues of Coronavirus. Whereas the Ministry of Health officials are there, as Speaker and the Legislature, I believe your voice is equally strong. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, you see you have been fighting to have a parliamentary radio. I think this would have been one of the areas where members of Parliament would be communicating. I do not know what happened and what UCC did. 

Now that we have the Prime Minister and the team here, I think that is where it becomes very important for us to have our own radio to be able to communicate to the public and our voters freely, without going through these other things. Therefore, I think you need to take this up, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we were vetting our colleagues - hon. Nabakooba and hon. Ogwang - I told them that my first instruction to them is to ensure that we get a frequency because our equipment is here. They have not yet delivered.

3.13
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, Moyo County West, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is a very brief one; we have worship places here. We have the Catholic chaplaincy, we have the Anglican chaplaincy and also the Muslims normally have their prayers here on Fridays. 

I think from today onwards, if you are Catholic, simply make your sign of the cross and stay wherever you are. If you are Anglican, simply say, “Hallelujah”. If you are Muslim, stand here and face Mecca and say, “Allahu Akbar” instead of gathering in those places to pray. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: So, we should close the chaplaincies because it is crowding? Yes! 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, I think it can hugely affect the Christians but the Imam of Parliament is here – For us, apart from the Friday prayer, you can pray the rest of other five prayers alone but in the mosque. You can stand in the mosque and pray alone. So, you do not need to close the mosque. 

What can be forbidden are Jama’ah - the joint prayers - but for the Muslims, it is very much acceptable. I can pray all the five prayers alone; so we are okay with it –(Interruption)

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, it is true that in the interest of all of us, even gatherings of a religious nature have been banned. As Parliament, we are no exception. We are grateful that you created prayer rooms for different religious denominations.

What I would like to emphasise is that as we conduct our prayers as Muslims five times a day, we usually go in for Jama’ah and that is congregational prayers at one, four – and those who can be here – up to seven o’clock. Now, what we are going to do, in light of what is going on, is we have informed colleagues that we have banned Jama’ah – coming together in the mosque. You can come and pray on your own and even Juma prayers that have been conducted from here have been suspended for the time being.

However, my question is that as we try to decongest, I do not know, Madam Speaker; you have brought in very good measures but how about we, members of Parliament? As we debate right now, this is also a crowd? I do not know how we are going to think about it; maybe in future, we will go for suspension.

THE SPEAKER: In my communication, I made some proposals, which I think are going to be taken on. Honourable members, I think for now, we have said enough about this issue. There is a paper on the economic impact of the Coronavirus. Others will speak when hon. Kasaija has made his presentation. 

Let me quickly get hon. Karungi on a matter of national concern. You came for only one and now there are three here; simply choose only one.

3.16
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. The concern I am raising is about the Kibwetere saga. 

On 17 March 2000, Kibwetere and his group burnt people at Karengye in Katete Village, Kanungu District. They were about 2,600 people. The ones that were murdered and buried in that hole were also many. It was not possible to count them because the dead bodies were already rotten and bones for some of them apart.

Madam Speaker, these were just in Kanungu. However, Kibwetere had church branches in other districts like Kasese, Bushenyi, Mbarara, Kabale, Kisoro, Rukungiri, Ntugamo, Kabarole, and Kampala and in other countries like Rwanda and Tanzania. When the incident took place, the impact was so much. People lost their parents, spouses and relatives. Government had promised to compensate the relatives or the next of kin to these people. The affected wrote to Government and Government promised it was going to do something about it.

On 6 February 2016, when the President came to Kanungu, this group approached him. He still promised Government would do compensation so that they can - maybe those who are able - do business and for the children to proceed with studies. He directed the Prime Minister to take charge and look for money to compensate these people.

Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister also met this group and told them Government would compensate them. These people are about 592. However, the Prime Minister requested that they should bring their National Identity Cards. Unfortunately, this was not possible for all of them and so, only about 234 of them were able to bring their National Identity Cards. He promised these that they would compensate them and leave the ones who did not have their National Identity cards.

However, up to now, even this group has never been compensated. On 17 March 2020, we made 20 years ever since this incident took place. It is not right for Government to promise people and give them hope and later withdraw.

I would like to know whether the Government still has any plans of helping these people and if so, what plans? Like I said, they lost parents and spouses and they stopped going to school. They had hoped to get the money and maybe do business but nothing is happening. Therefore –(Interjections)– of course they suffered irreparable damages because it was the duty of Government -

THE SPEAKER: I am sure you have made your point many times.

MS KARUNGI: Madam Speaker, I pray that the Government looks for money and pays these people because they had many promises. It was Government’s duty to make sure these people had security by not allowing any religion to come in and take people the - (Member timed out.)
 
THE SPEAKER: Office of the Prime Minister, the Kibwetere survivors, 20 years ago, were promised some support.

3.21
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. Ali Moses): I think you will ask the Member to follow up this matter in the office. I will be ready to meet her on Tuesday because on Monday, we shall be in a Cabinet meeting; I will take it up from there on Tuesday morning at 09.00 a.m. 

We shall walk her to the Prime Minister to get the details then we can follow it up from there. This is an administrative matter, which cannot be solved on the Floor of Parliament. That is why these offices are there. Therefore, raising matters here, which are administrative, will not help much.

However, the honourable member is officially now, on behalf of the Prime Minister, invited to the office of First Deputy Prime Minister. If you do not know –(Laughter)– you will check with colleagues; they will bring you. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I am being reminded that in the Ninth Parliament, a petition was brought here and the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs considered it and objected to the compensation; the committee of this House.

MS KARUNGI: Madam Speaker, thank you for that information. However, in 2016, I think the compensation was not talked about in the Ninth Parliament because I was in that Parliament too. I raised this issue many times; the compensation issue was either in the Seventh or Eighth Parliament when I was not here.

The reason I decided to raise it is because in 2016 when the President came to Kanungu, these people met him privately and he promised them. He made an assurance to them that he was going to get them some money. He also directed the Prime Minister to handle the matter.

Madam Speaker, it is an assurance from the President to my people and I have a right to raise it here so that something is done because when the President pledges something, he has to fulfil it. It was either the Seventh or Eighth Parliament when I was not here -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Clerk has assured me that in the Ninth Parliament, this matter was discussed and the resolution was that if the Government started compensating people in those circumstances, it would set a precedent where everybody who is involved in personal problems comes to the Government. However, the President can compensate from his resources.

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Housing) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the woman representative for Kanungu for raising this issue because the “Movement for the Restoration of the Ten Commandments of God” religious sect killed people, many of whom were in Kanungu.

Like you have said, Madam Speaker, we need to refresh the memory as Parliament. In the Ninth Parliament, a group of orphans to the people who died in the inferno came and on several occasions went to the Office of the Speaker. The Speaker guided that they should prepare a petition, which I presented to Parliament, on their behalf.

The petition was processed by the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and did a comprehensive assessment including visiting Kanungu and other places. The committee presented a report to Parliament. The difficulty the committee had in their report was that there are many people who died and some were in Kanungu, Bunyaruguru, Bushenyi and others here in Ggaba.

It was not easy –(Interjection)– just hold on; I will allow you - for them to establish for instance that these are true orphans of people who died because an investigation was not carried out. Also, there were no DNA records of the people who died. The major recommendation by the committee was that Government should study the matter and see how it can help. It was as general as that. 

It is true, like the honourable member for Kanungu has said, that those children - by the way some of them were from Rwanda and a number of them were not even Ugandans - they met the President in Kanungu. The President did not pledge to compensate them; he just requested the Prime Minister to handle their case –(Interruption)

Mr wadri: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable minister, for yielding the Floor so as to receive this point of clarification.
When this heinous crime was committed, I very well recall that Government instituted a judicial commission of inquiry and the person who was supposed to chair this Commission was Justice Augustus Kania.

I do not think the inquiry ever took off; I do not know for what reasons Government decided to halt that inquiry, which probably would have given us an insight into what exactly happened in that religious sect.

Can we find out from you whether you still have in mind, as a Government, the idea to further pursue this so as to understand what exactly happened through execution of this judicial commission of inquiry?

Dr baryomunsi: That has been overtaken by events. It is true that a commission of inquiry was appointed but it never took off. I do not think it is our desire to reopen it. 

Madam Speaker, I was giving an update that when these people who call themselves the children of those who died in the inferno met the President, the President requested the Prime minister, who was present, to handle their matter. He did not say, “You will be compensated by Government.” I was present.  

The Prime Minister, since then, constituted a committee, which has been examining this matter and the committee is still in place. I think that is why the Deputy Prime Minister said, if hon. Karungi came to his office, she would be able to get the details. There is a committee of Government, which is studying this matter; there are issues of the land where this church was located. Therefore, that is where we are.

The point I would like to clarify is that at no point has either Parliament or Government committed to compensate anybody on that issue. However, there is a committee in place, which is examining this matter.

Ms aol: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable minister. These people came to my office many times and the last time, I referred them to the Office of the Speaker.

To say that we cannot set a precedent is wrong because this was a one-time calamity, which involved very many people. Closing your eyes to it and pushing it 20 years down the road - why can’t you sit and try to resolve this matter? 

If you are not going to do anything, just let them forget it because you have not given them a proper answer and they keep coming. It is not very easy for people to come from Kanungu and Bushenyi to Kampala to chase for one thing. Can you help these people? That is my point of clarification.

The Speaker: Honourable members, you can follow up with the taskforce of the Prime Minister. I keep telling you that the matters of national concern should really be matters of national concern. Some are constituency issues; so, I am evaluating them.

3.30
Ms rosemary tumusiime (NRM, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to raise a matter of national importance regarding the isolation centre in Entebbe.

I would like to thank His Excellency the President for the elaborate statement he made yesterday. One area that he mentioned in the preventive measures was that Ugandans travelling from abroad and other travellers would be quarantined at their own cost.

Honourable colleagues have already mentioned something to do with a facility in Entebbe; Central Inn, Entebbe. I had an opportunity to share with somebody who is quarantined in that facility and I thought that it was important for me to share with this House the irregularities concerning people being quarantined in that facility.

We would like to thank the proprietor of Central Inn who has offered those premises to have people quarantined. However, the cost for the people living in that place is US$ 100 full board. For 14 days, that is US$ 1,400. If you are not going to have full board but only bed and breakfast, you pay US$ 60.

Madam Speaker, people started going to that place on Tuesday and yesterday but I would like to tell you that they have not taken up those rooms; they are seated in the lobby. How safe is that for people who are in that area? 

Secondly, when these people arrive at that facility, there is no official. Nobody is mentioning anything. Isolation alone is stigma but being mishandled is more stigma. Among them are students who cannot afford the rates.

I, therefore, feel that this whole exercise might not help us much. My prayer is that the Ministry of Health comes out with a statement to inform this House and the country at large how they are going to handle matters of people who are being quarantined in that place.

The Speaker: Honourable members, the matter will be addressed after the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has made his statement on the economic impact because that is also touching the economy of the owner of the inn as well as the people. It will be answered after the minister has spoken.

Ms tumusiime: Finally, allow me to speak about that businessman who has offered his premises; people are not taking up the rooms and he cannot have other clients. How is he going to meet the costs for that hotel? Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

The Speaker: Thank you. The Government is listening and you have to answer those questions. Some of these things can be asked in questions. Is it national or one school? Okay. 

3.35
Ms Winfred kiiza (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter is in regard to the policy of Government to ensure that all Ugandans access education. Government of Uganda is very specific on the girl-child.

Our schools are now more interested in posting very good results rather than dealing with the students themselves. Yesterday and this morning, parents from Nabisunsa Girls Secondary School who have their children in Senior Four and Senior Six have been calling us to ask whether it is now a deliberate Government policy that students who do not qualify under first and second grade will not sit for national examinations.

Nabisunsa Girls Secondary School has told some students that the school will not accept to register them because they think they will taint the image of the school by not performing very well. The parents would like to know whether Government has changed the policy to say that it is only the bright students who should start and finish school. If it is not the policy of Government, can they be assisted? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think the Minister of Education and Sports is here. I do not know whether he can make a commitment to investigate. 

3.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker and honourable members, the policy of Government on primary and secondary schools has never changed.

Under Article 1(1) of the Constitution, Government policy is a preserve of Cabinet but it is important to note that all schools normally undertake admissions. When schools admit students, that particular lot is supposed to progress from senior one until senior four. They sit for Uganda Certificate Examinations (UCE) and then they either make choices to get back to that same school or go to other schools. 

For Nabisunsa Girls Secondary School, as Ministry of Education and Sports, we do not have any special arrangement whatsoever for any special consideration of other students to sit for exams and others remain. 

However, Madam Speaker, I can still commit to ensure that we, as a ministry, get in touch with the leadership of Nabisunsa Girls Secondary School. If there are other schools, may I humbly request Members affected under that same arrangement to kindly submit the list of these schools? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not take the minister on a fishing expedition. Give him the tools and names so that he can work.

MR OBUA: For those who have names of schools, just like hon. Winnie Kiiza has stated on the Floor of Parliament and named Nabisunsa Girls Secondary School, kindly help us to help the nation by giving us the list so that we are able to establish the truth, as alleged on the Floor of Parliament and we report accordingly, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, minister. Honourable members, if you have names of those schools, please submit them to the minister. Honourable members, let us go to item three.

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF COVID-19 ON UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, since this is a topical issue, I thought we should go to item 3 so that the minister can explain to us and then we debate quickly. 

3.40
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Honourable members, I have been asked by the country to come and inform Parliament, first of all, on the economic impact of COVID-19 on our country. However, we know it as a Coronavirus.

Madam Speaker, as we are all aware, the recent outbreak of the Novel Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19), that started in Wuhan China, has spread globally with over 182,000 infections and a death rate of approximately 3.5 per cent in over 160 countries by 17 March 2020.

Although the number of daily new cases of the COVID-19 is finally declining in China, it is increasing in the rest of the world, especially in the USA, Europe, South Korea, Iran, and more recently, in Africa, with our neighbouring countries, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and the Democratic Republic of Congo registering cases.

The virus will significantly affect economic activity at global, regional and loca1 levels. Moreover, an outbreak of the virus in Uganda would impose a significant strain on the health sector, which will necessitate additional resources to deal with the pandemic. 

The Coronavirus outbreak is already having a negative effect on the global economy. The last few weeks have seen a large fall in the value of stocks and other financial instruments traded at the World Bank trading stock markets in the USA, Europe and Asia. 

Preliminary estimates by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) indicate that global growth in 2020 will reduce to 2.4 per cent from an earlier projection of 3.9 per cent.

The COVID-19 outbreak is affecting the supply of goods and services. The pandemic has already led to shortages of drugs, industrial chemicals, medical equipment and consumer goods like smartphones, as factories in mainland China shut down and those closures disrupt complicated trade networks. Labour is in short supply too, with workers forced to stay home. 

I saw it today when I was driving early this morning. I always come from a very congested area but there were few cars because people were staying at home –(Interruption)– don’t mind, I will invite you there one day.  

The Coronavirus is also affecting demand for travel and car manufacturing, resulting into lower demand for oil as economic activity in most affected countries slackens. The fall in oil prices has been exacerbated by the price war between Russia and Saudi Arabia that saw Brent crude oil prices drop to as low as US$ 34 per barrel during the first week of this month from about US$ 56 per barrel in February of this year. The above effects on the global economy have implications for the domestic economy as well. 

Impact on the Domestic economy 

Real sector

Given the current situation, the projection for economic growth in Financial Year 2019/2020 has been revised downwards from 6.0 per cent to between 5.2 - 5.7 per cent, depending on the severity of the disease impact eventually on the country. 

The biggest impact will be on the services sector. Travel restrictions are already affecting the tourism sector including hotels, accommodation and transportation. Supply chain disruptions are hampering trade and this is expected to continue until the virus is contained at the global level.

Travel restrictions at the global level will also affect the flow of imports into the country leading to disruption in supply of inputs into the industry sector. This will affect industrial output.

The low activity in the industry and services sectors will result into loss of jobs further leading to a decline in economic growth and an increase in the level of poverty. The number of people that could be pushed into poverty is estimated at approximately 770,000 Ugandans.

External Sector (Balance of Payments)

Madam Speaker, in the external sector, the Coronavirus will affect the following: 

    i.  Tourism will be severely affected by a sharp drop in tourists coming to Uganda following extensive travel restrictions in the USA, Europe and Asia. This is already taking place. Yesterday, I received a report from the tourism body; virtually all our hotels now are empty. Bookings, which had been made up to June this year, have been cancelled. So, the story is not nice. Tourism earnings are expected to decline significantly in the last four months of the financial year.

    ii. Exports are expected to decline in the last four months of the financial year, on account of a sharp reduction in global demand and travel restrictions imposed by Uganda's key trading partners in the Middle East, European Union and Asia.

    iii. Imports will also be affected by travel restrictions and a reduction in demand within the local economy. The majority of Uganda's imports come from Asia, particularly China, which has been the most affected country. Overall, imports are -(Interruption) 

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My point of procedure is that I would expect the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development talking about the economic impact of Coronavirus to give us figures - so far, what have we experienced? The report is basically a narrative. It looks like an assumption.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you have also become rude. The minister has not finished reading his statement, please.  

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I am coming with some figures. Overall, imports are expected to decline by 44 per cent in the last four months of this financial year. However, this provides an opportunity for the country - now, colleagues; I would like you to listen to this very carefully.

When I was at university, I had a professor who taught us to turn a disadvantage into an advantage. We want to turn what is happening to us into an advantage. This provides the country an opportunity to produce some of the imports locally in line with our import substitution and export promotion strategy. 

We, therefore, need to put more effort in the implementation of this strategy in order to reduce our dependence on imported inputs and final goods in the case of such emergencies.

There is a story of a certain minister in Europe who said all we are producing is for us, leave those people to die their own way. We must answer that challenge, countrymen. Somebody was making fun yesterday that we were your slaves, you did this - I will not go to that one. It is now, as far as we are concerned, to turn this rather sad moment and event to make sure that we begin producing what we have been importing. 

We are going to create capacity and make sure that Uganda Development Bank - some entrepreneurs and I am sure there are some among you, that bank should be able to help people with some capital but they add something and create an enterprise out of this misfortune -(Interjection)- how much, we shall discuss that. We can also borrow for sure; we are borrowing for so many things. 

For that, I will borrow an amount of money that we require in order for that bank to finance our people who want to start small industries to manufacture what we have been importing from outside so that we can produce it here locally. 

Workers’ Remittances and Foreign Direct Investments (FDI) will also be affected by the slowdown in the global economy. In the last four months of the financial year, FDI and remittances are projected to each decline significantly.

Loan Disbursements are projected to decline by 50 per cent in the last five months of the financial year because of the likely delays in projects execution and a disruption in the supply of inputs for the projects.

Overall, Balance of Payments Position due to the travel restrictions, scarcity of goods and lower inflows (tourism, remittances, exports and FDI), and the balance of payments is likely to deteriorate leading to a likely depreciation of the exchange rate and consequently inflation. This has already contributed to the depreciation of the exchange rate of 1 per cent between February and 10 March 2020.

Given the above assumptions, the Current Account Balance (CAB) in FY 20I9|20 is projected to widen by $363.1 million (12.7 per cent). Consequently, foreign exchange reserves are expected to decline from 4.2 future months of imports to about 3.5.

Impact of the Coronavirus on the banking system

The impact of the Coronavirus on the banking system has an indirect effect through non-performing loans (NPLs). The sectors that are likely to be most affected include trade, tourism, transportation and construction. 

Private sector credit extension to these sectors constitutes 45 per cent of the total private sector credit. If NPLs in these sectors increase by 50 per cent due to fallout from the COVID-19 outbreak, the ratio of non-performing loans to total loans would worsen from 4.7 per cent to 5.9 per cent, which has a negative impact on private sector credit growth as well as economic growth.

Fiscal Sector

Revenue collections will register an additional shortfall of about Shs 82.4 billion for the remaining period of this financial year and about Shs 487.6 billion in the next financial year assuming that the Coronavirus does not enter Uganda or that it is quickly contained hence avoiding widespread infections within the population. 

The Coronavirus will mainly impact international trade taxes (reduction in value of imports) as well as consumptive taxes (VAT and Excise duty) due to the slowdown in the industry and services sectors.

Impact on Public Investment Projects

There is likely to be a slowdown in the rate of execution of Government's development projects, especially in the transport and the energy sectors due to the impact on project financing as well as the likely impact on required inputs that are imported. In addition, there is a risk to the private sector financing for Public-Private Partnership (PPP) projects, which could delay completion of planned projects.

Additional expenditure requirements

Preliminary estimates from the Ministry of Health indicate a financing requirement of Shs 25 billion to deal with health challenges caused by the disease. In addition, more financing may be required to facilitate continued surveillance, aerial and ground spraying of locusts as well as continued awareness creation and sensitisation as well as to provide support to the people whose livelihoods will be affected.

Financing gap 

In total, the Government of Uganda is faced with a preliminary additional financing gap of approximately Shs 370 billion (equivalent to approximately $100 million) and Shs 350 billion (approximately $90 million for Financial Year 2020/2021) due to revenue shortfalls and additional expenditure needs to deal with the challenges in the health sector, needs arising from the desert locust invasion and related support to people whose livelihoods will be affected.

Worst-case scenario

In the event that the virus enters Uganda and spreads rapidly – I pray to the Almighty God to save us out of this. As experienced in some African countries such as Egypt, South Africa and Algeria, the impact on the economy, the budget and the population would be significantly higher than what we are talking about.

I am giving this picture because they have no certainty. I am only picking what I think is the trend but I cannot give you the specifics –(Interjection)– I am talking about statistics. We can talk statistics here but when you are involved in terms of international trade, there is no way I can be specific at this material time except at the end of a given period. 

In the worst-case scenario, there would be countrywide restrictions on the movement and gathering of people. It has already happened – yesterday, the President said that we are closing down schools, places of worship, entertainment venues, sporting events and also closure of borders. This would have more significant effects on the economy and livelihoods of our people.

In this scenario, economic growth of Financial Year 2019/2020, will decline to between 4.6 per cent and 5.1 per cent. An additional 2.6 million Ugandans would be pushed into poverty. Following the resultant severe reduction in exports, tourism receipts and workers’ remittances, the current account balance would deteriorate significantly.

On the fiscal side, there will be larger revenue shortfalls than anticipated and additional expenditure requirements to cater for the health sector response to the virus spread as well as livelihood support for affected persons.

Domestic revenue would register much larger shortfalls of about Shs 288.3 billion in this financial year and Shs 350 billion in the coming year. This would largely be on account of a reduction in international trade taxes due to travel restriction into and out of the country, which would disrupt trade. Domestic taxes would also be affected by severe reduction in economic activity. 

Madam Speaker, today, I was talking to my friend in Denmark. Denmark a week ago closed down everything; they closed schools, businesses, travels and they have even closed their borders with all their neighbouring countries. There are only two activities going on:

    1. The supermarket for people to go and buy chakula.
    2. Pharmacies – because they must remain open. 

My friend told me that the worst he has ever seen happen in Denmark was after the Second World War. He was still a young man; he said he had never seen a bad situation like that. That is why we are saying that apart from praying to God, let us do everything we can to ensure that this virus does not come into the country. 
  
The health sector would require significantly more funding for hospitalisation and isolation structures for the infected people, intensive care unit facilities, emergency response vehicles, more testing kits and protective wear for medical personnel, face masks and hand sanitisers, recruitment of additional medical personnel and sensitisation of the public about the virus.

Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude that:

    1. To deal with this economic shock, both fiscal and monetary policy adjustments would be required. The fiscal policies will play a critical role in mitigating the negative impact of the pandemic on economic activity and the challenges in the affected sectors, particularly health; while monetary policies will help to reduce the impact on the deterioration of the balance of payments.

    2. To deal with the possible negative impacts on our balance of payments, the Government will seek support from the International Monetary Fund to support the Central Bank in ensuring that international reserve buffers remain strong and that the exchange rate remains stable.

    3. To deal with the financing gap in the Government budgets for this financial year and next financial year, my ministry will seek for a budget support loan on concessional terms worth $100 million for this financial year and $90 million for the year to come from the World Bank.

    4. As one of the policy responses, we need to put more effort in the implementation of the import substitution and export promotion strategy. This will reduce our dependency on imported inputs and final goods in case of trade disruptions and other global economic shocks.

    5. In this regard, my ministry will be meeting the private sector and financial institutions to enhance implementation of the import substitution and export promotion strategy and to discuss Government’s short, medium and long-term policy responses aimed at dealing with the negative impacts of the COVID-19 on our economy and future economic shocks.

However, we should go and think about how to produce more internally. Madam Speaker, I rest my case. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Before I hand over to the Members, I would like to request the religious leaders in the country to pray really hard so that the Coronavirus remains elsewhere so that after the 32 days, we go back to business.

4.05
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda North County, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the President and the Government for these proactive measures that have been put in place. I am also very happy with the House because this is a bipartisan issue – because the Coronavirus does not know any politics when we come to these issues.

First, my concern is on us who come from rural constituencies. Today, I have been receiving calls from people and they are asking, for example, if the Coronavirus happens to reach a place like Mitooma, what measures has Government put in place to ensure that such areas get quick response?

Secondly, the business community - we know, of course we are a Government that failed to focus on enabling our people to manufacture. We failed to focus on import substitution. We depended on exports. This is the only time I have heard the minister talk about it deeply and I hope they are going to put in place measures. 

I, for example, have a very young person in my constituency who borrowed and started making buttons for export to Asia. He processes them from cow horns but all his orders are now closed. 

You have people who were dealing in second hand clothes, importing from everywhere. They are all down. The banks are on their necks. The landlords are on their necks. National water is demanding payments and Umeme is also asking them to pay bills.

I expected the minister to talk about that small person, down there and not this international economic structure and picture. Talk about what is happening to a person here in Uganda. That is the person I am talking about; the young people who have borrowed to do businesses. They are the ones I am focusing on. The minister should tell us the strategies Government is putting in place. 

Finally, the minister should also tell us what Government is doing. These hand sanitizers like Saraya, which originally cost Shs 25,000 but are now at Shs 150,000 and Shs 200,000 –(Interjections)– why has Government allowed these economic poachers who are heartless to come and benefit from the suffering of the people? What is Government doing to control such essential items to ensure these people who are hoarding them do not abuse this unfortunate opportunity? 

4.08
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Rubanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. 
Today morning I received a phone call from a friend. He told me that he borrowed money from the bank and all the businesses he has been doing have been affected by the Coronavirus because he is now very unable to connect to the world. 

Now the challenge we are facing is, if I have borrowed and I am not doing business, how will I pay the loan? I would like the minister to inform the House whether there are mechanisms through which he will engage with banks, especially in this season, to reschedule some loans. 

My second point is, the Coronavirus problem seems to be putting everything down. The minister has just noted that our revenues are likely to go down. In your communication, Madam Speaker, you noted that some staff will be asked to stay away. However, the minister is saying that the expenditure of Government is likely to rise because they will need money to fight Coronavirus. 

I would like to ask the minister; in a normal situation where you have revenues falling and every other thing is falling, what should we do to the expenditure side? Should we keep borrowing? Isn’t this the time for us to rethink and see what we can do with and what we cannot do without. Probably see how we can manage ourselves within the circumstances? 

4.11
MR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga East County, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to, first of all, hail Government for the measures that are being taken to ensure Ugandans are safe from the Coronavirus. 

My concern is that it seems to be lopsided. Emphasis is on extreme social distancing, making sure that we do not come into contact with each other, which I appreciate. However, there are a number of challenges that are not being addressed. 

The first, and I had expected the minister to announce it in his statement, is what the ministry will be doing about the overburdened system, should we be attacked. The health system is already struggling. Of course with the impact of Coronavirus coming in, I think more and more pressure will be put on that struggling system. What is being done by the Government on that? 

There is also the case of the elderly, the vulnerable groups, and people with mental health, who will be more significantly affected. Are there any arrangements being made to ensure such people are treated?

About asking people to stay at home - yes, people can stay at home but I would like to share with you the experience of the USA. During the hurricane Katrina in 2005, millions of people were left homeless and over 2,000 people killed. 

What Government did was to tell people to move away from New Orleans when the hurricane was coming. The US Government thought people would move, just as we think people will stay at home, but the people thought that the hurricane might change direction. Secondly, they had nowhere to go and they were not being given any support to move to another city. 

Now, we are telling people to stay at home. What support is being arranged to ensure those who stay at home can pay their rent?

The other concerns relate to loans. Some people survive on a day-to-day basis. Are there any arrangements that can be put in place to support, for instance, the informal sector; to support people who will lose their jobs and to support private businesses that will have these people working at home? 

There is also the issue of emergency preparedness of our disaster –(Member timed out.)

4.14
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened to the proposed strategies by Government but my pain is, at the moment, every strategy implementation is going to be expensive because the whole world is aware and scared about this pandemic. Movements are restricted – whether of human beings or other items. How I wish we had remained proactive. 

This House has been emphasising building and enhancing industrialisation in this country. Yes, the minister has talked about substituting importation but now, for somebody to start manufacturing something, they need to establish industries. Where are you going to get the parts from? Where are you going to get the materials from? Everything is going to be expensive. I pray that the Government heeds our earlier recommendations and starts to implement them during this Budget process.

On the issue of borrowing, even without this outbreak, we have been borrowing. Now that we have this outbreak, I know we shall borrow even more. My prayer is that we make proper use of the monies that we are going to borrow. Thank you.

4.16
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for his statement. I also hope that religious leaders have heard your plea that they should pray that coronavirus does not reach this country. For now, we are lucky that it has not yet reached here. 

However, in the event that this deadly virus comes, what is the state of our preparedness? The minister has only talked of the economic impact. How are we prepared in the medical sector? In the event that people start falling down, how many hospital beds have we prepared to receive Ugandans? Where are the medical personnel? How are we going to take care of the dead? If this thing comes here, we are going to drop like flies, given our health and hygiene habits. This is a big worry and as Government, we should focus on our preparedness.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the whole world has gone into a shutdown. Everybody is saying, “You stay there, don’t come here.” We are also telling people not to come here. This shutdown means a lot for our survival. What basic survival kits have we prepared, now that we depend on many things coming from outside? Have we listed down the key things we need to survive as we face this shutdown globally?

Lastly, Madam Speaker, the minister has talked of increasing exports. I do not see how this is going to happen when everybody is saying, “You stay there.” What are we going to export? If we are to export anything, can we identify key sectors, which are likely to be on demand such as food items: fruits and vegetables? Can we sort these out so that in the event that there is going to be demand for those things Uganda will be ready to supply them? Thank you.

4.18
MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Omoro): Madam Speaker, I appreciate the statement made by the minister on the impact of coronavirus in the country. However, my expectation was to hear more about how ready we are, as a country, with mitigating measures. 

Right now, the key things that we should focus on, as a nation, should be basic needs for our people. In this case, pharmaceuticals and food, among others, are paramount. Right now if you move to supermarkets or pharmaceuticals, prices of sanitizers have gone high. I had expected Government, after the Cabinet meeting of yesterday, to come with clear positions on some of these things. If not, it is going to be more challenging for us to cope with this challenge at hand.

Madam Speaker, it is good for Government to look at the national aspects but also how our local people are going to cope with this challenge at hand. I heard the minister talking about how they are going to look into empowering some of our local entrepreneurs in the country. This is something that we expected more elaboration on so that our local entrepreneurs start producing for us and we see a way of limiting exports.

Madam Speaker, I appreciate the minister’s input on the country looking at borrowing about US$ 100 million to support us in our endeavours to fight coronavirus as well as the locusts. However, this is the time for technocrats and those who are handling this money to bear in mind our motto: “For God and My County”. If not, the resources we are even going to put in this fight may not help us realise the impact. As nationals, we should be more patriotic at this time as we join our hands in this common fight. Thank you.

4.20
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me also take this opportunity to thank the minister for the statement, although we expected more details than this. There are obvious things I expected the minister to mention; I expected the minister to talk about the effects of the coronavirus in as far as inflation is concerned but I did not hear that at all.

I expected the minister to talk about the effects on foreign exchange rates. I also expected the minister to clearly talk about coronavirus effects24on employment, although he talked about that indirectly.

Madam Speaker, you are aware that Uganda imports food, especially rice. We are a net importer of rice. As it is happening right now, there are many attempts by many people to rush and try to buy and stock food. Given that a lot of the commodities in supermarkets are imported, the effect on prices is definitely obvious. We expected the minister to guide the country on this but the statement never mentioned it.

Madam Speaker, I have watched that in the last few days, the exchange rate of a dollar has been escalating and it has gone to almost Shs 3,800 yet it has been at around Shs 3,600. This has a lot to do with the fact that we are not able to export and of course, tourists are not coming to the country. We expected the statement to have made mention of the effects of coronavirus as far as exchange rates are concerned.

On the issue of import substitution, I think this is not a short term solution. We cannot talk about import substitution when we are trying to address the problem in the short term. To substitute imports, we have to establish manufacturing plants here. It also means we have to import machinery and technology and these are things, which we cannot do. How can we, at this moment, say that in order to curtail this, we are going into import substitution? That is impossible. I do not see you able to do that.

Madam Speaker, finally on employment –(Member timed out.)

4.23
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement about the economic impact of Covid-19 on Uganda’s economy.

The minister talked about non-performing loans. In Uganda, schools have closed for 32 days. What we have always witnessed is that some schools and teachers pick loans from the banks. How will these loans be serviced, when students have been sent home yet the loans are supposed to be serviced using school fees?  

Madam Speaker, this is going to cause a lot of issues. There are students who have not even paid school fees. By the way, I am a proprietor of a school in Arua and most of the students have not paid fess and they have gone back home. How shall we recover yet the banks will be onto the necks of schools and these teachers?

Secondly, we have refugees in West Nile but they have continued to move from Uganda to Sudan and then come back to Uganda. We have border points like Elegu, Fogi, Oraba and Vurra. Madam Speaker, our economy in West Nile will suffer because of the impact of Coronavirus.

Already, we are facing challenges around the boarders due to the coming of refugees. How will the Government control the movement of these refugees from Sudan to Uganda, when we have these restrictions? Also, how will the refugees be controlled within the camps? Otherwise, if they are not controlled within the camps, certainly we are going to have the spread of Coronavirus in West Nile. Thank you very much. 

4.25
MS LOWILA CD OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues to thank the minister for his statement.  As we continue to pray for God’s grace and mercy for our country, there is need of high level of preparedness. 

I have one issue on the measures that are being proposed by the minister. There is one where the minister talked about dealing with financing gaps. He talked of getting loans on concessional terms. The issue of getting loans may be inevitable but we have already been having many issues about loans.

Madam Speaker, I expected the minister to make a proposal of reviewing and revising the budget provisions that we have for the remaining months, especially revising and reviewing the budget proposals for the next financial year.

Madam Speaker, I believe we have some activities, which are not a matter of do or die. They can wait for one or two years. I expect the minister to look into revising what we have and cutting out those that can wait and then look at the critical issues as we prepare to handle this issue. Thank you.

4.27
MS HELEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the minister for the statement he has made although I think there are some challenges.

Uganda does not own any entity that can brings money like the banks and the telecom companies. We are always on the receiving side. Whereas we are praying that Coronavirus should not come to Uganda, we are already affected indirectly by our partners who are affected.

Madam Speaker, the juice and milk in our supermarkets come from Kenya yet these things are getting empty and their prices have gone up. The minister has come here to give us hope that there is a silver lining; we can build something. Where are you going the get the laborers now that they have locked everywhere; people are not coming? Why are you giving us hope that we are going to do this?

Madam Speaker, many people are going to lose jobs and this is going to affect our economy. I thought the minister was coming here with a plan that gives us direction that this and that is not going to be possible. Otherwise, it looks like we are sitting. You have a wound and yet you are sitting on it. You are actually pretending that you are okay. Madam speaker, the truth is: we are moving to the worst state. 

What is going to happen to people who have running loans? The banks are holding onto them and so, what are we going to do with them, honourable minister? The banks we have are not ours; they are for other people. We do not even control the interest since we do not have a lot of power in them.

Honourable minister, you should have come here with hope. If you give me health and you do not give me the food, how will I recover? I think there are a lot of questions that need to be asked. Our health sectors are sick.

Madam Speaker, I was in Soroti regional hospital the other day – you will cry. Imagine if people in that area get sick - there are places without ambulances. How are you going to quarantine people? We have already been given a report here that people are paying $100 per day. I remember the President said “at your cost” Does it mean it is only the rich who are going to save themselves and the poor will die? Honourable minister, I think you should bring an outlook of Uganda while taking care of your neighbours and the porous borders. What is the effect that is already running into Uganda? Thank you.

4.30
MR ANDREW KOLUO (NRM, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the minister for the statement. The minister has specifically mentioned that this Coronavirus has affected the tourism industry badly.

As I speak, the hotel bookings are cancelled. The occupancy used to be 75 per cent but it is now below 15 per cent. Hotels have started even laying off staff. I would like to suggest the following way forward to help all the business communities in Uganda.

One, I suggest that Government should waive taxes on hotels and another levies during this hard times. 

Two, I know tourists usually come to Uganda in the months of June, July, August and September, I think by that time, this virus will not be there. Gorilla permits should be given at discounted  prices like 50 percent so that these people come and give us  -(Interjections)–  I am saying in case.

Thirdly, I suggest that loans be given to the business community at zero interest so that they can keep on with their business.

Finally, in Teso regional as a whole, I would be happy if the Ministry of Health can come up with a statement to help the people who drink the local brew. Majority of these people share tubes and calabashes. This statement should be open so that people try to contain this disease.

Madam Speaker, today, as a family man, I am going to lead a prayer at my home so that this Coronavirus does not reach Uganda. I would like to request my colleagues to do the same. Thank you.

4.33
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kitagwenda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When the minister was making the statement, it might have skipped your eye, but hon. Terrence Achia coughed and I saw hon. Grace jumping but was stopped by hon. Ayo who was near and immediately hon. Lamwaka gave him a sanitiser. After a short while he stepped out and then came back.

However, coronavirus infection has similar characteristics with common flue, you have a running nose, headache a bit of temperature and even the gadgets we are using to test for coronavirus are simply taking temperature, but temperature can be increased by any sickness in the body even a malaise or jetlag can cause a rise in temperature.

I am not very sure about alcohol but the General says that even alcohol can increase temperature. I thought that while the minister made a statement about the economic impact of corona, he was going to inform us at what point are we going to do empirical confirmatory tests for coronavirus. That is by testing blood, when are we able to have RDTs that can test blood of people to confirm?

We thank God that corona has not yet come to Uganda but you might find that it is here but we have not yet known it because nobody has been tested to confirm whether they have it or not.

We are going on with the assumption that you have a high temperature therefore you are suspected. I would like the minister to inform, the House and the country at what point we go for testing of blood such that we confirm whether someone has the virus or not. 

Hon. Koluo made an introduction for this point; yesterday after the statement of the President I was with hon. Silas he rang some people in the constituency and told them that the President had banned all bars and they must be closed.

They answered that the President had banned the bars in Kampala not the local brew bars. He said, “The President had said that when you share tubes and therefore share saliva and that some of you when you pull the drink and it is hot you push it back so you must stop because the President has directed.”

They told him to go and buy for them local tubes they use –(Member timed out.)

4.36
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this chance. I would like to thank the minister for the message. Yesterday the President gave a very good message but we would like to enrich it depending on the impact that it has. Some is short term and some is long term.

When the minister was making his speech he alluded to the fact that when he was coming to town he had already started seeing the impact of the President’s message.

Amongst others was the decrease in the traffic that means automatically business has slowed down in the city, it is a trickledown effect.

I am glad that the minister said that even Government will not get the expected revenue that it thinks about in the near future and will resort to borrowing. 

The most important fact here is that if Government thinks about borrowing what about the small business players that live off daily income as one of their incomes to sustain their families - for example, the transporters that will not be able to transport people on a daily basis earn Shs 50,000 to Shs 40,000 to sustain their families. If they are out of business within 32 days won’t we be threatened of not dying of coronavirus but of starvation? Who will help them pay their bills? 

We pay our bills of electricity and water depending on how we earn that is why we have pay as you earn electricity bills. Is there any intervention by Government telling people of Umeme Ltd to go slow because it is short term intervention? 

Let us suffer this economic distress together just like the European governments after a shutdown made interventions on electricity bills and even paid. The United States is releasing a check of $1,000 per family depending on how much you earn.

What intervention are you going to make for the single mothers and fathers that are going back home to sustain families without a consistent earning that they have been earning on a daily basis.

Secondly, we have mobile money tax and we want to limit the use of paper money. If paper money is an issue that can be used to transmit –(Interruption)

MS KAMYA: Thank you very much, colleague and son for giving me way. The information I would like to give is that work places have not been closed. People will continue to work in the markets, offices.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, I take the information as it comes but we are talking about people that live off earnings per day. We may control coronavirus but we get threatened to die of starvation.

There is also another matter of the suppliers as we have closed schools; there are businesses that survive on education for example over five million children go to school and therefore there are food suppliers to these schools.

Automatically stationary, food suppliers will walk out of business and go back home. What are short-term interventions in giving them leverage of the loans and loan settlements that they acquired from banks?

What of those that run shops, for example, at Nkrumah, Nasser and Printers; they are going to pay rent taxes but no landlord will give them an inch of a day if they do not pay this rent.

Is there any intervention just like the governments that have conducted a shutdown in the foreign world or we have copied sui generis and transplanted everything we heard from outside.

Finally, the health workers that have put their blood on the line to see that our borders are protected and have access to the people that might come in with coronavirus.

Is there an extra allowance to the doctors and other health workers that are going to spend day and night to attend to people whether in hospital facilities or at the points of entry to give them encouragement and to fight for us?

The minister talked about the matter of unemployment; he understated the view that it is only about a projection of 780,000 people that would walk out of business as a result of this scourge and the interventions that we are making.

My prayer is that we go down and see how many people will be impacted; for example waiters and waitresses that have been laid off duty because they are employed according to the productivity of the hotels.

The bars and restaurants was it rushed; those people live off daily income because they are paid Shs 10,000 per day and at the end of the day who is going to feed their families?

Isn’t it time to discuss what happened to our granaries, silos that we were talking about as food storage for food security?

What if we run out of food?

4.45
MR STEPHEN BIRAAHWA-MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable minister, for giving us the economic impact of the Coronavirus to our employment, our jobs, poverty, the taxation and generally the economy, in our effort for transformation.

The minister should make this routine; it should be either biweekly or fortnightly. It should give us the immediate and mid-term impact because you are going to have the first round effects and secondary effects. If we do not do that, then we shall have not managed the situation.

The second point is the timing: This virus comes at a time when we are in the political mood; very polarised as a country. My first appeal is; can we address this as a bipartisan matter as a country? No wonder, in some jurisdictions, you have seen the Presidents and Prime Ministers moving with Opposition leaders and religious leaders because this is a matter which cannot be addressed in a partisan manner.

Therefore, as an advocate of national dialogue, I would like to request that we scale down the partisan politicking and electioneering. This kind of situation globally, even from the time of the world recession of the wars, requires inward-looking policies. Inward economic politics do not know partisan divisions. So, it is very important that if you are going to get solutions, we need to move as a country and work together.

For example, if you talk about import substitution, the Government is largely getting more imports than exports even in value. It also means that in terms of taxation, we are getting more money in terms of import duty. We are already saying we have a threat as far as that is concerned. So, what is the compensation?

I would like to contend that one of the best ways to go in the current budget and in the budget to come is; action should be made. You mentioned UDB. How much are you putting on the table for UDB, aware that we largely have foreign-owned banks, insurance companies, oil companies, telecom companies, including the construction companies?

Madam Speaker, I would like to propose that in terms of the fiscal interventions in next week’s presentation by the minister, they must be very clear. In terms of the monetary tool interventions, this is the appropriate time for the central bank to bring the bank rates down, so that we avoid postmortem action of a bail-out. We should instead do a stimulus right now; a proactive, preventive stimulus using the fiscal and monetary tool, so that we do not wait for the second round bail-out but we –(Member timed out.)

4.47
MS LUCY ACHIRO (FDC, Aruu County North, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you the minister for the statement that you have given us today about the Coronavirus. Actually, for the last four days, I have been seeing many stars in relation to this disease.

I am saying this because our district Pader does not have any district hospital. When you get to our health centres, we do not have nurses. Nurses are always not around at the hospital. We do not have doctors. When our people get there, they claim they do not have medicine. So, I have been relating all these problems, that if this disease gets to Uganda, what shall we do?

As leaders, Madam Speaker, many times, I have seen our own people abusing Members of Parliament. They abuse us and yet –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MS ACHIRO: Madam Speaker, yesterday we went to the hospital with hon. C.D Lowila. We had about 13 referrals from Pader to Mulago Hospital. So, I want to imagine that if this disease comes to Uganda, are we really prepared?

Two; the crisis of goods. Yesterday, I picked some sanitiser from here. I wanted to go with it to my home because I had to send money to the constituency for burials. So, I do not know. Our people cannot even afford soap. Can’t we get supplementary money from Parliament and we take to our people, just like Togikwatako? They should give Members of Parliament money. We need this money, Madam Speaker, because they will call us – our voters will call us. They will not call anybody but they will call us.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MS ACHIRO: Lastly, Madam Speaker – the third one –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, make concluding remarks.

MS ACHIRO: Madam Speaker, to conclude, I have seen the toll-free numbers. There are three toll-free numbers. Right now, you have to move somewhere in Pader and buy or load airtime. I can imagine the distance. I am just seeing stars everywhere.

Another thing is which language are the people from the Pader or Aruu North going to use –(Member timed out.)

4.52
MR ROBERT KYAGULANYI (Independent, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to my comrades’ in thanking the Government of Uganda for the response that has been accorded to this epidemic. However, again, the Government of Uganda alone cannot fight this pandemic; the population must be involved.

The biggest weapon of the population is information. In Uganda today, social media and the Internet are the biggest platforms of communication. However, as we all know, there is a tax on social media and that limits our people. 

It is not only that, Madam Speaker. We have been guided by the experts to practise social distancing and avoid contact. Although we have options like mobile money, we know that the majority of our population is using paper money because there is a tax on mobile money.

I think it would be prudent for the Government of Uganda, for at least these 32 days, to suspend mobile money and social media tax to help our people. This is the time when the Government of Uganda should at least feel the pain of the people of Uganda. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.54
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take cognisance of the fact that we are operating in a free market economy. However, Government has the responsibility of ensuring that people’s lives become their priority number one. People can only have life when they can access food.

Madam Speaker, I expected the statement from the minister to clarify on how especially the unemployed people in urban areas, including those who are going to lose their jobs, will meet their survival in the next 32 days. I know that when the prices for maize went down, this Parliament asked Government to raise the prices of maize to a reasonable price.

In the event that we have this crisis, I expected the minister to help those who will not have money in their pockets and to see that, for example, the prices of foods, especially the foods that people use on a daily basis, are managed by Government; in the meantime.

Madam Speaker, the minister has not talked about the congestion in the police cells especially now that people are arrested on a daily basis. Their lives are at a risk due to congestion in these cells.  The people can die out of that. Most of them will be released on police bond when they have mixed with people whom they do not know where they have come from. When they go back to their homes, they can infect their relatives, which will not be good.

The same applies to the prisons and so, I also expected the President of Uganda to tell us how the prisoners who are congested - I have been to Kirinya Prisons; there is a lot of congestion. I do not know how they are going to manage those cases.

4.57
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, I thank you. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development came up with two scenarios - what I call a modest scenario and what he called a worst case scenario. 

In the worst case scenario, he described the following in 4.2: there will be countrywide restrictions on the movement and gathering of people at schools, entertainment venues blah! Blah! And he predicted that this will leave 2.6 million people in poverty.

Therefore, we are not on scenario A, which is 700,000 people. We are now on worst case scenarios because those restrictions have happened. What I expected the minister to tell us at this juncture is: if 2.6 million Ugandans are going to be in poverty, this is what the Government intends to help them with - a clear plan of action. Reading through this paper, I see nothing to that effect.

Madam Speaker, let me speak for the poorest of the poor; the so called women in Uganda. They have been getting some money from the Office of the Prime Minister called “women empowerment.” They have been buying tents and chairs, which they rent out to functions. This money is supposed to be paid back. 

Now that you have banned gatherings, what remedy do you have for these humble village women that have borrowed this money? They do not need the rhetoric of global figures, they need real action.

And for the youth, the President is moving around with Emyoga and giving money to youth. Most youth are buying boda-bodas. In the address of the President, he said: “…please restrict movement on boda-bodas…” We are asking what will those youth who you lent money to as Government of Uganda, do? I would have expected the minister to speak to that effect. 

The minister tells the country that we are going to import but he does not explain what we call turnaround time. How long does it take you to start a process of setting up an import substitution factory up to having a product out of that factory? It cannot be a remedy for a short term. It is either in the medium or long term.

Madam Speaker, let us speak about the ordinary Ugandans. Closure of schools - actually you can talk about tourism and blah! Blah! But you do not know that the biggest industry in this country moves around schools. Education is the only sector where you have five million Ugandans subsisting. They go and buy from the market; farmers sell their farm produce and many more to schools.

The effect we are telling him and teachers and workers; what we would like to the minister to tell us is: when you restrict travel abroad and other scenarios, you are going to save money. We have a lot of classified money. This is the time to call back on that money; Shs 3.1 trillion is classified. Before you borrow - and let us not buy weapons; let us this time go and invest money where our real people are.

Before you come up with a first remedy, which is borrowing, honourable minister, think outside the box. When you borrow and over borrow - you have already borrowed Shs 2.2 billion for the Budget shortfall. You have borrowed another Shs 400 billion before the Budget Committee and you are talking about more borrowing - honourable minister, we are calling on the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come up at least with another statement to Parliament with solutions.

5.01
MS ANGELINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the minister for the statement presented. I would like to agree with what the colleagues have said.

Basically the world has locked us out and at this point we should be thinking about ourselves and not about the world out there. Like many colleagues have said, what are we doing? How prepared are you?

Madam Speaker, I came from Soroti last evening but before I travelled, I happened to go to the Central Police Station. I told them that everywhere there are sanitizers and before anybody enters any office, they have to clean up. So, I asked why there did not have yet there is a lot of human movement in and out of the police station? The officer in charge asked me if I could sponsor and buy for them sanitizers.

I would like to ask Government, now that we are trying to fight just as we are trying to do - and we have taken care of Parliament by having sanitizers everywhere, what are we doing about those public offices out there? What has Government done?

I am not sure whether Coronavirus is airborne or not. After you have used the sanitizer, what impact does it have if this thing is airborne? How does it help? 

We have talked so much about silos, which we have never been taken seriously by Government. In Soroti, there are Kenyans that have set up stores. They go and buy produce in the gardens while our Government is looking on. With the impact of this, we are going to see shortage of food.
 
Madam Speaker, right now, the weather favours us, why wouldn’t Government encourage our farmers that they will buy produce from them and store it?  There is nothing new under the sun; it happened in Egypt, it can happen in Uganda. Let us buy the produce from farmers and store it for the sunny day.

Lastly, places of worship should have been the last thing for us to ban. Because as Ugandan we say, “For God and my Country.” Each one of us here believes in God. We know that where man has failed, God will not fail. Why would you stop people from going to pray? The Bible says “…do not forsake the habit of coming together in fellowship.” Yes, some of you may think that it is about religious leaders, no - (Interruption) 

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. We know that God created us and it is true that our motto is, “For God and my Country.” God would love us to be alive.

Madam Speaker, when you have been informed scientifically and medically that crowds are grounds for the spread of corona virus; a conduit and when there is a directive in that line to safeguard Ugandans and even the Pope in Vatican said, “No, services will be delivered”, even in Mecca, we are not going for the holy pilgrimage (Umrah) simply because of protecting people from the virus, is she in order to be more catholic than the Pope and say, “worshippers should be allowed to go and pray,” yet we are putting Ugandans at risk when we allow them to go in big numbers for prayers? Is she in order?

The Speaker: Honourable members, I think we should not hide our heads under the sand. There has been clear evidence that in Iran, despite the warnings, they continued with their campaigns. It is one of the countries that have suffered most deaths because of crowds. Therefore, it is “For God and my Country,” but God wants people who are alive.

Ms osegge: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your ruling. In my faith however, I believe that God is supreme. What man cannot do, God will do. (Interjections) Yes, we may worship different things. I worship the living God and I know that He is able.

Here we are a crowd. We go to the markets where there are crowds. We have not stopped public transport where people move long distances for seven hours. In a worship place, we go for a maximum of two hours and go back home. 

Why would you consider stopping people who meet once a week for two hours and continue with movements of seven hours in a bus, in a crowded area and you think we are safe? (Interruption)

Dr baryomunsi: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of order. This matter was discussed by Cabinet and before the President made his statement, he had a meeting with the Inter-Religious Council of Uganda where all the religious institution leaders were involved. They were in full agreement that prayer meetings should be suspended for 32 days.

Is hon. Osegge, who was represented by her religious leader in that meeting, in order to keep insisting that we should allow infections to be facilitated by a meeting when it is a public health measure that we are protecting everybody against coronavirus? 

The Speaker: Honourable member, I think you have finished. (Laughter) 

5.09
Ms Winfred kiiza (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Picking up from where we are asking the providence of God to take control of the whole situation, many of our colleagues have been saying, we are praying to God that the scourge remains there. Let us not be restrictive. Our God is a rich God and He can touch everybody wherever they are.

Our prayer, as a people, should be that the human race should be saved no matter where they are and no matter where they sit. As a country, our anthem puts us in contact with our neighbours. The Bible that I read tells us to be each other’s keeper.

Therefore, those of us who will have the opportunity to pray and who believe in the healing power of God should pray for the whole world. I know that we shall pray.

While President Uhuru was addressing the nation and making declarations like our President did, he did make a clerical call to the institutions that handle money. I thought that in delivering this message and trying to let us understand the economic impact of the virus to our situation, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development would equally put interventions that will enable Ugandans to continue surviving amidst the challenges that we are facing.

Many colleagues have talked about the loans that people are choking with, including those that parents took to pay school fees for their children who have been sent back home. What are the parents expecting? Is it that they will again pay next term or will these fees be carried forward? 

What are we expected to do when a time comes and you cannot even go to the market to buy food, should the unlikely happen? President Uhuru called upon dealers in mobile money to reduce the cost. I expected that in the address, the minister – because the President said that many of these issues are going to be dealt with by the ministers –(Member timed out.)

5.12
Mr abdu katuntu (FDC, Bugweri County, Bugweri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Colleagues, this is not an academic discussion. What we are talking about today is life and death of our people.

Honourable minister, when you came to address us, I expected you to clearly state economic interventions you are making as the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. What are the areas? I have thought of about four areas:

    1. Loss of employment and job opportunities for our people arising out of this challenge.
    2. Businesses collapsing because of loans taken and businesses closing down. Go downtown; how many people were importing from China and have since literary closed? How many of them have loans? 

Therefore, we expected the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to see how this businessman, whose business is collapsing because of loans, can talk to a bank and they restructure these loans. What is Government’s intervention as the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development?

    3. We thought you would talk about loss of job opportunities. I have been told that Serena Hotel today laid off over 40 people. Many hotels are going to do the same because they cannot continue putting people on the payroll when there is no work to be done. That is when we expect the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come in and intervene. 

Medically, before the coronavirus claims a single individual in this country, it is already claiming businesses. You should be the first doctor before even Dr Aceng comes in. We have seen these countries; I am sure many of my colleagues have been watching international news. Presidents have literary been reading second budgets earmarking specific resources –(Member timed out.)

5.14
Mr matHias mpuuga (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Madam Speaker, I am picking up from where my senior colleague left. I leant a bit back when the honourable minister was presenting his statement. I thought the statement was projecting to the future, yet we have a problem on our hands, Madam Speaker. 

I will only speak about two things. One is generic that the statement from the minister could easily mislead other sectors because it is not anywhere sector specific. For example, he made reference to health. I expect the minister to clearly state how emergency measures are being made to prepare more intensive care beds, how much they are doing to import test kits and protection because it is an emergency. 

The minister sees the problem in the future. The problem is with us and we need a reaction. Perhaps, the minister could tell Parliament how much time he needs to return to Parliament to be more particular and specific. 

Madam Speaker, the minister has, in generic terms, referred to the impact on transport but the economy, as it is, like myself, know what the problem could be if transport costs remain high. You know the people effect of the cost of gas on food prices. We are talking about headline and underlining inflation. Don’t you think time has come for you to call on the managers of our gas reserves in Jinja to find out whether they are ready to intervene? You talked about dropping gas prices on the international market but remember the producers are at liberty to hoard and up the price bids on the international market. Are the reserves alive, honourable minister? 

Three years ago, we gave you money to resuscitate the reserves. Don’t you think it is time for you to plan now and see what time you are going to intervene in the gas market? This is in order to keep the equilibrium in the market to avoid the trickledown effect on gas prices, honourable minister.

Therefore, would you bring your statement back and be more realistic? The future will come when we have handled the present that is with us and is a crisis, honourable minister. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 
5.17
MR DAVID GUMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Madam Speaker, very briefly, I have no doubt in my mind that the world is likely to witness yet another economic recession, like the one of the 1930s and 1940s, after the first and second world wars. 

I have heard the minister’s statement. My understanding is that we are likely to witness a worse situation of revenue failure because most of our collections are import duty collections. 

Tourism has already collapsed. When you go to all the tourist centres, you will not see any white person. Strong economies of the world are predicted to fall in this recession. 

Madam Speaker, I think that this is an extremely important debate but we do not seem to have time. I would like to call upon your indulgence that we get extra time, two or three days, to debate this issue; delve into the issues, rather than “roasting” hon. Kasaija, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This is a national forum with all the guides and qualifications so we need to discuss this matter, make recommendations and enrich him, rather than “roasting” him. 

At the end of the day, Madam Speaker, we are talking about a Government collecting money from businesses that have collapsed, like hon. Katuntu said. The collections will, therefore, collapse or dwindle. 

My view is that we get sufficient time, if you so decide, and discuss this matter, raise serious inputs and recommendations for the Government to take on. We should look at the collections and the expenditure side. For example, we could say these “penkoni” vehicles should not be bought anymore. We should take posterity measures to ensure that this Government is saved. 

We can also take advantage of economic areas where we are superior in the region in order to produce more food and earn more money and export in the region. That is my call, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you saying that we should not just comment but we should design solutions? Honourable members, I think we need to decide whether we are going to have another session based to cover a motion, and not just debating as we are. It should be based on a motion with proposals; something more structured. Let us hear from the minister. 

5.21
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I am very grateful for the contribution that colleagues have given. Please, let us read the heading of my statement which is, “The economic impact of COVID-19 on Uganda.” 

When I was studying in school, the teachers told us to stick to the question and answer it. I have answered that question. I would like to inform this House, Madam Speaker, that I came here to just tell you the problem. I will come back to give you what Cabinet thinks the solution should be. Nonetheless, I am very grateful that you have already tackled that promise. 

Madam Speaker, I would want – let us not prolong this debate. Give me a chance next week to come back, after I have met Cabinet, to tell you our solutions. Let me give you an example. On the loans of our people that are collapsing, I have intention to call all the bankers and we discuss this question. On the question of producing locally here, I have intention and I have already invited UMA and other business people to come and we discuss how to go forward. 

I suggest, without wasting Parliament’s time, that I be given an opportunity to come back and give you the solutions. However, if I can receive the solutions from you in writing, then, I will incorporate them in the statement that I will be able to give. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I was going to propose that we form a task force within Parliament to identify the issues which we shall present to the Government. Can we do that, honourable members? Can we have a task force to identify the issues so that when the minister comes we have a position? Okay. 

5.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. That is a good proposal. 

Madam Speaker, what has happened to us this year has not happened in this country and whatever is happening I biblical and it is written. 

I would like to inform colleagues, if you went to 2Chronicles 7:13-14, it states: “When I hold back the rains, or send locusts to eat up crops or send an epidemic on my people, if they pray to me and repent and turn away from the evil they have been doing, then I will hear them in heaven, forgive their sins and make their land prosperous again”.

Madam Speaker when you go to Isaiah 26:20, it says, “Come my people, enter your chambers and shut your doors behind you, hide yourselves for a while and until the Lord’s wrath has passed”.

Madam Speaker, there are people who have been saying God does not exist, the homosexuals of this world; I want to tell them that today they are in their doors, can we repent and get back to God and know that he actually exists.

I would like to call upon all of you, let us get back to the right path and we need that Anti-Homosexuality Act, the promotion of homosexuality is going on in this country. In our schools, children are being sodomised. We have seen this. Can we repent and get back to our path? As leaders and Members of Parliament, can we provide leadership? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had provided 30 minutes for that debate, but we have actually gone almost two hours because of the importance of the subject. I want us if we agree, we form a task force, identify the issues- when are you coming back honourable minister? Shall be ready on Tuesday?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I cannot come here before I have briefed my colleagues in Cabinet on Monday. Could I request this House to allow me to come back next Thursday with a full statement? However, as I said, I have gathered all the ideas you have given -

THE SPEAKER: No, I think there are others you may not have gathered so our taskforce is going to pick out those issues, when you come, that is what we shall present to you.

MR KASAIJA: No, Madam if I could have those ideas in writing, then I would be able to incorporate them in my paper to Cabinet.

MS ATIM JOY: Madam Speaker, we are lacking sanitizers, the minister knows in Uganda we have too much waragi which people are just consuming. Can’t you think of that as a matter of emergency so that these people should pack it and put it for the population to buy or to supply other than us lacking it in the supermarkets?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to make some proposals. I want to name six members for the taskforce: Hon. Kayinza, Hon. Okupa, Hon. Guma Gumisiriza, Hon. Joy Ongom-

MR GUMISIRIZA: Madam Speaker, there is a Committee of National Economy with eminent members of this House and who have the proficiency and ability in this field. For example, Hon. Dr Bategeka, the Vice Chairperson of the committee; I think that if we gave the committee the responsibility and members our rules allow non-members of the committee to be co-opted so that they discuss and come up with these issues. That will be a very effective way to go.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us proceed as we had agreed. We had already named four members - Hon. Kayinza, Hon. Okupa, Hon. Guma Gumisiriza, Hon. Joy Ongom, Hon. Nsereko and Hon. Winnie Kiiza. 

Your work is to sit, generate some resolutions that we want the minister to handle which we shall present to him when he comes with his statement on Thursday. Thank you. They should choose among themselves a chairperson.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the guidance you have given but I was looking at the World Health Organization report of 2018 about the availability of laboratories in the country. Out of the 947 checked or surveyed, it was only 45 which were meeting the requirements for diagnostic services in the country.

I was wondering on the basis whether the Ministry of Health at the same time, would not present a statement on their capacity to do the diagnostic service in respect of the Coronavirus we are talking about.

Madam Speaker, that is premised on the fact that even this afternoon, I have received a video where some of the people who are entering the country - those who have people within Government were just leaving the airport without being quarantined. I have sent even a copy to the Ministry of Internal Affairs this afternoon and the committee -

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether the Minister of Health is here. Is there anybody from health today? Are they working from home?

5.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just for clarification, not everybody who travels from outside is quarantined. The quarantine is for only those who are coming from, class A countries which have been named because they have been classified into different groups.

There are countries like UK, Sweden, China, USA and the President read all those countries in his statement. It is only those who are traveling from those countries that undergo quarantine.

However, if you are coming from Kenya or any other country, you simply go through the screening process.

THE SPEAKER: Item 3(ii)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON SCHOLARSHIP OPPORTUNITIES UNDER THE MINISTRY OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

5.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Hamson Obua): Madam Speaker, on Tuesday 10 March 2020, this Parliament directed two ministries, the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, to present a statement on scholarship opportunities.

Specifically for the Ministry of Education and Sports, we were required by Parliament to provide –

    1) information on all the available scholarships in the Republic of Uganda under the Ministry of Education and Sports;
    2) the list of countries providing these scholarship opportunities and the numbers;
    3) the procedure, and/or the criteria of giving out the scholarship opportunities;
    4) the list of beneficiaries of the scholarship opportunities covering the academic years of 2017/2018, 2018/2019 and 2019/2020.

Madam Speaker, I now move under Rule 51 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, to present a statement from the Ministry of Education and Sports, answering the four questions posed by Parliament on Tuesday, 10th of March.  

Uganda receives various types of scholarship awards (full or partial with varying levels of support) through various schemes from several countries. The various types of awards include the following:

l. 	Awards through multilateral cooperation. 
2. 	Offers through bilateral cooperation. 
3. 	Direct offers to individuals through embassies of awarding governments. 
4. 	Other scholarship offers (one-offs) in other government ministries, universities and other agencies.

The scholarships awarded to the Government of Uganda through the Ministry of Education and Sports are:

    i. The United Kingdom through the Commonwealth Scholarship Scheme, which calls for 30 nominations annually, from whom 10-20 beneficiaries are selected, on average. The scholarship is fully-funded and is received in September of every year. 
    ii. The Indian Government through the General Cultural Scheme and Commonwealth Scheme offers 30 partial scholarships received in January every year. 
    iii. The Egyptian Government offers l5 scholarships received in June annually. 
    iv. The Turkish Government offers 5-10 scholarships, every four years.
    v. The Japanese Government offers 5-10 full scholarships in May annually. 
    vi. The Algerian Government offers 70 partial scholarships in June annually. However, in 2019, Algeria offered 100 scholarships. 
    vii. The Chinese Government offers 11-18 fully-funded scholarships received in March annually. 
    viii. The New Zealand Government offers two scholarships received in March annually.
    ix. The Cuban Government offers one partial scholarship annually. 
    x. Mauritius offers 15 scholarships received in January every year.
    xi. The Malaysian Government offers five full scholarships received in March.
    xii. Australia through the Australian Development Scholarship Programme, used to offer 10-20 scholarships annually. However, since 2014, they offer short-term scholarships for capacity building and they are handled by the High Commission. The advert runs between December and January every year. 
    xiii. His Highness, the Aga Khan through the Aga Khan Foundation, offers 10 scholarships annually for Masters in Teacher Education. The scholarship is handled by the Aga Khan Foundation. The Ministry of Education and Sports officials are only invited to participate in the interviews.

Madam Speaker, some scholarships are directly offered by individual countries and agencies to Ugandans who apply through their websites or agents. It should be noted that not all scholarships are awarded through the Ministry of Education and Sports. Some countries make direct awards to the beneficiaries. The Ministry of Education and Sports, is sometimes given information about the offers and only participates in disseminating the information to the public through the ministry’s website and notice boards. 

These countries include, but are not limited to; Australia, Serbia and the Aga Khan Foundation. The scholarships offered by Serbia in 2019 were received by the Ministry of Education and Sports after the deadline.

The scholarships offered through the Ministry of Education and Sports are managed through the Committee on Central Scholarship. The committee is responsible for shortlisting, interviewing and nominating candidates, and for recommendation to the awarding foreign governments and agencies.

The procedure, and/or criteria of giving out the scholarship opportunities

Following receipt of notification of offer, the Permanent Secretary and the leadership of the ministry give guidance in respect to the fields of study (courses) and the slots for each field to be advertised, guided by the National Development Plan priorities. 

Publicity/advertisement

Advertisements are run in the print media and on the Ministry of Education and Sports’ website. Copies of the advertisements are also placed on notice boards of the ministry’s headquarters.

The advertisements state in detail – Madam Speaker, may I seek for protection from the gentleman or lady manning the machine I am using? 

THE SPEAKER: You can proceed. 

MR OBUA: The advertisements state in detail the types of courses offered, number of slots per course, minimum entry requirements, which include age of less than 35 years for Masters, 45 years for PhD and 25 years for undergraduate; deadlines for receipt of applications; dates for display of shortlists; and interviews.

The advertisements clearly spell out the terms of the offer, partial scholarships or otherwise. It is made known to prospective beneficiaries (individual students and their parents) whether they have to meet the other costs, including air tickets to and from the country of study, and the possession of a valid passport for some countries.

Madam Speaker, for confirmation of the advertisements, the ministry has attached three copies at the end of the statement highlighting the opportunities:

    • The New Vision of Thursday, 04 May 2007 shows the Egyptian Government scholarships. They are 15 in number and the advert is attached. 
    • The New Vision of Monday, 21 January 2019 has 30 scholarships from the Government of Indian. The advert is hereby attached. 
    • The New Vision of Tuesday, 28 January 2020 has 12 Chinese Government scholarships. It is also attached as evidence that the adverts do run in our papers. 

Receiving and capturing data by the secretariat 

All applications received before the deadline are recorded and information compiled for each applicant.

Shortlisting of candidates

The Central Scholarship Committee convenes to do the shortlisting after the secretariat has compiled all the data according to the fields of study, in accordance with the criteria spelt out in the advertisement. 

In case of stiff competition, the best applicants are shortlisted by considering the Cumulative Grade Point Average (C.G.P.A) for Post Graduate programmes and the weight of A’level grades for undergraduate programmes. 

The shortlist and timetable for interviews are then displayed on the website and notice boards at the ministry headquarters. I would like to appeal to members who are here, with advanced technology, to visit the website and access all this that we are talking about. 

A minimum of Grade 'C' in essential and relevant subjects is considered for undergraduate courses and for Masters, a minimum of an upper second or first class degree.

Interviewing Candidates
Interviews are conducted by all members of the Central Scholarship Committee. During the interviews, each member awards marks using a score sheet for assessment. The average score is calculated for each candidate interviewed. 
As part of the affirmative action, a female candidate is given one additional point.

The candidates are graded according to the total score based on weight assigned to A’ Level results, for under graduates and first class or second upper degree, for post-graduate programmes plus scores for assessment for the oral interviews so as to get the best candidates.

Note that each candidate interviewed is given the date and time of release of the interview results at the end of his or her interview.

Nominations 

Soon after the interviews, the committee nominates the best candidates in order of performance. All candidates are given the interview results on the date and time as stipulated.

Submission of application by nominated candidates

Each of those nominated is given a code for accessing the website for the awarding country to apply and the website is closed by the awarding country on a stipulated date as the deadline may dictate. 

After applying and submitting online, the candidate uploads the application and submits the hard copy to the Ministry of Education and Sports for endorsement and onward submission to the awarding country.

Submission of Nominees

The Ministry of Education and Sports, as the nominating agency, submits a list of nominees as per the various programmes applied for to the awarding countries.

Feedback 

Feedback from the awarding country is communicated to the ministry and directly to the successful candidates. This includes the name of the university, the programme of study, date of commencement of study and any other important information. 

The ministry communicates this same information, plus any other information, to individual students whose names appear in the award letter.

Pre-departure briefing

A Pre-departure briefing session is conducted by the Ministry of Education and Sports through the Central Scholarship Committee for admitted students together with their parents and/or guardians to address academic issues, welfare, role of parents in the education and mitigation of psycho-social issues and cultural shocks.

Madam Speaker, all students who proceed abroad for studies on any form of scholarship are required to open files with the Ministry of Education and Sports. This is because they have to report back to the ministry at the conclusion of their studies so that they are submitted to National Council for Higher Education for equating of the foreign qualifications to the Ugandan standard. However, not all students comply with the regulations.

Lists of beneficiaries of the scholarship opportunities 2017/2018, 2018/2019, 2019/2020 academic years are hereby attached. It has the names of the students, their sex, the district, the university, the programme and year of study and the award year for all the scholarships under the ministry.  I beg to submit. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for that information. However, I think we would like to know why the adverts are only at the ministry of education. There is a ministry called Parliament across the road –(Laughter)– it would be good if you sent that information here for the people’s representatives.

Secondly, I was in Serbia last year and they were very unhappy that for several years they have been sending 10 scholarships but that because we did not take them, they have reduced them to two. Therefore, we would like to know why those have not been taken. There are many other countries where we have received those complaints; even India. Some of ours were taken to other countries because we were not taking them. Countries like Turkey. 

5.52
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for that elaborate statement presented; that was very clear. 

I have been expecting to hear some details because the source of some of these complaints is in line with the most recent scholarships. Besides the scholarships from other countries, there is a rumour in this country - I do not know if it is confirmed - that the oil scholarships that came because of this new oil sector – the oil discovery was supposed to actually favour a certain region in terms of the opportunities like employment and scholarships. 

However, when you talk about a particular region, Bunyoro, we have conversations with Members of Parliament from that region; they are complaining that their people are not actually benefiting - (Interruption) 

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. For the last 18 to 20 years, Government has trained specialists, undergraduates, post graduate in oil and gas, some on Government budget and some on scholarships. What surprises me is that Bunyoro and Acholi regions have not benefitted from these scholarships and trainings. Right now, they are recruiting and, therefore, we are missing out on those expert jobs. This is an area where we needed interventions yesterday.

Therefore, it is true that Bunyoro and Acholi missed out on the training and are now missing out on the jobs. We need a remedy.

MS AMODING: Madam Speaker, there is a problem in line with the sharing of opportunities that pertain to any sector. Education opportunities have a bearing on how the national cake is eventually shared. If you want to see the impact of this oil and gas sector, go to the National Oil Company and the National Oil Authority. There is a shameless behaviour in this nation where certain opportunities, which are lucrative in that direction, go to a certain region. This practice is very shameless. I wanted to come here with a motion so that we can debate it at length. 

I would like the minister to explain why those opportunities are not explained. Those opportunities are there but they are carefully not talked about on the Floor of Parliament. I know that many regions are concerned about the way these things are happening. I think the reason why this issue was brought on board was because of such opportunities being absent in other regions. Information is not available to other people and this is not good. 

Honourable minister, I would like you to clarify that particular issue. We thank you for giving that information but there are other opportunities, which are hidden from the general public, particularly – (Member timed out.)

5.56
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Hamson Obua for bringing this statement. However, I would have expected this statement to be signed by the Minister of Education and Sports, although it would be okay for the minister of state to read it to Parliament. Therefore, one wonders; is this statement from the Ministry of Education and Sports or is it from the minister in charge of sports? (Interjection) There is a signature, indeed from the minister of state in charge of sports –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what are you interested in? Do you want information or signature?

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, we want authority; that the statement is owned by the Minister of Education and Sports. If the clarification is made, I have no problem with it.

5.58
MS CD OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the minister. There is a big problem as far as awareness about these opportunities is concerned. I would like to inform the minister that these adverts at the district headquarters that he is talking about are not sent. No adverts are sent to the district headquarters, at least in the case of Pader.

The minister talked of newspapers. It is true that some of us, at our level, buy newspapers almost on a daily basis. However, there is no way you can read these newspapers from page to page to be able to see these adverts and maybe pass the information on to the people in the rural areas.

Madam Speaker, when scanning through the names of the beneficiaries, you see that there is a big problem: Wakiso, Wakiso, Wakiso, Wakiso, Wakiso, Kampala, Kampala, Kampala, Kampala, Kampala, Masaka, Masaka, Masaka, Masaka –(Laughter)

No wonder the minister is talking about websites. How can potential beneficiaries from rural areas like Pader, Lamwo and Amudat access this information from the websites where there is no internet? Sincerely, what is very difficult in giving information to members of Parliament – either by emails or in our pigeon holes – so that we can use our connections to give information to the potential beneficiaries? There is a lot of unfairness and this must be addressed. We need regional balance.

If you look at these beneficiaries and the poverty rate in this country, you find that those who are disadvantaged are the ones missing out on some of these opportunities. Sincerely, is this fair? No – (Interruption)

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to donate to my sister is very crucial. I would like to inform her that it is not only about these scholarships coming from abroad. Even when we talk about the list for the students’ loan scheme, we feel pain. Whether it is State House scholarships or - That is the information I wanted to offer to you.

MS OKETAYOT: Thank you, my brother, for that very good information. Madam Speaker, we need to take up this issue and come up with how we can have fairness in benefitting from some of these opportunities. I thank you.

6.01
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the honourable minister for a very honest statement that he has presented because that is the procedure. He only ran short of telling us what actually happens in implementation.

Madam Speaker, this matter came up because members had information regarding the inequities related to access to these scholarships. A reference to the central scholarship committee is one of the national scandals that perhaps the Committee on Education and Sports could interest itself in, to investigate and ask them to make a presentation of all the applications. They should access a list of all the applicants and even investigate the manner in which they finally came up with the beneficiaries.

Madam Speaker, perhaps failure to decisively deal with this inequity could be the biggest failure of this House. I was in the Ninth Parliament and I was on the Committee on Presidential Affairs. We investigated State House Scholarships and even made a recommendation to Parliament to have those scholarships go to the Ministry of Education and Sports so that a professional body could handle scholarships. This was never done. It is to the extent that State House sponsors primary school pupils and secondary school students with billions of money in the presence of UPE and USE. It is an indictment of the very programmes that were incubated and nurtured by Government.

Madam Speaker, I think the minister could come back to Parliament on another day and address this House on what they are doing about the activities of the central scholarship committee. It is to the extent that people have complained that their applications disappear in this committee. It is a scandal.

Madam Speaker, I would very much love to see you instruct the Committee on Education and Sports to go and investigate the activities of the central scholarship committee. The reason why this Parliament did not insist that State House scholarships are irregular is because the President – Yes, he is the President and the Fountain of Honour but this country is for all taxpayers. We did ask for the criteria for access but it was never there. People said “You see, when you have somebody who can catch the President’s eye, then you can access it”. It is a scandal. Perhaps, we are too shy to address very serious matters of our communities.

Like the Member who submitted before me, our people are being denied opportunities. The level at which we are promoting sectarianism in this country is very scary and it threatens national unity.

When hon. Ssemujju Nganda was the chairperson of the Committee on Commission, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE), he authored a report having investigated the people employed in the various key Government sectors and departments. The report is before Parliament. If you read it, you will wonder how scandalous we have been over time. Something ought to be done. Perhaps, the beginning would be the Central Scholarship Committee for a very clear inquest into staff activities and we advise Parliament to curtail this problem so that we offer our people an opportunity to compete on an equal platform.

Madam Speaker, there are lots of talented brilliant Ugandans that have been denied access to special opportunities because they cannot whisper in special ears in this country. This must stop and as Parliament, we owe a duty to these Ugandans and bring an equilibrium into the job market and access to education. Thank you.

6.05
MR JACOB OPOLOT (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the report presented by the honourable minister and commend colleagues for the concerns they raised.

It is true there is need to improve the way scholarships are published to the people and the way the selection is done. I am specifically drawing the attention of this House once again, to the provisions of the Higher Education Students Financing Act, 2014.

Under Part IX - Transitional Provision specifically Section 42, which is Management of existing scholarships. Section 42(1) says “All scholarships currently offered by the Government of Uganda, including bilateral scholarships, existing immediately before the commencement of this Act shall be vested in the Board.”  

Section (42)(2) The Central Scholarship Committee of the Ministry of Education and Sports existing immediately before the commencement of this Act shall cease to exist on such a date as the minister may by statutory instrument publish in the Gazette.”

Madam Speaker, I am citing this because this Act is about six years old. Since then, every year, the Committee on Education and Sports has been re-emphasising the need for these scholarships to be managed according to the law. When the honourable minister is talking and referring to the Central Scholarships Committee, I do not know under which arrangement that exists. I would like to, therefore, implore this House that sanity can be enhanced in the allocation of these scholarships, if the law is followed and if these are transferred to the Higher Education Students Financing Act. That is what I wanted to inform this House about. 

Madam Speaker, the provisions of the law say “shall”. Therefore, I think the Minister of Education and Sports should be brought to order and made to comply with the law. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.08
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of State for Education and Sports for the statement.

There is a lot of segregation and nepotism in the process of selecting scholarship. As a result, we end up sending wrong people for the right courses. When they interview, they first look at the names. Does the same start with letter A, K, B. If it starts with letter “O” and “A”, you are very unfortunate. That is what is happening in the selection process. In fact, if you do not know anyone in that committee or ministry, you will never get a scholarship. The Scholarships are there but - (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order. Members, a colleague is on the Floor.

MS BABA DIRI: Wrong people are the ones getting these scholarships.

In 2001, my son benefited. He is a very brilliant boy. We saw the advertisement for the Commonwealth but I had to run from the minister to the commissioner and everyone to beg them to take that boy since he was the brightest boy in Uganda. He is very intelligent.

I ran up and down for him to get that scholarship in Birmingham. When he finished his studies and went for industrial training, he was retained and up to now, he works there.

Madam Speaker, they normally send wrong people who do not know what to do with the advertised courses. We actually need to investigate this committee and the ministry. Why are they giving scholarships to people of their choice? These scholarships are for Ugandans and the best students should be the ones to benefit. (Interruption)

MS SILVIA AKELLO: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. We talk about affirmative action but I would like to give information that last year, I had a girl in Otuke who was the best. We even talked about her in the newspapers and NTV Television went and interviewed her parents. They are secondary teachers in seed schools and earning Shs 50,000 per month, and so, they could not afford fees for this girl.

It was not until some Members of Parliament started contributing – I would like to thank hon. Tayebwa who gave money for buying scholastic materials for the girl and KKK Bus that  took up to pay fees for the girl in Namagunga.

Madam Speaker, what the honourable member is talking about is very true. There is typical selection - whether someone is bright or not, as long as your name starts with letter “A” and “O”. Thank you. (Laughter)

MS BABA DIRI: Madam Speaker, unless we shake that committee and investigate this corruption, other parts of Uganda will never benefit from these scholarships. Thank you.

6.12
MR TONNY	AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the Minister of State for Education and Sports for bringing a report, which is very clear for this Parliament to see exactly what takes place in the national scholarships.

It is unfortunate that the opportunities that are provided to the Government that should support brilliant needy citizens of this country do not reach where these scholarships should be given.

This Parliament must insist that the Ministry of Education and Sports should realise that for quite some time now, people have forgotten about the scholarship issues because it is only for those who are either connected or are in the Ministry of Education and Sports. The rest of the people just hear about the scholarships. Sometime back, issues of scholarships were presented to the whole country and people would have the opportunity to compete and the best students would get the opportunity to study abroad and then, come back and support the country.
I would like to know from the minister if the Central Scholarship Committee had been scrapped by the law, then why have we still kept them for over six years? Who are these members of the Central Scholarship Committee who have remained there tormenting citizens?

We demand that Ministry of Education and Sports takes immediate effect to scrap the Central Scholarship Committee and use the rightful body, which should be open to citizens of Uganda.

Somebody who is hard up may not have the opportunity to read newspapers in a week, two or three weeks and yet, some of these scholarships have got time limits.

Why don’t you as the Ministry of Education use the office of the District Education Officers across the country from time to time to update the country on the scholarship opportunities that are there so that we bring everybody on board?

It is painful that we are reaching a level where we forget about the brilliant brains that we should tap to support us and people put in friends, relatives and in-laws who want to continue living there. We have very many scholarships on this list –(Member timed out.)
6.15
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the information that we have received and from the look of things, it would appear that the scholarships are offered on merit and that whoever emerges the best in an interview, gets it.

In our Uganda of today, that is never the case. Imagine the best in an interview in Uganda today is no longer a guarantee that you will get a competed for position. This explains why despite the demographics, you see very few names. I have been scanning through that list.  

Tororo is one of the most populated districts in this country but the names are scattered. I a saw only two or three names from Tororo. (Interjection)- I brought to the attention of this House a lady who emerged the best in an interview but she was not given the job because she had a wrong name and she came from a wrong area. A person who came last but happened to be a relative of one of the big shots was given the job. 

Whereas on the surface it would appear that these scholarships are being given out on merit, sitting for these interviews does not guarantee that you will emerge the best and get the scholarship; they are not on merit.

They are given on technical know who, where you come from and the affiliation you subscribe to. The reason why you do not find many names from Tororo is because of poor connection -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: I have just scanned through these 337 names; the way we settled in our country -(Interruption)

MR AGABA: Madam Speaker, I enjoyed the debate by hon. Othieno even when he crisscrossed between the scholarships to jobs and back until when he seemed to authoritatively state that the list is missing people from Tororo because they are disadvantaged, come from distant places, their names start with wrong letters.

The insinuation of the “A”’s and “O”’s includes the Agabas and Alitwalas. Is it in order for hon. Othieno to continue asserting that the reason people from Tororo are missing on the list is because of where they come from -(Interjection) Even without providing this House with names from Tororo who applied and were denied simply because they come from there? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Otheino, maybe, you can substantiate. 

MR OTHIENO: Madam Speaker, most people from Tororo who got education in those years went through as a result of Government scholarships. We have many students who applied and sat for these interviews.  I am surprised that my colleague is coming from -(Interruption)

MS JOY ATIM: I would like to inform hon. Othieno and the House that formerly, during the UPC time, scholarships would look for you wherever you are but in this regime, if you either bribe, your application is plucked out. Scholarships are for relatives, friends and in-laws.

I would not think that there is nobody in the north or in Tororo who excels as to qualify for these scholarships. You cannot say there is nobody in Kamuli who has ever excelled and does not qualify for this kind of scholarship. There should be a scholarship board and these other people should be investigated. We need equity in this country.

6.21
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a very interesting subject. I would like to state here that the criterion is defective. 

When you look at the advert alone, how can you trust that all Ugandans will get to know the opportunities available in the ministry when the advert is only in newspapers and yet, many Ugandans, especially those upcountry, do not read newspapers? The districts are not aware.

I have never seen these adverts in Sironko and so, the question is, do we do enough publicity for these opportunities? We do not; we must improve if all Ugandans are to benefit.

Let us face some facts as they are. When you look at that list, you will observe that the districts in Bugisu sub region are mentioned three times and those are only three names. 

Here, you are clearly disadvantaging very talented Ugandans. I am just referring to Bugisu but there are many other areas. It looks like students from areas like Wakiso and Kampala are super bright.

Certainly, you will see these areas dominating this list. This was what my brother hon. Othieno was referring to. Those districts are dominating the list. Do we say that they are super bright and more talented than other Ugandans?

Madam Speaker, as I conclude my remarks, let us focus on the key issues on how we can improve this. One, the selection criteria should be worked on properly. We should interest ourselves in how the committee, which deals with this issue is constituted. We should be interested in how the membership is constituted –(Interruption) 

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable member has mentioned a number of times that the students benefitting from the scholarships are from Wakiso and Kampala. I have gone through the list that has been given and it is not only Wakiso. Also, many of us as members of Parliament have children in schools in Wakiso and Kampala and their residences are in Wakiso and Kampala.

Is it, therefore, in order for us to continue mentioning Wakiso when actually it is our children – we the members of Parliament – who are in the Wakiso and Kampala schools? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is difficult for me to rule on that matter because I do not know whether this is a district of residence or district of origin. 

MR WOBOYA: Madam Speaker, I will conclude my submission. I only said that there is a reason for us to doubt when we see other districts dominating at the expense of others.

My last point is that we need to perhaps allocate slots to regions. We can say, for instance, “there are ten scholarships. We are allocating three slots –“

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable Members.

MR WOBOYA: Madam Speaker, the last point I am making here is that it would be perhaps more beneficial if we agreed that if there are five scholarships, we allocate two in northern region, three in western and we allocate four in Bugisu or rather in eastern. That way, we can balance all the regions. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.26
MR MOSES NAGWOMU (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the honourable minister for the statement. That shows good behaviour. It is good behaviour to be accountable to the people.

I want us to look at the previous results, which were released. If you look at the Primary Leaving Examinations results, eastern region is a problem. Senior Four results are a problem. A-level results are a problem. People have been talking about northern Uganda and Bunyoro but what is happening in eastern region is almost human rights abuse.

We all know that for us to make a step forward, we must look at the education and not mere education but education in strategic studies that can lead somebody to strategic placement. You cannot talk about the scholarships to benefit from any scholarship opportunities when you have not excelled.

Looking at Uganda’s policy right now, the policy is geared towards studying sciences. It is after excelling in sciences that you can qualify to even get a Government loan scheme. You can also qualify to get certain specific Government scholarships from other countries.

Madam Speaker, eastern region needs affirmative action. (Applause) I am not ashamed to say that Butaleja District is the poorest in eastern region at 89 per cent –(Interjections) Voting NRM 100 per cent is not an issue. The issue is; can we have something, which can make our people to move to another level? (Interruption)

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With pain, I am reading this list. Hon. Obua, I would like to thank you. However, although my brother is saying that we do not get good grades, it is on record that Prof. Margaret Mungherera was the first female president of the World Medical Association and she was from Butaleja.

When the people who get second grade in these rural schools come to Kampala and go to university, they get first class. Go and check. People who cram to get A’s in exams in these schools of Kampala get retakes at university.

Madam Speaker, finally, the information I have is on page – Honourable members, there are names where people were not given districts. For example, when I look at Appendix One, which you put, hon. Obua; I do not know why they were putting stars on people from Soroti. There is a star on Okwalinga Ronald from Serere and Musau Joshua from Kapchorwa. There is a star on Ngora. Hon. Obua, there are stars here already photocopied. Can we know why you are putting stars? There are stars on these people, including Lira. Can we know why these people were put?

Madam Speaker, if you look at the list, there are stars. Honourable minister, can we know why you put those stars? (Laughter) Honourable members, there are people who were not given – 

THE SPEAKER: Is that information?

MR WALUSWAKA: Yes. There are people on this list who were not given districts. For example, Madam Speaker, I would like to refer you to –(Interjections)– Yes and university courses. I would like to refer you to page 145 and 147. These people do not have districts and so, we do not know whether these are the people who come and pay money.

Honourable minister –(Interjections) Thank you but the issue of balance is needed. That is my point of information. (Laughter)

MR NAGWOMU: Madam Speaker, my prayer is that eastern region needs affirmative action as far scholarships are concerned. The reason for that is that in the long run – we may not see it today – when we are even gone, there will be a problem in the eastern region and other areas. Those children will never get employment anywhere. They will end up on the streets selling matooke but on the issues of strategic employment, they will not get anything reasonable.

Madam Speaker, I request that this august House takes on that decision to compel the ministry to make sure that there is balanced and equitable distribution of scholarships to Ugandans.

6.33
MR EDWARD OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the voices of those thanking the minister for presenting this statement today. After listening to the minister, I have realised that there is a lot of information that we do not know; even for me as a Member of Parliament.

I can imagine what it is for my people back in Agago in the rural area. One of the critical things that need to be done is dissemination of information. We need to go deep down to the radios. We cannot leave these matters to newspapers alone. We need to disseminate this information even to schools.
Otherwise, other than that, honourable minister, when I was looking at the criteria for awarding these scholarships - first class, upper second - looking at how our region is performing at the moment, I just realised that even when you go by those standards, very few of our people can qualify because of the way education at the moment is in the north.

Honourable minister, Article 32 of the Constitution talks about affirmative action for marginalised groups. This is a constitutional matter; why can’t this constitutional provision be operationalised to recognise what we have gone through in the north, which is a reflection of what is going on right now? That is my submission and thank you.

6.35
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I had thought that scholarships would be used to create balanced development in this country but I think the ministry is not doing that. There is not only a problem with these scholarships from foreign Governments. We also hear about State House scholarships, which are being managed by the President’s Office. That tends to advance the cause of people in certain parts of the country leaving a number of communities not catered for.

For example, if you counted the number of people who have benefited from State House scholarships in my district, you would not perhaps hear of any. Honourable minister, we would want to get a list of people who have benefited from State House scholarships so that we can judge for ourselves whether there has been return on investment.

We hear the President making commitments to pay fees under State House scholarships. For example, he pledged to sponsor two people per constituency in West Nile. We also hear that he is sponsoring two people per constituency in the Karamoja Region. How are these decisions made? Is there a framework within which all this is being done to avoid disfranchising some Ugandans?

If we want to have value from all these investments in education, it is very important that you give us information on how State House scholarships are being run and what criteria the President follows in balancing development in accordance with the laws of Uganda. Otherwise, we may be disfranchising our communities. (Interruption)

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, hon. Oguzu, for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that the minister should be categorical on those students who are offered these opportunities because they are only partially funded. There are those that are fully funded but when you scrutinise, you realise those who are partially funded again come from the East and North.

By the way, when the Member mentioned that it is only Bunyoro and Acholi that are missing out on the courses for oil and gas, that was an understatement. All regions from the East including Bugisu - you can never find any course offered in these scholarship opportunities that is related to oil and gas. That is the marginalisation in those scholarship courses.

MR OGUZU: In summary, I would have wanted the scholarships to target the disadvantaged and vulnerable persons. That way, Government will be seen to be taking care of people who may not have the opportunities. Thank you.

6.39
MR BERNARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the minister for presenting this statement. I join colleagues in expressing discontent with the manner in which the education sector has been abused.

As we grew up, Makerere University was a national institution where you would find all ethnicities and regions represented and all studying on Government scholarships or sponsorships. It beats my understanding that as a country, we still treat education the way we are handling it. That is not right because education is where you train the manpower and empower your citizens to become productive people in whichever sector of the economy they can engage in to contribute to national development. Now, we have further degenerated into identifying and handpicking people for particular courses but disenfranchising others based on ethnicities and regions.

Madam Speaker, when you go into the details of this list, you find that these scholarships benefit the well-to-do; the well-connected and those in power. I have heard colleagues who associate with NRM lament. That means there are some people who are more connected in NRM than them.

Therefore, I would suggest that we revisit the education sector starting from primary school. One friend from Ireland told me that she feels disheartened to see that in Uganda, we are treating education as business, yet that is where the national cake should benefit each and every citizen; the same applies to universities.

Higher education should be given to the best brains in this country for free. That is important because we have children in public universities paying school fees but in the end, they join the service sector to serve the country. That is contributing to corruption in this country because some people operate on: “I want to recover what I invested quickly.”

However, if people were given opportunities on merit, they would serve this country with a heart. They would always recall that the country contributed to their being professionals and so, they should give to this country without expecting anything extra.

Therefore, my proposal is that we should make university education or education in higher institutions of learning compulsory and free for each and every citizen of this country. I thank you.

6.43
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker for the opportunity. I rise to add to what my Chairperson of the Committee on Education and Sports has said. I feel that the solution to this problem would be implementing the law. When you look at the law on students’ financing, we have all this stated very clearly.

Looking at all the anomalies that we are talking about, the scholarship committee has been in place for long and we see very many irregularities. During the Ninth Parliament, I had students from Kween who applied and they had Second Upper class degrees. They were doing very good courses in sciences but they were not taken. Therefore, there are issues with that board. 

I would like to implore the House that we demand that the Central Scholarship Committee be dissolved and it reverts to the financing board.

When you look at the loans board, at least they do something good enough. They give the names of all the students that apply and you see that every district that has students that applied is considered. Therefore, I implore the House that we demand that with immediate effect, this committee is dissolved and the scholarships go to the other board.

Madam Speaker, I was looking through the list and realised that most of our districts, especially those from the eastern where I come from like Kween, are not included. However, I have students who come from Bukwo, Kapchorwa and Sironko. 

As I was looking at the list - I do not know whether it is by coincidence or it is planned - some names are even repeated. Under Algeria, when you look at number 80, 83, 103 and 110, there are two students who are repeated. I do not know whether it is by coincidence. When I look at Sironko, you have Elisa Kabili under 46 and again under 137. I do not know whether you are hiding some names. 

Lastly, I would like to – (Member timed out.)

The Speaker: There is also someone called Turyamye who appears twice under Egypt. The entire list of Egypt is repeated. 

6.46
Mr silas aogon (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, allow me to join colleagues in first of all lamenting then later on proposing what I suggest should be done. 

First, when you fail at the level of education, even when it comes to employment, the same thing will happen. After failing in employment, the standard of living will follow suit. Life expectancy will go down and it is most likely that you will go to hell and not heaven, which is a disaster.

I think it is very good for us to hear that a Ugandan has been sponsored for a course abroad. It is our pride for any of our citizens to get a scholarship. However, I think it is high time that this Parliament constituted a select committee to look deeper into these scholarship issues. The committee should investigate properly and come up with recommendations so that we take proper action.

It is very pertinent for us to amend the Education Act so that we make it stringent and difficult for people who are doing bad things to execute those bad missions.

I also think it is high time, even before we talk of amending the laws, that we developed a national scholarship register so that when a district has got a scholarship, we should be able to tick it off. When Masaka gets today, we tick and say, “that one has benefited already.” When Mubende and Mukono get, we tick them off. For Kumi, we have ticked only once for the last five years. We shall also be able to know that Amuru has never benefitted. 

We the accountants rely on trend analysis. How do we do the analysis? We need figures. Next time, the ministry should be able to give us percentages so that we get to know that the highest percentage went to this district and the lowest percentage to that district. We should know how we are moving. 

Otherwise, I think the new minister is coming with a big spirit; you are doing a good job. Within a short time, you have been able to supply a report. Whatever happens, you have done it. You have brought a report; you have started on a good note.

I am on the good side of the nation. All we need is equity and balance. The eastern region is suffering. Specifically, Teso is economically seated down because of these kinds of education inequalities. I beg to submit.

6.49
Mr Michael mawanda (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his statement.

I would like the minister to borrow a leaf from the Master Card Foundation. They give a few scholarships but they are seen. We have many scholarships from Government but you cannot see them. Please, go and find out how the Master Card Foundation through Brac carries out their selection of students for scholarships. 

Secondly, two weeks ago, we talked about the curriculum. You have talked about the advertisements, which are run in newspapers that do not reach rural areas. They put them on the website but there is no power and they do not even have where to access the internet. For example, I see hon. Aza here who was vehemently supporting the curriculum. 

The National Curriculum Development Centre has put on its website that schools should go and download the Learners’ Guide. The guide is supposed to guide students on what they are going to study. Without a Learners’ Guide, you cannot study with this new curriculum. How do you expect a school from my constituency, which has never had power, where there is no network for any telephone and where there is no computer – 

There are schools there. Before this problem came, the schools were running but they did not have anything.

Yesterday, surprisingly, I found the Permanent Secretary in the committee lamenting. He was actually crying, “You people help me, I do not have books and teachers.” These are the people who said they were ready and had everything. He was crying before our Chairperson of the Committee on Budget. You can ask him.

The problem we are talking about of scholarships is like this. 20 years to come, Members who will be here will be talking about the effects of the new curriculum. I believe you have schools in your constituency, which do not have power. How are they going to access the Learners’ Guide? 

This is a matter that we still need to continue looking at, if we are going to assist our children in the rural areas. It is not something we should just cover away as if everything is okay. In the actual sense, things are not. Thank you.

6.52
Mr hood katuramu (Independent, PWD, Western): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity you have given me to make a comment about scholarships. 

Securing scholarships is not easy but as the minister has rightly said, scholarships are secured from many sources. However, I am confining myself to scholarships through our good bilateral relations in countries that offer us scholarships. 

Madam Speaker, our ambassadors in our missions abroad do this work but it is unfortunate that in some countries, we have been offered scholarships and we do not take them up. 

I implore the Minister of Education and Sports to investigate this matter. Why have some scholarships been offered to Ugandans and they are not received by our Central Scholarship Committee? This is a reality and we know that we have many youths in Uganda, who need to go and exploit those opportunities to study. 

Madam Speaker, I know that you are aware that in some countries, they have even reduced the number of allocations given to Uganda because we found that we did not utilise them in the previous years. This is a matter of concern and I think the Ministry of Education and Sports should take keen interest to ensure that we honour all these allocations that have been given to –(Interruption) 

MR OGUZU: Would you help the ministry with information on which countries have offered scholarships and they were rejected so that it can follow this up from an informed point of view? 

MR KATURAMU: Madam Speaker, as the Chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, I will present that information to the minister at an appropriate time; countries that have offered us scholarships and they have not been taken up. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I think the minister needs to streamline the allocation of scholarships, as a supervisor of the Central Scholarship Committee. The complaints and concerns that have been raised on the Floor of the House are matters of importance to the country.

We have had cynical and tribal sentiments on the Floor of the House. This is not a matter that we should take lightly. The Ministry of Education and Sports and the Central scholarship Committee should take the concerns of members of Parliament to ensure that we streamline the award of scholarships in this country in order to rescue the situation, before it goes out of hand. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I invite hon. Kiiza to speak, this week, we had an Appointments Committee meeting and I met one of the very senior officers in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. They laid the blame squarely on the Ministry of Education and Sports. They said they received and sent scholarships to the Ministry of Education and Sports but after that, they do not know what happened.  We need answers. 

6.57
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for giving us this information. At least, it is information that we did not have. Now that we have it, we can be able to debate and plan.

Hon. Mukitale, for a long time, has been talking about the national dialogue. I had not grasped the magnitude of the matter until now. You hear people debating and talking about recruitment of people in key sectors and these people coming from specific regions. Then, you see scholarships being awarded to specific people from specific areas. I feel the country has a problem that needs national dialogue. 

A motion was moved here and I supported it. I was one of those who seconded the motion talking about giving affirmative action to Busoga Region. I knew that the Government of Uganda may not have a specific budget set aside for Busoga sub region. However, in my own thinking, I thought that whenever opportunities arise, then, this motion would be actualised and possibly some percentage that takes care of the affirmative action, in as far as that motion was concerned, would be dealt with. 

It is unfortunate that when we come at equipping the human resource of this country, we are not taking into consideration the affirmative nature of our areas; Northern Uganda, Busoga and Eastern Uganda. I am not forgetting the Rwenzori region. 

Madam Speaker, I do not know where this Central Scholarship Committee derives its mandate; the one that is giving out scholarships. Where does it derive its mandate? I would like to know that, honourable minister. 

I would also like to know where these students go after they have got the benefit of the scholarship. When you hear hon. Mawanda talk about the Master Card Foundation, you will notice that it follows the students. Every holiday, they have trainings for their students to bring them up to date. 

I was surprised that even during the senior six holidays –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude. 

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, during the senior six holidays, they had a seminar for their candidates who were on holiday. They made sure that they took them to specific organisations to go and give back to the community. They equip them with skills. 

Honourable minister, I would like to know; after you have awarded scholarships, do you follow up these students and find out whether they have put to proper use the scholarships they were awarded? 

I would even be happy, assuming that these scholarships were awarded on an equal basis, that when they come back, we do not waste our money; that they are again placed in positions where they can serve the country and therefore, they start contributing to the welfare of other people. 

It would be –(Member timed out.) 

7.01
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also appreciate the minister for the statement. 

Looking at the minister’s list, I am aware that there are many Ugandans who are studying on scholarship in some countries that are not reflected on that list. For example, I know there are Ugandans on scholarship in Sudan, Saudi Arabia, Indonesia and Pakistan. 

Unfortunately, the list does not capture them. I have evidence because I have been to all these countries that I am talking about and I have met these students. I would like to find out whether the omission is inadvertent.   

The minister should clarify why the Ministry of Education and Sports continues to use the services of the Central Scholarship Committee, when Section 42 of the Higher Education Students’ Financing Act is very clear that functions of the Central Scholarship Committee are supposed to have ceased upon the enactment of that law. 

Aren’t you perpetuating an illegality? Won’t you be challenged in future if you continue utilising that committee and yet, the law requires you to use the Higher Education Students’ Financing Board? Why is it being side-lined? When are you issuing a statutory instrument in the gazette to formally cease the functions of the Central Scholarship Committee? I think it would be important that you clarify that.

Finally, Madam Speaker, it is important for the Minister to clearly address the issue of imbalance. The information you gave creates an impression that all is well in the process of awarding scholarships. However, we all know there are fundamental problems.

Therefore, it would only be better that the impression created is one of equity. Thank you.

7.04
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me start with what hon. Basalirwa was talking about. In the minister’s report, he has listed the countries where we get scholarships. However, when you look at the table, there are only six countries mentioned. Where is the list for the scholarships for other countries because you have only mentioned Algeria, Cuba, Egypt, India, China and UK in this list because each sheet has a heading of a country? What happened to the list of other countries like New Zealand, Mauritius and Malaysia?

I feel that this list is incomplete. As you have heard, Members talk here about other countries that offer scholarships.

The minister should be able to bring to us a complete list for each country and give category and country per country because there are over 20 countries that offer Uganda scholarships. However, I pity him. I do not know why the senior Minister for Higher Education who has been here longer, when these things were taking place, did not come himself to read this now they bring a fresh minister to carry the burden of those who performed-

Madam Speaker, we thought we would also see a list for scholarships for oil and gas. I do not see it here. Where is that list? It is also surprising; those who were in the university at that time, we all know about Jinja, Iganga and Kamuli  - when you look at this list, how come that those mother districts, there is no one coming from Kamuli on this list? It is a big district; why isn’t it there?

Madam Speaker, it is very easy for us who come from the vowel letters to know our names. The issue was raised here about Wakiso. When I look at this list, I do not see anyone with letter “O” in Wakiso because that was a blanket arrangement to say your children- because I would be able to look at letter “O” –(Interjections)- may be Otafiire. (Laughter) 

We should not be emotional when these matters are raised. If on the list about Wakiso, we found 20 or 50 per cent with those names, then we would say so because I think this is based on the district of origin.

Madam Speaker, what is the work of the Equal Opportunities Commission? Those are some of the things this commission should be looking at to see the balance.

Honourable colleagues, it is going to be very dangerous in future in this country. Today, we have many security firms in Uganda. However, go and look at who is employed in these firms. You just do not have to use any language. Just say “kopango”, you know where they come from.

Do you know the risk that poses? This is because of the low and poor education in those regions. Do you know the risk it poses to this country if those boys are mobilised tomorrow? This country would be in problems. Kampala would be in problems. They can even overthrow the Government but they do not know that risk. It is easy for them to be mobilised.

All this is because of lack of opportunities. It is a disaster waiting to happen. This must be an eye opener to those who are responsible for this.

Look at this total; they are 337 scholarships but you look at the names with letter “O” or “A” the vowel letters. They contribute less than 10 per cent. That shows you because that goes all the way from Tororo up to West Nile and Bunyoro. They are less than 20 per cent. Madam Speaker, let those who have ears hear.
7.09
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join others to respond to my very own brother, the minister.

If you realise, in this country, studies were done and they found out that in Uganda, for those who have millet in their diet, it forms one of the core competences in pituitary gland growth.

If you move across Africa, it is true that if you take millet in your diet, your ability in terms of intelligence increases very highly.

Madam Speaker, Intelligence Quotient (IQ) is measured against mental age and chronological age. In Uganda, the level of IQ of our children is very high. However, the challenge is about policy. How do you make sure that the children, who are very intelligent, have enough education to serve society?

That is why at independence, Uganda provided the best human resource to take on the independent Uganda of 1962. That explains that in 1958, when the Democratic Party sent 350 Ugandans on scholarships across board and denomination, they were preparing Uganda for independence. They came and began to construct this country.
However, it is very sad, Madam Speaker, to find that at present, the human resource constituency is much skewed. When you look at the scholarships that are now being given, the statistics are very worrying. I sit on the Committee on Foreign Affairs and it is very sad that when we receive information in the committee that the Central Scholarship Committee, which I call defunct because by law it does not exist, these committee members should just be arrested. They have been committing crimes since 2014 to-date and they have been allocating all these illegally.

I just request and pray that the Committee on Education and Sports follows this matter very seriously because it not a simple matter.

Madam Speaker, I need to emphasise that Minister of Foreign Affairs together with Ministry of Education and Sports get for us proper statistics of all the scholarships that come to Uganda.

A short while ago, I walked out and found out that Belgium this year has awarded 100 scholarships to Ugandans but nobody has taken them; even Netherlands. How do we profile these processes so that they can reach all districts in Uganda so that everybody can be given the opportunity to apply and get. As Ugandans, we deserve all these. I believe it should be that the districts should be the minimum level of units where this should begin from – not from the Ministry of Education and Sports and Ministry of Foreign Affairs. As of now, I understand most of these scholarships that are being awarded by some of these countries are going on sale.

Honourable minister, you have a very big task. It is not simple and we need to take this very honestly and head-on. Ugandans are very bright.

7.13
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for providing us with this very important information. However, my point of concern is that such wonderful information should have been coming every year to Parliament. Supposing Parliament had not demanded for this, would it have come? It means there is a question mark there.

In future, therefore, this must continue. Parliament should always receive this information for the benefit of the beneficiaries. I also propose that there must be three channels of communicating this information to those who should benefit:
 
    1. Parliament is one source where parliamentarians from the various constituencies would be able to take this information to those who may need it. 
    2. The district councils should also be able to get this information from the ministry and they will be able to disseminate to the sub-counties. 
    3. The press. 

If all these resources are provided through these channels, it would benefit many students.

Second, is about the equitable distribution of these scholarships. When you look at Karamoja; having scanned through all these, there is only one Karamojong who has benefited for the last three years, from 2017, 2018 and 2019 from the nine districts of Karamoja. What does that imply? Does that mean that they are so dull that they cannot be able to compete? It is for this reason that we have mentioned this that we should be able to provide the opportunities for equitable distribution of this very important benefit for the country.

Like for the girl-child, I was happy when the minister said that the girl is automatically given some advantage. May I also request that Karamoja the land, which is known to be the least developed, be remembered so that they should be able to benefit from such kind of opportunities when they come? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: As I invite hon. Baba, honourable members, I do not know whether we cannot resolve at some stage that this information should be part of the policy statement every year so that we know where to look.

7.16
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Obua, who has hit the ground running very impressively. However, you have entered into fire. (Laughter) 

What has come out very clearly here is that education is an investment for our children; it should not be taken lightly. What has come out here is that these scholarships are equalisers for those who are not capable and therefore, there should be fairness and equity in it.

In this respect, I have two recommendations:

    1. The Central Scholarship Committee - You have told us that there are scholarships on offer in March, May and so forth. From now on, let this committee come out openly and say, “We are going to interview students for these scholarships in A, B, C and D places”; regionally throughout this country. We would like to see a demonstration of this, openly done like it used to happen in the past.

    2.  Honourable minister, is it possible for you to organise the alumni or the recipients of these scholarships who have studied abroad? We should gather them one time at a tea party and we see how they have come back and contributed to this country so that we are sure we have not supplied “air”. I am sure you are capable of organising that and this is my specific request to you and to the ministry to organise that. Thank you very much.

7.18
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to thank the minister, for this very important information that we have got today. What my colleague said was very important as far as eastern region is concerned, most especially Bukedi sub region. 

If we do not support education in that side of the country, we will not be able to have our people participate in many programmes that lead to development in this country in the near future. We have a school like Manjasi High School, which known as one of the giant science schools in the region. Today, Manjasi is limping and it has less than 60 students with the entire science infrastructure that this school used to be proud of. We need a lot of support.

Many have spoken here that we need to “balance the boat”. Honourable minister, this boat has to be balanced. Let us spread these opportunities across the country such that they can be felt and everyone sees the benefit of these scholarships. 

Of recent, we have seen very good progress from the Students Loan Schemes and they have tried to be balanced enough. I know they did not get enough resources; we tried to give them more money but they spread the opportunities across the districts of this country. 

I would like to suggest that this very scholarship scheme also be handed over to the Students Loan Scheme. Those people have exhibited a very credible way of spreading the few opportunities they have across the country. There, we will feel that every district is represented. For example, in Tororo District, I have seen three students who benefited from this scholarship scheme but my neighbour here, hon. Jacob Oboth took all of them. From Tororo County, I do not see anything. So, this would be the opportunity that would be good for all of us when we spread them down to the grassroot.

Madam Speaker, I also want to find out from the minister. Nowadays, students are not given the courses they desire to do. Those who get such scholarships, do they pursue the courses they desire to do or they are also just given courses like it happened many times in the universities? I was sharing – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House supports the poor people and children of Uganda. We tried hard to get additional money for the higher education standard scheme; we needed Shs 5 billion just to give to more children but we failed. I think we should not fail to try and equalise through this scheme.

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, I am moving on a procedural matter under Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure to put the House on notice for a motion with indulgence specifically 56(c) to waive off the three-day requirement so that I can compose the emotive debate from Members into a motion upon which they will vote and we move these matters properly. 

I am putting the House on notice that I will compose this into a motion on Tuesday, with your indulgence, lifting the three day requirement under Rule 56(c) so that I can come with a motion that will compose the submission of Members into a resolution upon which they will decide to enable us solve this matter properly. Otherwise, if we leave this debate without a proper resolution, it will be in vain. I so pray, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Notice of motion duly recorded in respect of this subject. The Member will be allowed to move his motion on Tuesday next week. 

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, Article 178 of the Constitution - the Seventh Parliament did a very good job. They did not only provide for regional Governments effective July; they also provided for equalisation and equal opportunities for areas that are lacking. 

I would like to request that instead of having these ministries of Teso, Bunyoro and then the Busoga affirmative failure, without budgets, I would like to request – 

THE SPEAKER: No, do a separate motion. Do not disturb the scholarship of the children. Please, do a separate motion. It is important but do it separately. 

MR MUKITALE: Most obliged. 

7.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Dennis Obua): Madam Speaker, as we wait for the motion on Tuesday, it is important for certain facts to be stated the way they are. 

The first is that not all scholarships in Uganda are awarded through the Ministry of Education and Sports. In my introduction, I stated that this Parliament directed two ministries, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Education and Sports - the opportunities, in terms of scholarships that I have presented are those under the Ministry of Education and Sports.

The scholarships on oil and gas are not under the Ministry of Education and Sports – for the record. (Interjections) I do not know. 

Secondly, I am also informed – because in my own right as a Member of Parliament, I should also state this. Subject to confirmation, Israel gives Uganda scholarships every year under agriculture, which is about 200 of them - from what I have heard. May be, that ministry will confirm.  Let me state that fact very clearly. 

Madam Speaker, you have brought on board certain aspects. For example, you talked about Serbia, which you visited in 2019. On page three of the statement, it is clearly stated that the scholarships offered by Serbia in 2019 were received by the Ministry of Education and Sports after the deadline. It is true, the offer could have been there but the communication reached the ministry after the deadline. 

The other issue is about the committee that interfaced with the high profile member of Ministry of Foreign Affairs indicating that they receive and send to the Ministry of Education and Sports. 

I would like to submit that there could be some aspects of dishonesty. (Interjections) He is raising issues with offers from Belgium, which are not under Ministry of Education and Sports. And where do we receive it from? It is under the foreign policy, through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 

This Parliament is raising 100 scholarships from Netherlands. It is not stated here and it is not one of those if we do not receive from them. These are the opportunities under the Ministry of Education and Sports. 

Madam Speaker, you raised the issue of why the advert is only circulated in newspapers and notice boards yet, there is also a constituency called Parliament. (Interruption) 

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I would like to seek clarification. When you disown some scholarship opportunities here, how do we bring everything to do with education under the docket of education? What would you suggest? 

I ask this because if it is a scholarship, whether from Germany or Pallisa or wherever, it is under the docket of education. We cannot have scholarships spread all over ministries. What do you think we can do to have all these scholarships under your control so that you are fully accountable as a sector of education, so that we can work together as a committee and as Parliament? Thank you. 

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, I think that will be best answered on Tuesday but my answer is: we need a policy and a law to give full mandate of all scholarship opportunities to one ministry. 

A question was asked on the composition of the Central Scholarship Committee. It would be important to provide this information. The Central Scholarship Committee comprises of the following in terms of members:

    1. A representative of the Ministry of Public Service;
    2. A representative of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs;
    3. A representative of the civil society;
    4. A representative of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development;
    5. A representative of Makerere University, representing public universities;
    6. A representative of the Ministry of Education and Sports;
    7. A representative of local Government representing districts
    8. A representative of secondary schools;
    9. A representative of the private sector; and
    10. A representative of the awarding country or embassy. 

In terms of the current membership, the chair of the Central Scholarship Committee is Ms Theresa Obbo, who represents secondary schools. 

The members are:

    1. Mr Michael Aboki Karugaba – Ministry of Foreign Affairs;
    2. Mr Stephen Kateega – Public Universities;
    3. Mr Charles Musoke – Local Government Association;
    4. Ms Jolly Uzamukunda – Ministry of Education and Sports;
    5. Mr Augustine Oyang Atubo – Civil society; and
    6. Mr Mark Sseremba – Ministry of Public Service.

The position for the representative of Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development under the current committee is vacant. The position of representative for private sector is vacant and normally, the representatives for embassies of the awarding countries differ, depending on which country the committee is sitting to consider. 

I thought it wise that I should respond to this issue. 

On the law, Madam Speaker, it appears that there is incompatibility. Whereas the chairperson of the committee quotes Section 42 of the Higher Education Students Financing Act, 2014, the current members of the Central Scholarship Committee, apparently, are still using the Education Act, 2008 and they specifically quote section 3(1). 

We must reconcile these and see whether the current Central Scholarship Committee is properly constituted under the laws applicable in Uganda. (Interjections) Exactly but the chairperson has stated here that for the last six years – I have not yet even spent 100 days in the ministry – the ministry has not reconciled that.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I am going to take up the issue of the law and raise it in the top management meeting of the ministry so that we reconcile. If the current membership is not fully constituted under the laws of Uganda –(Interjections)– I know but they are in existence and we cannot run away from that fact. Whether they are in existence legally or not is something that we must reconcile and either they continue or we tell them, “You are in office illegally.” That is as far as the membership of the committee is concerned.

In terms of repetition of one or two names, I take responsibility, on behalf of the ministry. However, when you sum it up, together with what we have provided country-by-country, it matches when you take out the names that are repeated on the list.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my former boss, hon. Baba. For the record, hon. Baba was my boss. He was a minister in the Office of the Vice-President when I was staff there. I would like to thank you for grooming and mentoring me and for telling me, it is fire. I loved the baptism of fire. However, I feel that in terms of the four questions that Parliament demanded from the ministry, we have provided information.

Madam Speaker, if Parliament could prompt the ministry on the issue of scholarships through the Central Scholarship Committee to always inform Parliament, through the Office of the Speaker and Office of the Clerk so that members of Parliament are informed directly of the available opportunities and they are in a position to contact their respective constituencies to respond to calls for award of scholarships, that would be the fourth line after the website, noticeboard and newspapers.

It is two-way traffic. If Parliament could write to the ministry to keep them posted on every available opportunity and in turn, your office or that of the Clerk could inform Members and we have Ugandans from across the board responding.
	
On the issue of affirmative action, I stated in the statement that for now, the Central Scholarship Committee only considers female applicants and they are given one point. In terms of regions, maybe the law, guideline or policy should be able to guide the process once it is put in place.

Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: I just want to draw your attention to Section 42 of the Higher Education Students Financing Act, 2014. Under the headnote “management of existing scholarships” it provides as follows:

"(1)	All scholarships currently offered by the Government of Uganda, including bilateral scholarships, existing immediately before the commencement of this Act shall vest in the board – the Higher Education Financing Scheme Board. 

(2)	The Central Scholarship Committee of the Ministry of Education and Sports, existing immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall cease to exist on such a date as the minister may by statutory instrument publish in the gazette.” 

It is the minister who has not published it. The minister was supposed to publish the cessation of the Central Scholarship Committee in the gazette.

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, I stated with all honesty that we need to reconcile the two laws. To me, this provision of Section 42 takes precedence over Section 3(1) of the Education Act that the current Central Scholarship Committee seems to lean on. That is what we need to reconcile and see what the law is saying; as it is and not as it ought to be or as we wish it to be.

THE SPEAKER: The law is clear. The minister ought to have issued an instrument as soon as the law came into force. Just move them to do the needful.

Honourable members, we have done quite a bit of work but there is one thing I would like us to do for our communities. Can we quickly do the laying of papers?

LAYING OF ADDENDUM TO SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 2 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

7.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay an addendum to Supplementary Schedule No.2 for Financial Year 2019/2020.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the relevant committee.

LAYING OF THE PROPOSAL TO BORROW UP T0 €10.0 MILLION FROM THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF ITALY TO FINANCE THE KARAMOJA INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT – PHASE II PROJECT UNDER THE HEALTH SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN (HSDP)

7.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, as promised on Tuesday, we beg to lay a proposal to borrow up to €10 million from the Government of the Republic of Italy to finance the Karamoja Infrastructure Development – Phase II Project under the Health Sector Development Plan.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a procedural issue to raise on the papers that have been laid. One, on 5 November, I presented a matter of national importance here and you directed that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Local Government should consider payment of ex gratia to the 49 councillors of Mitooma District. The paper that the minister has presented has ex gratia payments for local governments and Mitooma is missing on the schedule.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have not seen what is contained. We have sent it to the committee. Follow them in the committee, please.

MR TAYEBWA: The second issue, Madam Speaker, is on the loan that he has just laid. You have heard what Members have raised; we should be borrowing money that is urgent and necessary to answer issues in this country. 

Madam Speaker, the loan that he has just presented is for roads. You have constituted a committee to look at matters of economic nature in this country. I would like to, therefore, propose that this matter should wait for the resolution of the committee that you have just constituted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, have you read where this loan is going? It is about Karamoja. Let the committee tell us. You can go and speak against it in the committee but it should first go to the committee.

Honourable members, thank you very much. We have done quite a bit of work. House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. Thank you.

(The House rose at 7.42 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 24 March 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)

