

Thursday, 18 March 2021

Parliament met at 2.25 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. 

This morning, we woke up to the shocking news of the untimely demise of His Excellency John Pombe Joseph Magufuli, the President of the United Republic of Tanzania, which occurred yesterday evening at a hospital in Dar es Salaam. His Excellency John Pombe Joseph Magufuli was the fifth President of the United Republic of Tanzania. He was in office between 2015 and 2020. Until his death, he was serving a second term as head of state, having won the presidential elections held on 28 October 2020 on the ticket of the Chama Cha Mapinduzi party.

On behalf of the Parliament of Uganda and on my own behalf, I extend our heartfelt condolences to the family, Mrs Magufuli and her children, the Government and the people of the United Republic of Tanzania, and the entire East African Community upon this loss.

We shall await communication from the Leader of Government Business to know the appropriate time when a motion can be tabled in this House in his honour. He was one of our heads of state of the East African Community Heads of State Summit and a leader in Africa. 

During this period of transition, we trust that the political leadership and all the organs of state of the United Republic of Tanzania will work together to ensure a smooth transfer of leadership for peace and stability, which has been a major feature of the Government of Tanzania and enjoyed by the nation. 

We pray that the Almighty God grants his soul eternal rest. I invite members to rise for a moment of silence in honour of the late, His Excellency John Pombe Joseph Magufuli, the President of the United Republic of Tanzania.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: There were a few matters of national interest.

2.30
DR MICHAEL BUKENYA (NRM, Bukuya County, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter I have to talk about concerns how unfortunate or fortunate the people of Bukuya County are for being in an area that has the largest gold deposits in the country.

Three years ago, there was an eviction of artisanal miners from Lujinji mining site located in Bukuya without adequate preparation and people lost a lot of income and assets. However, now there is a pending eviction of about 30,000 Ugandans in Kisiita mining site located in Kisiita Parish, Mbirizi Sub County, Bukuya County, Kassanda District.

These artisanal miners are organised in three groups but are being evicted in favour of a Turkish owned company, Kisiita Mining Company, sometimes referred to as Horizon Mining Company.

In the President’s guidance, he advised the ministry and the police to first see how to relocate these miners comfortably. Also, in view of the high unemployment rate in the country and the COVID economy, I pray that the three organised groups of artisanal miners that constitute the 30,000 Ugandans are first relocated to another mineral-rich area within the region. Since Kisiita has an eight-square-mile lease, they can give one square mile to artisans and locals to develop the area, and we could be assisted by Operation Wealth Creation.

However, there are issues with this company; when it goes to the President, it is Horizon Mining Company but in the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, it is Kisiita Mining Company. There are allegations that the majority shareholder, a one Mustafa, is being looked for by the Turkish Government and he does not appear in Uganda. He just communicates using email and other means, and he could cause diplomatic mishaps between Uganda and Turkey.

I request that the eviction is halted or delayed up to when comfortable resettlement of Ugandans is dealt with and also the concerned parliamentary committee investigates Mr Mustafa, Horizon Mining Company and Kisiita Mining Company in order for us to settle well. Those are my prayers.

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I do not see the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development. It is a pity that citizens of this country are perpetually under threat of eviction from resource rich areas. We have just settled a battle in Buhweju, now we are in Kisiita.

I ask the ministers in charge of energy and minerals to come and respond today, before we close business this afternoon. In the meantime, I think it is only proper that people who are being relocated should first get where to go before they are violently ejected.

We still have reports from the last eviction where people were left with nothing to start their lives, nowhere to live, graves dismantled. I appeal to the Government to ensure that no eviction takes place until the artisanal miners have been given an alternative. However, let me invite the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to come before we close business today and address us on that issue; it is urgent.

MR TIMUZIGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a point of procedure, concerning Rule 30(7) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, in May 2019, you directed the Minister of Works and Transport to handle the petition of the people who were supposed to be compensated for their land in Kagarama Town Council in 2001. However, up to now, they have never been compensated.

The minister has not been available in the House. I chose to raise this point of procedure after seeing him in the House today. According to Rule 30(7), the minister would have reported back in two weeks.

Madam Speaker, I request that you prevail over this situation to help my people in Kagarama Town Council get a clear response from the minister.

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Fortunately, the minister is here today. Perhaps he could make an undertaking. I do not know whether he is in position to respond to the project-affected people in Kagarama Town Council.

2.37
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think I am one of the most common ministers in the House. (Laughter) Having said that, I promise that on Tuesday next week, I will bring the details because we already have a report and I had shared its blind copy with the honourable member. 

If he did not get it, my apologies; but we will bring the report on Tuesday and lay it on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, minister. The Clerk will reflect that on the Order Paper.

2.37
MR JAMES KABERUKA: (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu) Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of public importance, in relation to the failure by the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to table regulations in the House to operationalise the Uganda Wildlife Authority Act that was passed by this House and assented to by the President in October 2019.

Madam Speaker, it is now one and a half years since the President assented to this law. This laxity by the minister has left the people in my constituency who share a neighbour with Queen Elizabeth National Park and Bwindi Impenetrable Forest to suffer because the human-wildlife conflict there has impacted negatively on the people surrounding those areas.

I pray that the minister responds as to when the regulations are going to be presented in this House. I also want to know how we are going to handle the people who have made losses from when the President assented to this law, to when the regulations will be made available. Are they going to set up a committee to assess their losses? What are they going to do for them?

Madam Speaker, this kind of inefficiency is – how can Parliament pass a law and it is assented to by the President but one and a half years down the road, this is not acted upon –(Interruption)

MR CENTENARY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Actually, when we were processing the Uganda Wildlife Authority Bill, which is now a law, we had been faced by a crisis of wildlife invading and destroying people’s crops and property. In that law, we put a provision for wildlife committees to be constituted at various levels, starting from village to parish up to national level, for those park-neighbouring communities.

It is very worrying that even when we expeditiously processed that Bill into law and even when it was assented to, the ministry has become so relaxed not only to prepare the guidelines but also to constitute the wildlife committees for it to be operational.

Some of our citizens are being killed by wildlife and there is no compensation, even when the law is in place. Others have had their farms destroyed but with no compensation. 

Madam Speaker, I think we should put our heads together and implore the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to come and explain to this House why, even when the law is in place, he is not giving us an environment where people can be compensated. I beg to move.

MR KABERUKA: Madam Speaker, the people of Kihiihi, Nyanga, Nyamirama, Kayonza and Mpungu subcounties are suffering because of the inefficiency in that ministry. 

I would request, Madam Speaker, that you strongly prevail over these ministers - they are two in that ministry - I do not know what is happening - to come and give us a solution to the problems faced by these Ugandans who are suffering.

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of the conflict between the population and wildlife was very prevalent. That is why there was pressure to enact those laws. This House did its duty and enacted the laws. 

Therefore, the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities should come on Tuesday and explain to us the status of the enabling legislation, which was supposed to have been put into effect; this is urgent.

2.42
MR CHARLES GUTOMOI (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I am rising –

THE SPEAKER: Didn’t you ask this already?

MR GUTOMOI: I asked it and received a document, in response to that road but it is not signed. I do not know who –

THE SPEAKER: No, no, no! If there is a response, then wait for the minister to speak.

MR GUTOMOI: That is what I wanted to inform you about.

THE SPEAKER: No! This was already done.

MR GUTOMOI: Okay. Thank you. I will wait for the minister.

THE SPEAKER: Yesterday, Hon. Makmot raised an issue and the minister said she was ready to respond. It was about the destruction of forests in Adilang Subcounty. Yes, honourable minister.

2.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this golden opportunity to respond to this matter.

Madam Speaker, allow me to condole with the people of Tanzania on the loss of their leader and a leader in the region. 

Madam Speaker, you have always sat here and spoken with your masks on but some Members of Parliament sit here without masks yet we keep talking and probably endangering each other. 

I would like to take this opportunity to call upon Parliament to act as an example so we can save lives not only in Parliament here but also in our surroundings.

Back to my presentation, Madam Speaker, yesterday when hon. Makmot raised this issue, I was following the debate. If our zoom had been on, probably, I would have phoned in because we already had the response to that. 

However, for the record, allow me to inform this House that the issue, which was raised by hon. Makmot was about the destruction of the environment and as the Government, we thought that it was very urgent and I had to come and respond today. This was raised yesterday and today we are giving the response.

In the last two months, my ministry, backed by the Environment Protection Police Unit, has been carrying out operations in the districts of East Acholi to address the issue of rampant tree cutting. The operations were carried out in the districts of Agago, Lamwo and Pader to curb the rampant tree cutting in the region for charcoal burning and timber. 

Madam Speaker, a big number of people, especially from Bugisu, Buganda and Busoga regions have invaded the region to cut down trees for charcoal burning and timber. These people usually buy big chunks of woodland from landowners, disguising under the idea of clearing land for agriculture, yet, the main reason is charcoal burning. 

The land owners rent out the land for money on a willing seller-willing buyer basis and the charcoal dealers use it for a specified period of time and normally, with signed agreements, witnessed by the various local leaders. This has resulted in indiscriminate cutting of trees, including endangered and threatened species notably Afzelia Africana and Shea tree.

In Pader District, we have conducted operations in Latanya sub-county where two people were arrested and detained at Pader Central Police Station for cutting down Shea trees with chain power saws for timber. They were later charged in Pader Magistrate Court for cutting down protected species contrary to the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003 and they are now on remand. 

In Agago District, we have so far flushed out charcoal burners in Agengo sub-county and Adilang Town Council, where a total of 11 suspects were arrested and charged in Patongo Magistrate Court and remanded. 

We even extended to Lamwo District, where the operations were conducted in Palabek, Ogili and Lokung subcounties where a total of 21 suspects were arrested. You could have seen in the press that a senior police officer, ASP Julius Mpande, the officer in charge of operations at Kitgum Central Police Station, was arrested with a full lorry-load of timber. All these suspects, including the police officer, were charged in Kitgum and Lamwo magistrate courts.

Madam Speaker, the rampant and indiscriminate cutting of trees on private land in the country is the main reason for loss of forest cover. My ministry has identified the clearing of land for agricultural expansion and for fuel wood as the main drivers to this. The ministry and its agencies, in collaboration with the district local governments, have designed the following measures to curb the vice:
 
    1) We have urged the district local governments to enact bye-laws to stop the cutting of trees for commercial charcoal burning and to identify alternative revenue sources other than licensing charcoal burning. The district local governments have included the licensing of charcoal trade as one of their local revenue sources because of the dwindling local revenue base. 

    2) We have intensified community sensitisation and awareness programmes in the affected districts, including Agago and across the country to garner support for protection of the remaining natural and woodland forests. 

    3) Sustaining arrests and prosecution of offenders to deter them from continuing with this practice and sounding a warning for others.

Madam Speaker, there is need to amend the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003 to strengthen the protection of forests and trees in this country. The previous forestry law had vested ownership of trees in Government and usage of trees, even on one’s own land, was done upon getting authorisation from forestry officers. The laws should also be made deterrent if we are to protect the environment in this climate change era.

Concerted efforts should also be made towards poverty alleviation and provision of alternative livelihood sources to members of the community who are relying on natural resources for survival. As the Government, we are looking into this to ensure that there is a cheap alternative source of energy and to continue sensitising Ugandans to change their mindset from thinking that forest areas are free areas for livelihood.

We are also in talks and collaboration with the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to effect some of these. We are looking at how the carbon market can be expanded to enable those who plant trees. The issue we are projecting is that we want people to grow trees. 

This is very important because if we all grew trees, we would own them. You cannot grow your child and kill it. However, because we plant – people are given free seedlings and they just go and dump it there and no one wants to know whether it is hit by fire or drought. Therefore, we are changing the mindset from people planting trees to people growing trees in Uganda. 

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much for your timely response. (Members rose_)  Hon. Makmot is not here. He is the one to raise a supplementary.

MR SSENYONGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural matter I am raising is that I am one of the concerned Ugandans and I can see the Minister of Education and Sports present in the House. We have heard that two students were shot dead in Gulu and the minister has other issues, which have not yet been responded to in this House. He promised to do it today and he is present here. As serious Ugandans, we would like to know the circumstance under which the two students were shot dead in Gulu. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: For your information, the Minister of Education and Sports was here yesterday and responded to all the questions that were on the Order Paper. You have brought something new. It is important but let us finish with the issue of the environment first.

2.54
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am up on the issue of Gulu Municipal Council and the four division councils. 

Since July last year, councillors have been ignored whenever they try to visit the clerk’s office. They have not even been served with letters, yet these councillors have contracts with people for five years. Their term will end in May this year. I do not know whether it is only happening in Gulu City – how different is it? Is it the Minister of Local Government –(Interruption)

MAJ (rTD) guma: Madam Speaker, hon. Beatrice Anywar, the Minister of State for Environment, has made very serious remarks here and some of us want to make some rejoinder statements. I thought the Leader of the Opposition was responding to that but she is completely moving off tangent. Is she in order not to listen to the Speaker’s guidance?

The Speaker: Honourable members, I would like us to close the issue of environment. Hon. Makmot was due to ask a supplementary question but he is not here. Is there anyone who wants to ask a question on environment?

2.56
Mr Geoffrey macho (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Yes, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of State for Environment, in her trademark name of Mama Mabira, for such a wonderful submission.

However, this country is on fire regarding the environment. Before I joined Parliament, I was a businessman in that area (Interjection)– I am not a smuggler, as my colleague is calling me; I am a cross-border trader. When I was still doing that business, I used to concentrate on the area of environment. I was shocked last week that the business of charcoal is now a racket –(Interruption)- up to Arua, Moyo and Adjumani.

What do they do? Kenya’s rich businessmen come and hire our people in Arua, Moyo and Lira because they have more trees. These people cut down the trees with the help of local governments to whom they pay very little money. They then go to Arua and the driver crosses with clearance documents to Congo and lies that the charcoal is for export; moreover, it has been burnt in Uganda.

They work together with some officers in Uganda Revenue Authority. The big trademark name is “Patrick”, on the border of Congo. We have a lot of trees being cut and this charcoal is taken to Kenya, yet the trees are cut from here.

Honourable minister, from reliable information, some of your officers deal with these people. They give them permits and help them so that they show that this charcoal has come from Congo. Therefore, I request that we should put our house of Ministry of Water and Environment right. The ministry should work together with Uganda Revenue Authority to curb this. Otherwise, as long as this racket goes on, we shall have a very big problem.

Secondly, Uganda Government should have an alternative source of energy. Every household in Kenya has gas. Here, every household has a charcoal sack, which is a very big problem. We are relying completely on trees, without which we cannot cook food in our homes. Therefore, I request that the minister brings up this idea so that we have gas as the alternative energy for this country, since it will save a lot of our trees. Honourable minister, also tell your people in northern Uganda to stop aiding the smuggling of charcoal to Kenya. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Honourable members, this issue of amendment of the National Forestry and Tree planting Act is something the Government is not serious about. The Act is over 15 years old.

Secondly, in the Eighth Parliament, hon. Ngabirano brought a private Member’s Bill but did not pursue it. In the next Parliament, hon. Katwiremu tried to follow it up but I think he lost it half way. The proposal is still with us. Since the Government is clearly not interested, can I invite the backbenchers to move on that issue quickly.

3.00
MAJ (rTD) david guma (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Madam Speaker, a lot of talk has been done about the environment and other issues, of course. I have been in this Parliament for a while. Increasingly, we are seeing deforestation year in, year out. When going to the eastern region of Uganda, Mabira Forest, from where hon. Anywar got the name, “Mama Mabira”, is along the road but there is no forest anymore to talk about when you go inside. 

Hon. Macho from Busia Municipality has just talked about Kenya. Kenya’s last budget lowered its duty on gas so that many people can use gas for domestic purposes such as cooking. Since democracy seems not to be working - I have heard hon. Anywar – can’t we implore alternative means? 

Madam Speaker, I am a military person and I know for sure that in 1981, there were many rebel groups that went to the bush but many did not succeed. It is the National Resistance Army, later Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF), which did. In that army, which I subsequently joined, there were extremely harsh methods of handling deviants. Arresting of the many people that hon. Anywar has talked about – they would, of course, get bail in this corrupt society of ours. Why can’t we implore the law of Moses - an eye for an eye? 

I am told that Budongo Forest, somewhere in Bunyoro, is also down. It is unfortunate that I am not coming in the next Parliament but I can challenge colleagues here that in 20 or 30 years’ time, for those of you who will be alive, this country will be in big problems as far as environmental issues are concerned. 

This democratic discussion and handling with kid gloves does not seem to be working. As far as the environment is concerned, the country is degenerating further. We need austerity measures to handle this issue.

The Speaker: Thank you. Honourable members, I have said that there is no will by the Government to handle this issue. On a number of occasions, I have talked about what Ethiopia did. They declared a decade of trees and they are planting 10 million trees per year. They now have 120 million new trees but here, we just talk.

3.04
MR EMMANUEL KALULE (NRM, Gomba East County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the proposal she has come up with, but we should also be sympathetic. People are not burning charcoal because they want it or are malicious; first of all, it is because they do not have sources of energy for domestic use. Secondly, that is their only source of income. So, they have nothing else to do.

Madam Speaker, at one time I was an RDC in Rukungiri. I noticed that in Rukungiri, there is a certain type of tree grown purely for charcoal. It does not take many years and the charcoal is of very high quality. 

I raised this issue in the Seventh Parliament, when I was a Member of Parliament then. I asked Government to take up this project of growing these trees so that they can suffice the business of charcoal burning. I do not know what happened but it seems like it was left there and nothing was done. This is the problem. You might find that with all these proposals that the minister is coming up with, the whole thing might end here and we might not hear of it again. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to request Government, especially the Ministry of Water and Environment, to go and make research on this species of trees that can be used for charcoal burning so that it can be grown everywhere. This will solve the problem of charcoal burning. I think making power available for the villages in Uganda may not be a solution in itself because electric power may not be affordable by our people. 

Much as we are trying to avoid charcoal, we might find that we have no way out. The solution is to have this tree planted everywhere so that charcoal is available. The people who are able can use power and gas but then the common people can still go ahead and use that charcoal. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: We are not going to make a decision on this matter but we are just talking. Minister, please conclude. 

3.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Environment) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues for your input and concern. I know that we are all passionate about the environment issues. We are aware of the racket of people conniving under many disguises and sending charcoal across the border; what Hon. Macho is trying to give as information.

It is unfortunate that we, Ugandans, are the ones aiding depletion of our own environment. That is why we need more sensitisation. We need to know that this country belongs to all of us. We need to also know that we should leave this country a better place for the future generation. If we do not take it personally, those are the connivances we have. People should have Uganda at heart. The arresting authorities are in place to do their work but you find that we are still talking about this misery. 

On response of alternative sources of energy, as Government, we recognise that gas – and I am sure many homes could be using gas now – is much cheaper and cleaner than using charcoal but we still need to go across and sensitise our people that use of gas, on which we have exempted taxes, is safe and cleaner, so that we can save some part of the concentration on –

On the issue of amending the Tree Act, as Government and my ministry, we have been following this very passionately. We would like to request you to give us a short time to table this in Parliament here. I have been looking at these Acts as a minister concerned and we want to see it pass to help us do our work. 

We still request that some of the Bills coming, like the one on climate change – please avail us the time so that we bring it for discussion in this House. We are ready to have it tabled here and have Members see it through to help us do our work. 

On the use of force that the honourable member talked about, you are aware that we have the environment police and the liaison officers from the UPDF. It was actually a concern from the Leader of the Opposition. She said, “How can people be sure and safe when we say we have the UPDF helping us to check these excesses?” If a Member of the House tells us that Government can use force, when the human rights have to be respected, I think one way we can respond to this is by saying that we are going to continue sensitisation of Ugandans to see the goodness of conserving the country, and the environment for the future generation. If we go out of our way and break the law, I think it will not help us.

Lastly, my colleague has alluded to the fact that people do not have alternative livelihood and that is why they resort to charcoal burning. I was here two weeks ago and I pleaded with colleagues in this House that we are all leaders. If we give the signal that our people cannot be directed to have a decent livelihood, other than destroying the environment and burning charcoal for survival, I think we are also part and parcel of the crime. 

It would be sad to hear that as leaders, we are encouraging our people to go ahead and defile our environment. It would be correct for us to give an alternative source of livelihood other than the charcoal. That is why we have people being told to go to the forests because they do not have anywhere else to go. That is not right. 

I think, as a country and as leaders, we need to guide our people to live a decent life other than destroying – by the way, it is even clean and decent when you survive – 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude. 

MS ANYWAR: By the way, it is even clean and decent when you survive in an environment like the wetlands. Other than depleting them (wetlands), we are trying to put fish ponds or beehives for them to survive within the wetlands without destroying them.

We have the collaborative management with the NFA and the public; those who want to plant and manage the activities in the forests, without necessarily cutting down the trees. That is a source of livelihood without necessarily burning the charcoal. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity that you have given me. I would like to end by assuring you that the issue of Mabira Forest, which people say is being destroyed, I would like to be on record that Mabira Forest is not being destroyed. What people – 

THE SPEAKER: No, Minister, you will find another day for that debate. 

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, what people do not know, including my colleagues in this House, is that Mabira Forest has indigenous owners. The President has actually directed that we get funds, go and discuss with those people that have ownership within the forest. This would facilitate them to go away, so that we can completely seal it off. That is a programme that we are undertaking. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I hope that next time when you come, you will come with a programme for the National Tree Planting Day. It is now a rainy season but you are doing nothing about planting trees.
 
Let us go to the next item.

MS BETTY AOL: Madam Speaker, I would like to tell hon. Guma -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, go to your issue.

3.14
THE LEADER OF OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): My issue is about the Municipal Council and the Divisional Councils of Gulu - those are five councils. They have been left like that since July of last year. The technical people have failed to answer them because they refuse to recognise them. 

These people had their contracts for five years but they are complaining and I think their complaint is right. I do not know about other cities but with Gulu City, immediately it became a city, they ignored those other people. 

Gulu City should have considered taking onboard the councillors though it is not yet fully operational. They are using the funds that go to Gulu Municipality. 

Why is it that these technical people who keep saying that they got information from Parliament - I was not there on that day - and the ministry has not given them anything in writing - why should we just push our people like that? We would like the minister to come clear on this and compensate these councillors. Let them finish their work up to the end of their term.

The ministry should explain the anomalies in the municipal council and the divisional councils. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Local Government should come and explain to the country, especially the cities, on how the councillors are going to be facilitated since they do not have a budget. They are still on the budget of the municipality. If you could come back by the end of next week. Let us go to item No.3.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REQUEST TO BORROW FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP

3.17
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am standing here on behalf of the Minister of Finance, who has requested me to lay before this august Parliament a request to borrow from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group: 

    i) Up to Special Drawing Rights (SDR) 9.2 million (Equivalent to $12.5 million) to Finance the Uganda COVID-19 Response and Emergency Preparedness Project; 

    ii) Up to Special Drawing Rights 10.7 Million (Equivalent to $15 Million) Additional Financing for Uganda Reproductive, Maternal and Child Health Services Improvement Project.

I beg to lay.
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I send that to the Committee on National Economy but I also caution Government to take into account the remaining time for the Fifth Session of this Parliament. Do we really have time to do all those things? Let us go to item four.

RESPONSES BY MINISTERS

    I. ON THE DEPLORABLE STATE OF MATUGGA-SEMUTO-KAPEEKA ROAD AND THE UNFULFILLED PRESIDENTIAL PLEDGE FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE NDEJJE-KALASA ROAD

3.19
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a number of responses to make, some of which were made back in 2020 but all the same, since they appear on the Order Paper, I will respond to them.

The first is a statement to Parliament in response to a question raised on the status of Matugga-Semuto-Kapeeka and Ndejje-Kalasa roads. 

Madam Speaker, at the 10th Sitting of the Third Meeting of the Fifth Session of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda, held on Tuesday 24 February 2021, hon. Ssembatya Edward Ndawula, MP Katikamu South, raised concerns over the deplorable state of Matugga-Semuto-Kapeeka Road and the unfulfilled presidential pledge for the development of the Ndejje-Kalasa Road.

Allow me to respond as follows: 

The above roads are part of the national road network, which is managed and maintained by the ministry through the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA).
 
Matugga-Semuto-Kapeeka is a 39.7-kilometre road. It is a paved national road, which connects the districts of Wakiso, Luweero and Nakaseke through the areas of Matugga, Semuto and Kapeeka. The road was tarmacked in 2008. At the time of tarmacking it, the areas of Semuto and Kapeeka had rural agriculture as the main economic activity.

Considering that this road was selected to be constructed using innovative technology for sealing off low volume traffic roads as part of a research to develop a cost-effective method of developing rural roads, the road was designed to cater for light traffic transporting agricultural produce from farms to the market.
As you are aware, the area has significantly transformed in the period since the construction of the road. Several factories have emerged in the area, manufacturing a variety of products. An example is Kapeeka Industrial Park, which produces goods, including tiles, clothes, dried fruits and many other products.

In addition, the area serves as a source of the much-needed sand and stones for construction of houses in Wakiso District and Kampala City. This transformation resulted in a drastic increase in the number of heavy vehicles along the road, which affected the roads lifespan and caused accelerated deterioration.

The accelerated deterioration has left the road in a poor condition and now requires rehabilitation. The UNRA is currently undertaking remedial measures in the short term including pothole filling and perching, edge repairs, spotty improvements and other short-term maintenance activities.

Rehabilitation works are planned in the National Development Plan III period with designs commencing in Financial Year 2021/2022 and construction works planned to commence in the Financial Year 2022/2023.

My ministry, through UNRA, has embarked on developing an expressway development master plan covering the whole country. This master plan will also ensure that all future industrial transformations in the different areas of the country can have access to high capacity roads for transportation of their raw materials, and the finished products within 30 minutes. This will reduce the impact of rapid industrial development on some of the roads leading to industrial parks and improve transportation in the country.

The Bombo-Ndejje-Kalasa Road, which is 10.4 kilometres, is a gravel road in Luweero District. The President pledged to have it upgraded and Uganda National Roads Authority subsequently began preparations for upgrading the road. Feasibility studies and detailed engineering designs for upgrading this road were completed in 2019. 

As you are aware, there are over 21,000 kilometres of national roads in Uganda of which only 5,400 were tarmacked as at the end of 2020.Uganda National Roads Authority has identified another 8,811 kilometres which require upgrading to bitumen standards during the National Development Plan III, in order to support investment in the primary growth sector. 

The resources available for road development are not sufficient to cover all the required upgrading of works at once. The resources for upgrading these roads could not fit within the medium-term expenditure framework and therefore it is part of the long-term planned projects.

The road is currently in a fair condition and undergoing routine maintenance, and we have programmed to carry out mechanised maintenance along the road in the Financial Year 2020/2021.

I would like to assure and the honourable members that -

a) 	My ministry, through Uganda National Roads Authority, will ensure that the short-term maintenance works on Matugga-Semutto-Kapeeka Road are undertaken as we design and look for resources for the required rehabilitation work and reconstruction.

b) 	The maintenance of Bombo-Ndejje-Kalasa Road, 18.4 kilometres, will continue to be done and that it is included in the long-term plans for upgrading.

c) 	An express road development master plan is being developed to ensure that the development of industrial areas is supported by the national roads network.

In conclusion, my ministry is committed to maintaining the national roads network in good order, in order to provide support to other Government programmes to facilitate economic activities and efficient provision of public services, and ensure the highest return from investment in these key national assets. I beg to submit.

Madam Speaker, if I could finish all of them then I lay the reports on the Table at once. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. If there are areas you have already answered, you do not need to go to them again. Just go to the areas you have not handled.

GEN. KATUMBA: The other was the question which was raised by hon. Paul Ssemakula, MP Nakaseke, about the bad state of roads in Nakaseke District during the heavy rains and we responded to it.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

GEN. KATUMBA: Madam Speaker, this is a statement in response to a question raised by hon. Koyekyenga Olive Katwesigye, Woman MP Buhweju District, on the vandalization of the chain-link fence and other road furniture along the Entebbe Expressway and attendant risks.

This is happening because of the thieves who have taken it upon themselves to vandalise the road furniture for commercial gains and resell most of them to scrap dealers and other metal fabricators.

In addition, over the years, during protests we have also faced a lot of vandalization of our road furniture by the protestors, among which include even setting fire on our roads. Here, the road life-span has been affected.

Whereas there are reasonable efforts to secure the road assets by the road agency protection unit, total protection would need 24-hour surveillance and enforcement of the entire road network by such an organ. This would be a big calling because most of the vandalism occurs at night and not during the day. 

Therefore, there is need to step up the presence of the Uganda Police on these roads, and we have discussed this, especially on the expressway. We have discussed it with Kampala Metropolitan Police who have now increased the deployment of patrol vehicles on the expressway.

We are also engaging the local leadership to ensure that the communities are sensitised to understand and appreciate the beauty of this infrastructure. 

In the meantime, we have also engaged a research team to work with other international bodies to experiment on other safe and sustainable materials, which may not be as commercially attractive to the fabricators as is the case with metals. Research is going on to see whether we can change the items which we use as our road furniture. 

On the illumination of the Kampala-Entebbe Expressway, the design and financing loan from China EXIM Bank did not include illumination of the expressway. However, Government has already identified this need for safety and security reasons and has availed the funding for the illumination under the operations and maintenance contract, which will soon start operating.

With the presence of a contractor, who shall provide 24-hour services to include road tolling, the problem of vandalism of road furniture will be mitigated. The finalisation of the contract process was completed in February this year and the contractor is now mobilising to start the operations and maintenance work on the Entebbe Expressway. I beg to submit.

The other question was by hon. Kiyingi Gonzaga, MP Bukomansimbi South, on shoddy works, obstruction of access roads and the delayed compensation of project affected persons on the Villa Maria-Ssembabule Road.

The contract for upgrading of the road to paved bitumen standard commenced in 2014 and was substantially completed by 2019. In addition, the town roads around the Mpigi-Kanoni-Ssembabule-Villa Maria Road were all developed as part of the project - limited kilometres in all the town councils.

The project was financed by the Government of Uganda and has suffered from slow cash-flow both for the land acquisition and civil works’ contract due to a limited budget. However, I am happy to report that the contract was finalised and it was under the defects liability period, which ended in December 2020, and they have already handed over the certificate for the road.

We are sure that the works have conformed to all the contract’s specifications for quality and quantity. Therefore, there are no known shoddy works - unless a particular spot has been identified - on any part of the road, not even on the town roads which were done as part of the project.

On land acquisition, out of the 297 titles affected on this road, only 84 have been paid for. The remaining 213 titles have not been handed over by the title owners as required for documentation and facilitation or compensation. 

It was noted that there are a significant number of absentee landlords without any documentation in that area. This makes it very difficult for the agency to know the bona fide owners and occupants of the land that should be paid without exposing Government to risk of paying the wrong persons and losing money.

There was also a category of project affected persons who disputed the Chief Government Valuer’s rates and appealed to be revaluated with the objective of getting paid additional money. These are within the supplementary report, which has been cleared by the Chief Government Valuer and clearance for payment is ongoing and they will be paid.

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

GEN. WAMALA: The next one is about a question raised by Hon. Kenneth Lubogo, MP, Bulamogi County on the collapsed bridge connecting Busoga and Bukedi, barely four years after its construction.

Madam Speaker, you visited this site; this is the Saka Bridge. The collapsed bridge is located on Kaliro-Namwewa-Saka-Pallisa Road, connecting Kaliro District to Pallisa District. The bridge has now been handed over to Uganda National Roads Authority to construct a real bridge.

What happened was that the connection had not been done as a bridge; it was with culverts. During very heavy rains, which all of us remember this country experienced, those culverts were overwhelmed, gave way and were washed away. So, there was a complete wash-away of the culvert section of that road.

We have now handed over that road to the Uganda National Roads Authority. Actually, the team even visited the site yesterday and now the Uganda National Roads Authority is going to engage one of the best contractors. I have actually recommended them to engage with Arab Contractors, who are already in the area, to construct that bridge to connect the two districts of Kaliro and Pallisa. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Minister. It is a very painful area but we want to thank you for responding.

GEN. WAMALA: Madam Speaker, there was another question by Hon. Catherine Lamwaka, Omoro District Woman MP, on persistent road carnage that has claimed scores of lives in Omoro District and the absence of key road furniture.

My ministry, earlier in March 2019, responded to a concern raised on the Floor by Hon. Lamwaka on Thursday, 24 January 2019, over the persistent road carnage. I do not think I need to go over this because we had responded to this matter. The report will be laid on the Table.

Madam Speaker, this is a statement in response to the question raised on the status of Lira-Kamdini Road. I am presenting this statement in response to issues, which were raised before Parliament during the Session, in relation to the status of Lira road section.

Honourable members, the above road is part of the National Roads Network which is managed and maintained by my ministry, through the Uganda National Roads Authority. The rehabilitation of the Lira-Kamdini Road is currently included in the Government of Uganda World Bank-funded road programme, commonly termed, “The North-Eastern Road Corridor Asset Management Project(NERAMP)”.

This project aims at introducing long-term asset management contracts through output and performance-based contracting. The OPRC, as it is commonly known, covers the Tororo-Mbale-Soroti-Lira-Kamdini road corridor. 

Along this corridor, the section which was in the worst condition at the time of the project preparation in 2014 was Lira-Kamdini. The condition worsened over time due to the following factors, which have continued to have downstream effects:

Effect of the delayed procurement

Bids for these works were invited in July 2015. During the procurement process, there was suspension of this component of the project from 21 December 2015 to 6 June 2017 - two years, which delayed the procurement process. As a result, the envisaged rehabilitation intervention scope was significantly affected.

Enhancement of environmental, social, health and safety compliance requirements after bid submission
The suspension during the procurement phase was because of non-compliance to social aspects on another World Bank funded project. You remember the Fort Portal-Kamwenge Road project. 

In order to proceed with NERAMP, improvements had to be made on the contract provisions related to the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) compliance. The enhanced provisions modified the ESIA compliance and management requirements by the contractor, leading to frequent omissions, hence the non-compliance. 

Due to this non-compliance, there was suspension of the contractor’s activity 15 months into the contract from December 2019 to 30 September 2020. 

The other reason was the complaints by affected community members, leading to requests for inspection by the bank’s independent inspection panel. When the suspension was lifted and the contractor remobilised in October 2020, the project-affected persons at one of the auxiliary sites – that is the Meroko Quarry – which the contractor had identified as a source of aggregate, raised a complaint to the bank independent inspection panel.

This incident also affected the approval process for the ESIA documentation, which has been elevated to be beyond the project level. The bank objected to the use of this site and grievances had been considered and the matter closed in May 2020.

Planned scope of work for Lira-Kamdini

Madam Speaker, the 2014 concept design that framed the basis for the tender of the OPRC works indicated a rehabilitation scope involving an asphalt concrete overlay with limited reconstruction of approximately six kilometres only along the Lira-Kamdini section.

A final rehabilitation design for the road section, submitted on 8 February 2021, shows full reconstruction – and this is what is going to be implemented – not simply an overlay. The plan is to conclude the design review and costing so that reconstruction work starts in June 2021.

Honourable members, the OPRC provides for routine maintenance activities to be executed for the full contract period of eight and a half years up to 12 February 2027. Over this period, the contractor is required to maintain the road at given services levels that are assessed every month.

Madam Speaker, in order to address the poor condition of this road section – that is Lira-Kamdini – that was adversely affecting the safety of road users, the contractor had commenced implementation of emergency works, which was more extensive than the envisaged routine maintenance work. This activity was again halted because of the suspension of the contractor’s obligation under the contract in November 2019.

Following the suspension of works, an interim measure by UNRA Lira Station carried out some interim maintenance interventions. However, the poor condition of the road section could not be improved through the routine maintenance works using the UNRA Lira Station workforce.

Honourable members, in May 2020, UNRA and I engaged the bank when the contractor’s non-compliances were addressed to resume the emergency repair works on the Lira-Kamdini Road but approval was not granted.

The bank’s assessment of the emergency works scope was that it amounted to rehabilitation, hence full Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and resettlement action plan were required.

The scope was clarified by UNRA and the bank decision communicated on 30 September 2020 was that, the bank was to take an informed decision and ensure that the planned activities were consistent with bank policies. The bank team would carry out an environmental and social due diligence process on the proposed source of material.

NEMA approved the source of gravel on 29 January, 2021 and in an interim, the bank gave approval for scarification and compaction of the heavily potholed sections on the 2 March, 2021. This activity was to commence on 16 March, 2021 and the delay has been because the contractor was concerned about leaving the surface exposed for a long time.

Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) and also the Ministry of Works and Transport and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, are working with the bank to resolve the source of aggregate so that the section can be worked on. 

Assurances, Madam Speaker:
I would like to assure you and all the honourable members of Parliament that my ministry, through UNRA, is committed to ensuring that the condition of the Lira-Kamdini road section is improved. This morning, we held a meeting between the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, World Bank officials, UNRA and myself on this matter. We have agreed that the Lira- Kamdini section is going to be worked on as I have already said; to ensure that the safety of the travelers is granted until the bank lifts the whole project when we have satisfied all the environmental and social safeguards requirements.

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, the NERAMP project development objective is to reduce transport costs, enhance road safety and improve and preserve the road assets sustainably by applying a cost effective performance based asset management contract along the Tororo-Kamdini road corridor. My ministry is committed to ensuring that this development objective is realized. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. That is the responses I had in regard to the questions raised.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, thank you so much for the work you are doing to make the country motorable so that we can move peacefully.  Thank you very much.

GEN. WAMALA: Much appreciated. I beg to lay the reports on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Earlier on, Hon. Muyanja raised an issue concerning the students - [Member rose-]- no we are not going to debate this. Of what?

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I have listened and analyzed the statement by the minister and I would like to bring a few matters to his attention. First of all, it appears that the minister has obsolete data that suggests that the roads have certain sections that are badly off and are heavily potholed and the rest of the sections are okay.

I would like to inform the minister that the entire road section, from Lira to Kamdini is 74 kilometres, is heavily potholed. Therefore, there is nothing like a certain section that you are going to work on and is going to cure this problem. I would like to inform the minister that the Ministry of Works and UNRA should conduct a fresh assessment. As you do this maintenance work, please, be on the ground and avoid using data from 2013 because that 2013 that you mentioned was the year that Dott Services concluded a project to rehabilitate that road. This road is in a very sorry state. 

Madam Speaker, I know you have received petitions after petitions and if nothing is done, you will receive another petition soon. I would like the minister to follow up and ensure that our people can move on a very good road. Thank you.

GEN. WAMALA: Madam Speaker, may I just give a confirmation?  That the Lira-Kamdini whole section as of now is going to be maintained and not parts of it. It will be maintained to the level that it can afford good travel for the users. As we wait for the big project to do the whole road, we are putting special attention on the 71 kilometres of Lira-Kamdini road section.

The Tororo and others, we are doing pothole filling for they are not as bad as the Lira- Kamdini road.

THE SPEAKER: No, Semuto-Kapeeka has already been answered in your absence. You were not here, it was answered. 

Honourable minister of Education and sports, there was a question about an accident involving two students who were shot raised by Hon. Muyanja. [Member rose] you have got the answers you want, how much are you going to say about Lira-Kamdini. No please. He has answered - Okay. No, they were raised in your absence.

MR ABACACONI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have followed the statement very well but one thing is missing. The minister has never bothered to apologise to the community of the road users of Lira and those whose vehicles were damaged, and  even between now and the time they are going to start the work, what pledge does he make to the people who will be using the road at their own risks?

3.50
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, on the night of Wednesday 17 March 2021, the information that has been availed to the ministry coming from Gulu, indicated that 10 students from St Joseph’s College Layibi in Gulu sneaked out of school at night and went to Bright Valley Girls’ School, from where the night guards opened live bullets on them.

Arising from that incident, this is the status of the ten students who reportedly sneaked out of school and went to the girls’ school. Two out of the ten students have been confirmed dead, one critically injured and currently hospitalized, three are in police custody after being detained by the school guard and four retained at the college. However, as I speak, both the three and the four that returned are under police custody making a total of seven.

Madam Speaker, the guard has equally been arrested and is in custody with the Police at Gulu Central Police Station. This matter is under police investigation. We condole with the families of the two students who lost their lives, but we also continue to implore our students and the parents to talk to students who have reported back to school to remain disciplined and always be within the precincts of the schools, where they reported. I beg to report.

Madam Speaker, this is the latest information we have. We are optimistic that after compiling all the information, the First Lady and Minister of Education and Sports will be in a position to brief the country in detail, including the names of the students who passed on and those who are still in police custody. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Thank you. That is work in progress. Honourable members, I would like to appeal to the Minister of Science, Technology and Innovation to be available next Thursday to handle item No. 5.

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE NATIONAL COFFEE BILL, 2018 AS RETURNED BY H.E THE PRESIDENT, IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 91(3) (B) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND RULE 142 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

The Speaker: Is our committee report ready?

3.55
The chairperson, committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (Ms Janet Okori-moe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries on the National Coffee Bill, 2018. I also beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the meetings of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries to consider the National Coffee Bill as returned by His Excellency the President. 

Madam Speaker, on 5 August 2020, Parliament of Uganda passed the National Coffee Bill, 2018 with amendments into an Act of Parliament and forwarded it to His Excellency the President for assent. The President did not assent to the Bill. In a letter dated 10 December 2020, he returned it to Parliament for reconsideration in accordance with Article 91(3)(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. The letter, addressed to the Rt Hon. Speaker, is attached and marked “A”.

The issues raised by His Excellency the President for reconsideration were as follows:

1. 	The appointment of the board of the authority under Clause 14(5) is by the minister and approved by Parliament. The President asserts that boards of all Government agencies are proposed by the minister and approved by Cabinet. This is an executive and not a legislative role.

2. 	Appointment of the board chairperson: Appointment of other board members under Clause l4(4) is by invitation of nominations, save for the chairperson. It was also proposed that another clause should be inserted to read as follows: “The chairperson of the board shall be appointed by the minister.”

3. 	Under Clause 22(1), the managing director shall be appointed by the minister on recommendation of the board. Under Clause 22(4), the managing director is answerable to the board. Therefore, appointment of the managing director by the minister undermines the principle of separation of powers, in that the minister is the appointing authority of the board. 

	More so, it is likely to undermine the powers of the board, which will not have the authority to control the managing director who is appointed by another appointing authority (the minister) other than to where he reports (the board that supervises him or her).

4. 	Registration of the coffee farmers: Clause 26(3) stipulates that where a person registered as a coffee farmer in Clause 26(1) is married, the registration of the person shall be extended to his or her family. The President asserts that this is in conflict with the constitutional right to own property and the several laws relating to property. Therefore, each farmer should register in their own capacity to avoid affecting the registration exercise, where some farmers may claim to have been registered as families.

5. 	Clauses 28(3) and 29(3) both refer to issuance of a certificate of registration to the coffee nursery operator or a coffee seed garden operator. It is proposed that the one under Clause 29(3) is deleted and Clause 29(4) is moved up to read as Clause 28(4) to avoid having two similar certificates.

The committee considered the President’s letter and deliberated on it in accordance with Rule 142(4) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, which states thus: “The debate on the Motion under this rule shall be confined to consideration of matters referred to in the message of the President or to any suggestion relevant to the subject matter of the amendment recommended by the President.”

The committee held a meeting, which was attended by the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and staff of the Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA), to consider the propositions by His Excellency the President.

Committee Observations and Recommendation

The committee observes that the proposals by the President in the returned clauses are similar to the positions as had been presented by the committee in its report to the House. The changes just arose from the debate on the Floor of the House during the consideration of the Bill. 

The committee, therefore, agrees with the proposals made by the President and recommends that its report on the returned Bill be adopted.

I beg to move.

The Speaker: Thank you, Madam Chairperson of the committee. Honourable members, I believe we can only have limited debate. We cannot go beyond the issues for which the President returned the Bill. There are some presumptions that everything else was okay other than those four clauses. Therefore, if there are comments, they should touch only those. 

4.02
Mr james kaberuka (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kinkizi): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. I would like to agree with your guidance. The President’s highlighted issues surely concur with the principle of separation of powers and I would like to appreciate that arrangement. When we consider what the President has suggested, it will remove conflicts from the offices. 

Madam Speaker, we have seen some ministers going ahead to bulldoze the boards and you find that services offered are to the wishes of the minister but not the supervisory board, which does the day-to-day supervisory role over the workers. 

I would like to suggest that we adopt the recommendations, the way they are, into law and move on. Thank you. 

4.04
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to commend the committee for the job done now and the one which was done before we finished with the Bill for the first time. 

I do submit to support the committee and the proposals of the President. In this case, I think it will create a very good relationship between the President and Parliament because what he has suggested is actually the same as what was in the report of the committee before we started debate. It will not be a problem to the people we represent since the same recommendations were in the report. 

Therefore, I stand to support the proposals of the committee and at the same time those of the President. Thank you.  

4.06
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask the chairperson of the committee and Members to critically look at the proposals that we had made under clause 26(3). Even when the President is against the extension of registration, which I agree with, I thought the committee should have actually provided for joint registration. 

Where the two coffee farmers have invested together, they should have provisions to jointly register. This is because this Parliament has even made it possible for people to jointly own land and other property, which rights the President seeks to protect. 

Instead of doing away with the individual registration by extension, we could provide, if it pleases the chairperson, for joint registration so that, that flexibility is available for the coffee farmers. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, what is your response to that? 

MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This matter has been with us for some time. I wish the honourable member had even tried to interface with the committee because as far as I know, there are other laws that are related to ownership of property. I think his fears can be catered for under that arrangement. Therefore, I stand by the position of the committee. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the committee be adopted. 

Question put and agreed to.

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL COFFEE BILL, 2020

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we shall focus on clauses 14(3) and (4), 22(1), 26(3), 28(3) and 29(3) only. We will not go to any other areas. 

Clause 14
MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The committee proposes to amend the provision of Clause 14(3) by inserting a new provision immediately after sub-clause (3) to read as follows: 

“The members of the board, except the managing director, shall be appointed by the minister.” 

Justification 

Boards of all Government agencies are proposed by the minister and approved by Cabinet and not by Parliament, as was adopted by the House. 

Under clause 14(4), the committee proposes that we amend sub-clause (4) as follows: 

“The minister shall, in appointing members of the board referred to in paragraphs (b) to (i), invite nominations from the respective institutions or organisations from whom the appointment shall be made.”  

The justification is that appointment of other board members under this provision is by invitation of nominations, except for the board chairperson. 

Under sub-clause (5), the committee proposes that we delete it. 

The justification is that it is already captured under the proposed sub-clause (3) above. 

In Clause 14, on board authority, the committee proposes that we redraft the provision to read as follows:

“4. 	Board of the authority. 
(1) 	The authority shall have a board of directors, which shall be the governing body of the authority. 

(2) 	The board shall consist of; 
(a) 	a chairperson;
(b) 	a representative from the ministry responsible for finance; 
(c) 	a representative from the ministry responsible for agriculture; 
(d) 	a representative from the ministry responsible for trade; 
(e) 	a representative of the coffee farmers; 
(f) 	a representative of the coffee processors; 
(g) 	a representative of coffee exporters; 
(h) 	a representative of coffee roasters; 
(i) 	a representative of the National Agricultural Research Organisation; and 
(j) 	The managing director who shall be an ex-officio member.

(3) 	At least one-third of the members of the board shall be women, one of whom shall be a representative from the value chain actors referred to in paragraphs (e), (f), (g), (h) of sub-section (2).

(4) 	The members of the board, except the managing director, shall be appointed by the minister.

(5) 	The minister, shall in appointing the members of the board, referred to in paragraphs (b)(i), of sub-section (2) invite nominations from the respective institutions and organisations from whom the appointment shall be made. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you may recall that we really had a lengthy debate on this issue. I now put the question that clause 14 be amended, as proposed.
(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.
Clause 22 

MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The committee proposes that we amend the provision by redrafting sub-clause (1) as follows; “There shall be a managing director of the Authority who shall be appointed by the board, on such terms and conditions as the board may determine.”

The justification is that the appointment of the managing director by the minister undermines the principle of separation of powers because the minister is the appointing authority of the board. The managing director is likely to owe allegiance to the appointing authority who is the minister other than where he or she reports to and that is the board.

b) Substitute paragraph (d) of sub-clause (4) as follows: “(d) “is removed from office by the board.” 

The justification is that it is a consequential. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, again, we had a lengthy debate on this issue. I put the question that Clause 22 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 22, amended, agreed to.
Clause 26

MS OKORI-MOE: The committee proposes that we delete sub-clause (3).

The justification is that this is in conflict with Article 26 of the Constitution on the protection from deprivation of property and the right to own property individually. More so, there are other several laws in place in relation to how one can own property.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal is that sub-clause (3) be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, amended, agreed to.

Clause 29

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, Clause 29 - Registration of coffee nursery operators and coffee seed gardens.

The committee proposes to amend the provision as follows: delete sub-clause (3). The justification is that it is catered for under Clause 28(3).

The committee also proposes that we transfer sub-clause (4) to Clause 28, and should appear immediately after sub-clause (3) as follows: Clause 28(4) “a certificate issued under this section shall be renewed annually.”

The justification is to avoid having similar provisions on the issuance and renewal of a certificate. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 28 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28, amended, agreed to.

Clause 29, amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House do report thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker, presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (MrAggreyBagiire): Madam Speaker, I would like to report that the committee of the whole House considered, amended and passed the following:

    a) Clause 14 sub-clauses (3), (4) and (5); 
    b) Clause 22 sub-clauses (1) and (4)
    c) Clause 26 sub-clause (3)
    d) Clause 28, sub-clause (4)
    e) Clause 29 sub-clause (3)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (MrAggreyBagiire): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that report of the committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
THIRD READING
THE NATIONAL COFFEE BILL, 2020

4.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the National Coffee Bill, 2020 be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Bill entitled, “The National Coffee Bill, 2021 be read for the third time and do pass.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “ THENATIONAL COFFEE ACT, 2021.

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes. (Applause)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO 69 MILLION EUROS FROM THE AGENCE FRANÇAISE DE DÉVELOPPEMENT TO FINANCE THE CONSTRUCTION OF WATER AND SANITATION INFRASTRUCTURE AND ASSOCIATED ACTIVITIES IN THE DISTRICT OF ISINGIRO

THE SPEAKER: Are the ministers in charge of water and finance here? Okay, let us receive the report. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not here. Someone should send for the finance minister, but we can start; the Minister of Water and Environment is here.

4.21
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Lawrence Bategeka): Madam Speaker, I am here to present a report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to €69 million from Agence Française de Développement to finance the construction of water and sanitation infrastructure and associated activities in the district of Isingiro.

Before I present the report, allow me to lay on the Table the following documents that the committee used in assessing this request:

1. 	The report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to €69 million from Agence Française de Développement to finance the construction of water and sanitation infrastructure and associated activities in the district of Isingiro.

2. 	Brief to Parliament on the proposal by Government to borrow up to €69 million from Agence Française de Développement to finance the construction of water and sanitation infrastructure and associated activities in the district of Isingiro

3. 	Summary of the Ministry of Water and Environment Strategic Investment Plan. It is annex a in the documents I am going to lay on the Table.

4. 	Maps of piped and point water sources in Uganda - annex b.

5. 	Map of administrative units that will be served with water and sanitation facilities - annex c.

6. 	Certificate of financial implication confirming Government counterpart funding.

7. 	Loan’s clearance committee letter from the office of the Prime Minister to the Head of Public Service and Secretary to Cabinet - annex e.

8. 	The National Environment Management Authority (NEMA)environmental and social impact assessment for the construction of water and sanitation infrastructure and associated activities in the district of Isingiro.

9. 	The draft credit financing agreement between the Republic of Uganda and the Agence Française de Développement dated 9 January 2020.

10. 	Cabinet minute extract 246 approving the loan request and the financing terms and conditions. 

11. 	The water and environment sector external funding performance as at 1 December 2019.

12. 	Implementation strategy of Isingiro water supply system.

13. 	Procurement plan for works, goods and servicesfor implementation of the water supply and sanitation infrastructure and associated activities in Isingiro District.

14. 	Quarterly report of National Water and Sewerage Corporation for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure for the southwestern cluster, which is Mbarara-Masaka areas.

15. 	Physical performance of externally funded projects as at 31 December 2019. 

16. 	The feasibility study report for the development of water infrastructure in Isingiro District, November 2017.

17. 	Report on the development of water and sanitation infrastructure for the southwestern cluster, package I, Kagera waterworks.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay and then proceed.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, chairman and your committee.

MR BATEGEKA: Madam Speaker, the Committee on National Economy considered the request of Government to borrow up to € 69 million from Agence Française de Développement to finance the construction of water and sanitation infrastructure and associated activities in the district of Isingiro project, in accordance with Rule 175(2)(b) of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure.

The request was presented to this House by the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 17 June 2020 and accordingly referred to the Committee on National Economy for consideration. The committee considered and scrutinised the request and now reports.

On the methodology, I will just outline the documents the committee reviewed. The committee studied and made reference to the following documents:

i) 	The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development’s brief on the loan request.

ii) 	The draft credit financing agreement between the Republic of Uganda and the Agence Française de Développement, dated 9 January 2020.

iii) 	The feasibility study report for the development of water infrastructure in Isingiro District, dated November 2017.

iv) 	Letter from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the project.

v) 	Letter from the Prime Minister to the Head of the Public Service and Secretary to Cabinet on the loans committee clearance for presentation to Cabinet of the proposal on this loan.

vi) 	His Excellency’s letter to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on his support to borrow € 69 million from Agence Française de Développement to finance the construction of water and sanitation infrastructure and associated activities in the district of Isingiro.

vii) The third National Development Plan of Uganda of January 2020 produced by the National Planning Authority.

viii) The National Planning Authority letter on the recommendation for approval to borrow €69 million from Agence Française de Développement to finance the construction of water and sanitation infrastructure and associated activities in the district of Isingiro.

ix) 	The project procurement plans.

x) 	Project implementation action plan.

xi) 	The environmental and social impact assessment for the construction of water and sanitation infrastructure and associated activities in the district of Isingiro.
xii) 	The public debt and other financial liabilities management framework.

xiii) 	The Uganda water and sanitation sector performance report, 2018.

Background 

I will give the background in a very brief manner. The population in Isingiro District relies on point water sources, such as shallow wells (30 per cent), boreholes fitted with hand pumps (23 per cent), public tap stands (31 per cent), and protected springs (6 per cent).

The parts of the district that have no point water source rely heavily on rivers and streams. It is expected that provision of reliable water can unlock Isingiro District’s economic growth and will directly contribute to the economic growth and poverty reduction plans of the country.

The existing water related challenges in the south-western cluster corridor point to the need for significant capital investment, required for development of water and sanitation infrastructure in the south-western cluster. 

The required capital investments call for substantial amounts of financial resources that cannot be leveraged by the National Water and Sewerage Corporation internal revenues, given the current water tariff, which is not a full cost-recovery tariff. I am skipping other details because they can easily be read.

Project objectives, impact, outcomes and outputs

The overall goal of the project is to secure and improve safe water supply infrastructure and sanitation facilities to the population of Isingiro District from the Kagera Water Treatment Plant.

The project specific objectives are the following:

    1. To ensure adequate safe water and sanitation facilities provision in each of the target areas in Isingiro District, by addressing the growing water supply sanitation challenges and;

    2. To ensure sustainability of water supply and sanitation services in the targeted areas in Isingiro District, through establishment of efficient and effective institutional support systems.

Project beneficiaries and location

The target areas that will directly benefit from the project are located in the district of Isingiro. The project will construct water supply systems in 15 subcounties and eight town councils.

These subcounties are Endinzi, Kashumba, Mbaare, Ngarama, Rugaaga, Rushasha, Kakamba, Bireere, Kabingo, Masha, Nyakitunda, Nyamuyanja, Kikagate, Kabuyanda and Ruborogota.
The town councils are Isingiro, Kabarebere, Kikagate, Kabuyanda, Kamubizi, Ruhiira, Endinzi and Bugango. All these areas will be supplied by water from River Kagera. 

The administrative units that will be served with water and sanitation facilities are shown in Table 2. That is what I have already read; I do not need to repeat it. The rest is detail.

Project cost and financing arrangements

The total cost of the construction of water and sanitation infrastructure and associated activities in the Isingiro District project is estimated at €84.48 million, consisting of loan and grants. 

The details are in Table 4 but quickly, I can say that 81.68 per cent of total project cost will be funded by the loan we are requesting for from Agence Francaise de Developpement, which is €69 million through a loan, while 2.5 per cent of the project will be financed by a grant from AFD of €2.5 million. 

In addition, 9 per cent of the project will be financed by a grant from the European Union, amounting to €7.6 million and the rest is detail that you can quickly read. So, it is a loan plus those grants.

Loan conditions

Madam Speaker, the loan has the following terms and conditions:

    1. Provision of a certified copy of the relevant decisions, in compliance with the legislation of the jurisdiction of the borrower, authorising the borrower to enter into this financing agreement, approving the terms and conditions of the financing agreement, approving the execution of this financing agreement and authorising a specified person or persons to execute the financing agreement on its behalf;

    2. A certificate issued by a duly authorised representative of the borrower, listing the persons authorised to sign on behalf of the borrower, the drawdown requests and any certificate in connection with the agreement and to take all other measures and/or sign all other necessary documents on behalf of the borrower under this agreement;

    3. A specimen of the signature of person(s) authorised to sign, on behalf of the borrower;

    4. Evidence that the drawdown of the facility will not breach any borrowing limit or any other similar limit binding on the borrower and; 

    5. Payment by the borrower to the lender of all fees and expenses due and payable under this agreement.

Project implementation

The project will be implemented for a period of five years by the Ministry of Water and Environment and National Water and Sewerage Corporation as the implementing agencies for this project. 

The relevant departments of the implementing agencies will be responsible for operational level activities including coordination, financial management, monitoring and supervision of their respective component activities. 

I think the rest can be read. It is the Ministry of Water and Environment to implement it.

Observations and recommendations made by the committee

Madam Speaker, this committee made the following observations and recommendations:

1. Low absorption of funds for debt-financed projects in the water and environment sector.
 
The current low disbursement is attributed to the continued slow pace by Government, in fulfilment of loan effectiveness conditions, costly land compensation claims and inadequate project preparedness for these projects.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and the Ministry of Water and Environment ensure that all inefficiencies that affect the sufficient utilisation or absorption of funds for debt-financed projects in the water and environment sector be addressed to guarantee timely realisation of the project development objectives and expected social and economic benefits.

2. Fulfilment of loan conditions 

The committee noted that Government has been slow in the fulfilment of loan-effective conditions upon signing of loan agreements, in order to trigger the disbursement of committed funds for the implementation of debt-financed projects.

The committee recommends that Government ensures speedy fulfilment of effectiveness conditions of the financing agreement for the loan, in order for the committed funds to be released by the Agence Francaise de Developpement on time, to guarantee the timely implementation of this project.

3. Compensation of project-affected persons

The committee observed that a number of infrastructure development projects are faced with challenges of compensation of project-affected persons that increase project uncertainties. 

These are also likely to affect this project, as it includes permanent land purchases, compensation and way leaves needed for construction of reservoirs and pumping stations, that are to be financed by Government of Uganda counterpart funds.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Water and Environment ensures that it acquires all the land titles in the areas where construction works for the project are to be implemented before construction works commence. In addition, all other project-affected persons should be adequately and expeditiously compensated.

4. Insufficient and Interrupted Power Supply

The committee noted that this project contains many water facilities that will require energy boosters and pumps. The energy supply reliability is one of the main risks of this project.

The main risks concern insufficient power supply and frequent power failures in the project area. Short power failures are frequent in Isingiro due to repair works. Safety solutions, such as power generators or dual power lines are not systematically adopted. There is no sufficient and continuous power supply in Kakamba and some other remote areas.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Water and Environment, in collaboration with the Ministry of Energy and Mineral development and its agencies, ensure the timely provision of sufficient and continuous power supply in the project areas to guarantee the realisation of the intended project objectives and outcomes. This can be realised by making sure that new water facilities in the project area are taken into consideration in their master plan and short-term energy consumption forecasts.

5. Willingness of Project Beneficiaries to pay for Water Sales

The committee noted that the project success is linked with the water sales it will generate. Insufficient capacity and willingness to pay together with insufficient distribution facilities can result in lower-than-expected water sales.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Water and Environment undertakes community awareness raising and engagement during the implementation of this project. This will contribute to the sustainability of the project in achieving the desired development impact in the project areas.

6. Vandalisation of Water Infrastructure Facilities

The committee observed that vandalism of the water infrastructure for sale as steel scrap, theft of solar panels and generators are common vices. This has consequently affected the supply of water to other communities as the distribution pipes and taps are targeted resulting in unsafe water for consumption. Due to a wide project area under this project that might complicate the surveillance, this project too might be affected by vandalism and theft, especially for non-guarded facilities.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Water and Environment together with National Water and Sewerage Corporation Secure fencing for the water treatment plants, reservoirs and pumping stations. Ensure that individuals engaged in this practice are penalised according to the law. Sensitise local leaders and beneficiary communities in Isingiro District in embracing local ownership of water infrastructure projects and guard them from vandalism.

In conclusion, the proposed project loan request is in line with the National Development Plan III, which runs from 2021-2025, the Uganda Vision 2040 particularly Goal 171, and the Water and Environment Strategic Sector Investment Plan, which runs from 2018-2030, the Water and Environment Strategic Sector Investment Plan running from 2018-2030) that set targets to be met by 2030, and the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

The Committee, therefore, recommends that the request by Government to borrow up to Euros 69 million from Agence FrancaiseDe Developpement to finance the Construction of Water and Sanitation Infrastructure and Associated Activities in the District of Isingiro Project, be approved subject to the recommendations herein.

I beg to report. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable chairpersonand the committee for the report. Honourable members, the report has been signed by the necessary minimum numbers. If there are any comments on the report- no, minister you will come last.

4.49
MS NOELINE KISEMBO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for the report they have presented. I am in support of the motion of the loan so that the people of Isingiro can have good water and sanitation infrastructure as reported. 

However, I have one concern that I would like to bring to the attention of the ministry. The aspect of compensation for the project-affected-persons is an issue that requires attention. I notice that it is also responsible for the law absorption rate on many of the loans.

I have just one example. There is a power project that is under construction probably countrywide but I will talk about Kibaale that I know about; there is a World Bank funded project. By now, it would even be nearing completion but the Government has not moved fast enough to compensate the project-affected-persons. 


As I speak, the contractor is ready.We are told that all the materials and everything is ready but because the people affected cannot be compensated - this involves counterpart funding by the Government - the project cannot move. This affects the absorption rate of many of the loans we are approving here.

I would like to advise that before such a loan is applied for, Government should make sure that the money needed to take care of their part - it is important that the Government does its part so that when we approve these loans, we do not have them redundant. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.50
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to thank the Government and support the motion for the loan request. However, I would like to inform this House that when I came into the 10th Parliament, I found this project on the Floor and it was proceeding.

I come from Rwampara just neighbouring Isingiro in Rwizi sub-county. We are in the same area and we are at the same altitude with the same problems. Therefore, much as we did not go to the committee, we have worked with the ministry and part of this project will extend into Rwampara. I would like to put it on record that we have already done all the groundwork. This money is enough for all of us and we have looked at the designs together, water source identifications and we have already commissioned some of the works. Therefore, I want this to be put on record.

The only difference is that the bigger part of Isingiro District will be served by Kagera River. However, in Rwampara, we have our own standalone water sources, which we have verified and will be worked on, so that all those people on the hills of Rwampara, in the areas of Rwizi and Bugamba, will be served under this arrangement.

Therefore, I would like to thank the ministry, the technical team and the President. We have all accepted this and all the politicians of Isingiro, including hon. Bright Rwamirama and his colleagues, because we all move together into that area. This will be a very big relief.

Madam Speaker, I have two comments and two requests. First, in this country, for many years water provision has been considered on technical viability. Where there are water sources, they have water but where there are no water sources, like in Isingiro and Rwampara, we had not reached this level of looking at alternative technologies. 
A lot of investments were done in springs and wells, and boreholes. Now, as a country, we should mark all those areas which have not benefited from any water source because of lack of appropriate water sources to be considered, especially all the mountain areas.

Secondly, if you go to Isingiro, they are invading River Kagera to get water. I worked in Isingiro District as a water officer. We had a lot of springs in the valleys but they are all dry because the water recharge capacity was depleted due to lack of forest cover. 

I would have wished the committee - and we should recommend as Parliament – (Member timed out.)

The Speaker: Please close.

Mr ngabirano: I would wish that for every water project that this Government runs and all other projects, there must be a tree planting component. Whereas we are looking for water, there are no water catchment areas. Therefore, we do not have water underground to develop.

Whenever we have any project, a percentage of this money should go into tree planting so that as we do the water projects, we preserve the environment and restore our tree cover hence the protection of the water catchment areas. Thank you. 

4.55
Mr EMMANUEL kalule sSengo (NRM, Gomba East County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand in support of this loan request but I have two comments to make.

First, there is a problem of low absorption capacity. This is the same case with almost all the loans that we have acquired. At one time, I was a member of the Committee on National Economy but all the loans you have taken up have not been performing very well. I would request that we get an audit of all the loans we have taken up. 

Secondly, I was reading in the papers about two days ago and the Auditor-General was expressing worry that we have almost reached the limit of borrowing. Whereas our limit is supposed to be 50 per cent of our Gross Domestic Product (GDP), he said that we have already reached 41 per cent. With these new loans that we are taking up, I do not know if we shall not reach 45 per cent. 

That is worrying, especially during this period of COVID-19 when many of our businesses are not performing well and tax collection is very low. We need to review all the loans that we have taken up, see how they are performing and then know what to do next.

Last, but not the least, Gomba District is one of the districts in the cattle corridor of this country. We have a problem of safe water for both human beings and animals. I request the minister responsible for water to say something about the proposed project of getting water from River Katonga for Gomba District. Otherwise, this is a good loan request and I stand to support it. Thank you. 

4.57
Ms Justine khainza (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the committee for the loan request report. 

I support the motion that Uganda borrows €69 million to supply water to Isingiro District. This will be a big step for Uganda towards the attainment of Sustainable Development Goal No. 6, which is about ensuring availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all.

It will also be a step for Uganda as a country because our target, currently, is to increase water supply and sanitation levels from 60 and 70 per cent respectively to 100 per cent by 2035. However, Isingiro District safe water coverage level is at 44 per cent, which is far below the national rural coverage of 67 per cent. This is more reason to support this loan request so that the people of Isingiro access safe water.

I am impressed by the financing arrangement on page 12 of the report. However, my concern is on the counterpart funding of €5.38 million by Uganda. It is my humble appeal that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development releases this money on time because the components for which it is supposed to cater – compensation - are the foundation of the project.

I also pray that the Ministry of Water and Environment in turn compensates the project affected persons so that the project does not stall. The people of Isingiro have been water stressed for a long time, so we need to come to their rescue as a country. Thank you. 

4.59
Mr Robert kasule (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the loan request. In fact, I am so happy that I may use my hands and legs to clap for the people of Isingiro. 

I had the chance to travel to the whole of northern Tanzania through the LVEMP project during the time when Mrs Mutagamba was the minister. The whole of northern Tanzania is water stressed. However, they were bold; they were not agreeing to the protocols of the River Nile, of not getting water out of the River Nile. Ten to twenty years ago, they started getting water out of the Nile, from River Kagera. Whenever we complained about Isingiro not having water, they would say that we had signed protocols with Egypt and other countries, so we are not supposed to get water from River Kagera.

I am now happy that at last Isingiro, which I visited through the Millennium Villages Project – Even if Isingiro has water in their aquifers and valleys, it is difficult for women go for water there. Therefore, I pray that this loan from the French Government will help us to draw water. I am also happy for Rwampara, the neighbours, who are also getting part of these loan funds.

Just as other Members have said, counterpart funding always comes in very late. Let us put it in the budget this time. The budget has not been passed. Let the committee responsible for water look for money for counterpart funding to make sure that the project for the people of Isingiro, who have waited for ages to get safe water, is not delayed. Thank you. 

5.01
Mr silas aogon (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, in 2016 when I had just joined Parliament, one of the major disasters that the country had was drought. Teso was badly hit. At that time, I remember very well that Isingiro had problems to the extent that many animals died because of lack of water for production. Therefore, I stand with strength to support this loan to immediately be approved. 

Madam Speaker, I urge my colleagues and counterparts from that side to encourage the masses to protect Kagera water source. We might place machines there and then the place dries up afterwards.

I belong to the UPF Watch Forum in Parliament and I am happy that today, we are getting a loan approved at a time when we are observing the sanitation week, which runs up to tomorrow. We are also about to celebrate the World Water Day; so, it is a big cake for us to have this loan passed this afternoon. 

Article 39 of the Constitution under Chapter 4 talks about the right to a clean and healthy environment; you cannot stay clean and healthy when you are far away from water. Therefore, I have no other thing to do but to support this loan. 

The cost of water, most especially in health facilities, is something that we must consider, as a House. This morning, we visited Nabweru Health Centre III in Nansana and there was a complaint about the failure to keep up with the hiking water bills because the cost is high. 

I would like to request that we also watch our debt burden. The committee has done well on those other things but let us not borrow without knowing where we are. Let us watch our ceiling so that we do not make mistakes. 

I would also like to ask what you are going to do about foreign exchange rates. Sometimes, we get these loans and benefit from the differences in the forex; the gain. How are we benefiting from this money? How are we utilising the differences? It should be returned to the Consolidated Fund, where we benefit from those gains. 

Madam Speaker, we need to constantly monitor these projects and also get a reliable contractor, if at all the procurement process has not been initiated. Only 23 per cent of the water sources are from boreholes and therefore, these people entirely need this water from Kagera so that water can be circulated to institutions. 

5.04
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Madam Speaker, I will not support this motion because of what has been put in the report. 

First of all, the heading of this report reads, “Development to finance the construction of water and sanitation infrastructure and associated activities in the district of Isingiro.”

Honourable members, we are making mistakes. Have you carried out research on how the surrounding districts are suffering? In this report itself, on Page 3, the committee names particular areas that have a similar problem. Can I name them? There is Lyantonde, Rakai, Mutukula, Kakuuto, Rushere, Kazo, Kyazanga, Katovu, Sanga and so many others. 

Some Members here worked in Obote’s Government so they know what he used to do with the loans. When he was building regional hospitals, he catered for all the 23 regional hospitals, thereby, catering to the whole country. 

Here we are passing a loan for only one district. Maybe that district has a blessing and when you go to Isingiro, I am giving reservations to this loan – by the way, these days they produce the biggest number of bananas –(Interruption) 

LT. COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and Member for giving way. I wish to appreciate the Member’s concerns but also to inform him that the water covering Rwampara District covers parts of Rakai, Lyantonde and Kiruhura, specifically, Sanga. The line comes from Kikagati all the way to Kageti to serve those districts. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you for your information, honourable minister. You are still making it worse because it covers parts of those districts and covers the whole of Isingiro. My interest is seeing Karamoja, where they are also water-stressed, being part of this loan. That is why Hon. Rwamirama might have influenced to achieve this loan. You are very smart in this and I congratulate you on that. 

As a Member of Parliament, I observe that we have more water-stressed areas in this country that need adequate attention, not because I hate Isingiro. I might even have married from your district, Hon. Rwamirama but when it comes to equity, under Article 21 of the Constitution, we must cater for all these districts.

Nonetheless, you have come on the Floor of Parliament to say that Lyantonde is going to get part of the water but Isingiro – even in Kampala, where we are, the sewerage system is poor. In this heading, it is like Isingiro will most likely get a better sewerage system than Kampala because you have talked of water and related activities. 

I live along Salaama Road but Kiruddu Hospital has failed to get a sewerage line. I pray that as you pass this loan, you look at all these particular districts and give them attention, other than looking at one district alone.

Kalungu District might come back next week seeking for another loan for it and we shall continue with that process. You will then say, “Ssewungu a Member of Parliament from Kalungu West is supporting this loan with all his feet on the Floor of Parliament.” 

Madam Speaker, I cannot support this unless we make an amendment because we are borrowing money that will be paid by all Ugandans, including those who have supported the loan and yet they are water stressed in their areas. 

I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are taking a lot of time. Is there objection to this loan? [HON. MEMBER: “We are concerned.”] What are your concerns? 

5.09
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I am certainly concerned because as the previous speaker pointed out, there are very many water-stressed areas in this country. I think Karamoja is worse off than Isingiro; there are several other areas.

This is a national Parliament and we are passing a big loan for that region. The people of Karamoja are listening and their Members of Parliament are here. They are also seeing me there and asking if we are Ugandans. 

Madam Speaker, we had passed a loan earlier for water harvest and to distribute water in some areas but I have not seen the implementation of that. 

As a Ugandan, I do not want to be misunderstood. I would rather we suspend this loan. Let the minister come to us and tell us how he is planning for Karamoja and other water stressed areas. He must tell us. We are not going to reject it but let us suspend it. Let the minister bring this loan request together with the plan that he has for other water-stressed areas, specifically Karamoja. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this loan request was brought here on 17 June 2020. Members are free to attend the committee sittings even if they are not members, to raise their concerns; at worst, to file minority reports. 

This loan request has been here for almost a year. I, therefore, put the question that the report of the committee be adopted. 

(Report adopted)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the House do approve the borrowing for this loan. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (LOCAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018 (ON 122 DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENTS; 42 MUNICIPAL COUNCILS; 1042 SUB-COUNTIES AND 355 SECONDARY SCHOOLS AND TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS)

5.12
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (LOCAL GOVERNMENT) (Ms Judith Akello): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to present the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) on the Auditor General's Reports on 122 District Local Governments; 42 Municipal Councils; 1,042 sub-counties and 355 Secondary Schools and Tertiary Institutions for the Financial Year 2017/2018.

This report was ready in July 2020. We thank you that you are giving us an opportunity to present now. Before I present the voluminous report, allow me to lay it on the Table. I will only be able to read the executive summary.

Allow me to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee meetings that ensued as we processed this report. They are divided into three: Group A, Group B and Group C. 

The mandate of the committee 

The Committee on Public Accounts-Local Government (PAC-LG) is mandated under Rule 179 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to:

    i)  Consider the reports of Local Governments and Public Accounts Committees laid before Parliament by the Minister responsible for Local Governments, in accordance with Section 88(8) of the Local Government Act;

    ii) Consider the Auditor-General's report, submitted in accordance with Clause 4 of Article 163 of the Constitution of Uganda, which article requires the Auditor-General to submit to Parliament annually a report of the accounts audited for the financial year immediately preceding; and

    iii) Lay the report of the committee on Table, in accordance with Article 163 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, for purposes of debate.

Composition of the Auditor-General's report for the Financial Year 2017/2018

The Auditor-General's report for Financial Year 2017/2018, contained the following reports;

    i) 122 reports on District Local Governments for the Financial Year ending 2017/2018.
    ii) 42 reports on Municipal Councils for the Financial Year ending 2017/ 2018.
    iii) 1042 reports on Subcounties for the Financial Year ending 2014/ 2015.
    iv)  355 reports on Secondary Schools and Tertiary Institutions for Financial Year ending 30 December 2017.

Methodology

The committee:
    i) Reviewed the Auditor General's Report for the Financial Year ended June 2018.
    ii) Scrutinised reports for individual District Local Governments (DLGs) and Municipal Councils (MCs) to get an insight of the queries and basis for the Auditor-General's respective opinions.
    iii) Conducted hearings with Accounting Officers to get their explanations in response to the Auditor-General's findings and the respective action they had taken on the Auditor General's advice.
    iv) Carried out field visits to specific areas to confirm the Auditor-General's findings and in some cases, the action taken on the Auditor-General's advice.

I now present the executive summary of the above report and I would like to begin with district local governments. Under this, we present the first issue as the Youth Livelihood Programme (YLP)

The YLP is a Government programme, which was implemented under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development (MoGLSD) through local governments. It started in 2013/2014 as a revolving fund to respond to the challenges of youth unemployment; to harness their social-economic potential and increase self-employment opportunities and income levels.

Audit observed that Shs 32,927,697,651 and Shs 1,645,794,143 was disbursed to 105 district local governments and 17 municipal councils respectively, in the Financial Years 2013/2014 and
2014/2015. 

At the time of audit, the recovery period of three years had expired on 30 June 2O18.

Observations

The committee observed that;

    i) The MoGLSD retained powers to determine what amount would be given to a local government in total disregard of the local Government budget.

Underfunding of the programme

The committee observed that the district local governments budgeted for Shs 35,152,638,710 for the two financial years of 2013/2014 and 2014/2015 but only Shs 32,771,390,067 was released, resulting in a shortfall of Shs 2,381,248,643. Meanwhile, municipal councils budgeted for Shs 1,695,881,462 for the two financial years but only Shs 1,645,794,143 was released, resulting in a shortfall of Shs 50,087,319.

Due to the underfunding, not all youth interest groups were funded. This shortfall undermined the intended objective of responding to the challenge of unemployment among the young people.

The committee learnt that despite the shortfall in release of Youth Livelihood Project funds, some few districts later received the deficits. However, this meant that some of the projects could not be implemented in time because of the delay to receive funds, which affected the implementation of the respective projects and thus failure to recover funds in time.

Large number of group members: It was also observed that each group of beneficiaries comprised between 13 and 15 members, a number that was rather very big for effective supervision, monitoring and continued cohesion.

Inadequate group funding: Each group received between Shs 7 million and Shs 13 million, an amount that was observed to be too small to effectively and successfully implement reasonable projects. Refer to the schedule of projects attached to the main report.

Recommendations

1. 	The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development should endeavour to release the funds approved for each local government to enable them implement the planned youth projects.

2. 	The number of group members should be reduced to a manageable level of between five and nine. 

3. 	The funds should be approved and increased to reasonable amounts basing on the needs of the individual projects that will enable groups to effectively implement their projects.

Non-Compliance With Repayment Schedules of the Youth Livelihood Programme

Audit revealed that whereas all groups in district local governments funded in financial years 2013/2014 and 2014/2015 were supposed to have repaid Shs 33,550,074,740, inclusive of interest, by close of Financial Year 2017/2018, only Shs 8,287,502,832 (24.7 per cent) had been repaid, leaving an outstanding balance of Shs 25,262,571,908. Meanwhile, all groups in municipal councils were expected to have repaid Shs 1,777,260,096, inclusive of interest, but only Shs 443,417,177, representing 24.9 per cent, was repaid, leaving a balance of Shs 1,333,842,919 unpaid. 

It should, however, be noted that there were groups which received funding amounting to Shs 83.3 billion during the financial years 2015/2016 and 2017/2018. Those groups had made partial payments at the time of audit because their three-year term had not yet expired. Audit, therefore, considered them as ongoing projects.

The committee made the following observations: 

1. 	Delayed repayments were due to failure of some projects, especially agricultural projects, which were hit by natural calamities such as epidemics and harsh weather conditions.

2. 	Some projects disintegrated after receiving the money due to misunderstandings and embezzlement of funds. 

    a) In Katakwi District, for instance, it was alleged that the chairperson of Usuk Subcounty colluded with his son to hijack a youth group project worth Shs 10,000,000. 

    b) In Gulu, a total of Shs 256,000,000, which was meant for youth groups, was allegedly withdrawn at once by the district cashier supposedly to be distributed to groups but these funds were misappropriated.

    c) In Sironko, a total of Shs 6,000,000 was allegedly swindled by the OC/CID, who had recovered it from a youth group. Similar cases were recorded in Kole, Namayingo and Mubende districts where officials were even interdicted for manipulating youth groups and swindling the money.

Details may be got from the individual reports attached to the main report.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Inspectorate of Government should conduct further investigations into all these allegations and take appropriate action.

3. 	There were weak enforcement structures at subcounty level, yet the local governments were not provided with an administrative budget to undertake the project.

4. 	Poor selection of investment enterprises.

5. 	Acts of impunity by Community Development Officers (CDOs) was one of the issues. In some districts, some officers vehemently refused to avail information regarding the status of recovery of Youth Livelihood Project funds to the accounting officers.

In Kaberamaido District, for instance, whereas the groups funded in Financial Year 2014/2015 were expected to have repaid Shs 435,687,627, inclusive of interest, by close of the Financial Year 2017/2018, only Shs 96 million (22 per cent) was collected, leaving a balance of Shs 339,117,828, representing 78 per cent outstanding.

The focal person for Youth Livelihood Project funds at that time, Mr Samuel Ongaria, was transferred as the district Community Development Officer from Kaberamaido to Kalaki, which was a new district. The officer shifted with all the data regarding Youth Livelihood Project funds and the computer which he was using in Kaberamaido.

Efforts made by the accounting officer for Kaberamaido to get back the computer and receive a handover report from him and an update on the recovery of funds were all futile. The division police of Kaberamaido was notified of the occurrences but nothing was done to help.

Observations

Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, maybe you read the subject and the recommendations because the observations are there.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. That was it for the Youth Livelihood Programme (YLP) on actions taken and recommendations of the committee. Did you say I read the recommendations only?

THE SPEAKER: The subject and recommendations.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: The recommendation over this matter, Madam Speaker, is that the Office of the Inspector General of Government (IGG) should conduct investigations into this matter and take appropriate action.

The next one, No.3, is extortion of money from the beneficiaries, as mentioned in 1.2 above.
There was creation of ghost groups by district officials and therefore, the committee – over this matter, the recommendation is ahead.

Another anomaly, Madam Speaker, was failure to train youth and technical staff. Another matter was failure by some group members to access the YLP funds.

7. Behaviour of impunity by some public servants
8. Creation of new entities also affected the performance of this YLP.

The committee recommends that –

    i)    The accounting officers should ensure that all outstanding amounts are recovered, to enable other eligible groups to access the funds within six months from the time of adoption of this report.

    ii)   The accounting officer for Kaberamaido should ensure that Mr Ongaria returns the Government property or else it should be recorded as a theft case, at the Police and appropriate action is taken.

    iii)   The principle of sharing district assets and hand over should be adhered to by both local Governments.

    iv)   The focal person, Mr Ongaria, should be held personally liable to repay the outstanding balance, should it not be recovered within six months from the time of adoption of this report. 

    v)   The Office of the IGG should interest itself in the matter of failure to recover Shs 339.117,828 in Kaberamaido District.

    vi)   The Uganda Police Force administration should interest itself on the conduct of the behaviour of police officers in Kaberamaido District.

    vii)   The committee recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should revise the guidelines to include situations, where new administration units are created, with a view of shifting the recovery burden.

    viii) All the accounting officers should make sure that reconciliations and proper handovers are made whenever a new administrative unit is created and 
    ix) The legal policy framework, despite all shortcomings identified above, the committee observed that the Youth Livelihood Programme was informed and if well implemented, it would premise on and enhance a number of relevant national and international legal and policy frameworks, which include the following. I think Members will read this.

The committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the programme should not be clogged but redesigned to achieve its intended objectives.

Failure to transfer collected YLP funds

The recommendation on this, Madam Speaker, is that the committee recommends that the accounting officers should remit all the funds collected to the National Revolving Fund Collection Account within six months, after adoption of this report because some funds were not remitted to the Consolidated Fund account.

Existence and performance of Youth Livelihood Projects

The recommendation is that the Accounting Officers should ensure that all groups are properly assessed, in accordance with YLP guidelines before funds are disbursed.

Madam Speaker, I will leave the general observations and recommendations for Members to read. We made general observations cutting across all the challenges that we found in the field. I would like to go to page 16, on implementation of the Uganda Road Fund.

Budget performance of the Uganda Road Fund

Audit revealed that in the Financial Year 2017/2018, Shs 55,137,102,851 was budgeted to cater for routine manual maintenance, routine mechanised maintenance, periodic maintenance, and emergency activities on several district roads, using road gangs and force account mechanism. The districts, however, received Shs 55,296,044,146, resulting into an excess of Shs l58,941,296.

The audit further revealed that in the same Financial Year 20l7/2018, Shs 24,396,253,927 was budgeted to cater for routine manual maintenance, routine mechanised maintenance, periodic maintenance and emergency activities on several municipal roads using road gangs and force account mechanism. 

The municipal councils, however, received only Shs 24,508,879,178, resulting into an excess of Shs 112,625,251. The shortfall in funding focused mainly on district local governments and municipal councils to undertake less kilometres than what they had actually planned to undertake. 

Wakiso District, for instance, which was one of the worst performing districts, had budgeted to receive Shs 1,382,834,050 to cater for the routine manual maintenance, routine mechanised maintenance, periodic maintenance and emergency activities on several district roads using road gangs and the force account mechanism. The district, however, received Shs 1,315,646,050, representing 95.1 per cent, resulting into a deficit of Shs 67,188,000.

Madam Speaker, I think Members will read the observations. Let me read the recommendations.

The committee recommends that –

    i. The accounting officers should always submit any amounts over and above the budgeted amount to Council for approval;

    ii. The accounting officers should always follow the laid down processes of acquiring funds;

    iii. The Uganda Road Fund should always give explanations for less release of funds to the districts that receive less than what they had budgeted for. 

Field inspections of implementation of the Uganda Road Fund
The audit inspection carried out in 115 districts revealed unsatisfactory and incomplete works in 3l districts, which is 27 per cent of the districts in Uganda. The unsatisfactory work was attributed to heavy rains and floods, failure to attract road gangs, budget cuts and high unit cost of construction per kilometre.

Routine manual maintenance
The audit observed that district local governments planned to undertake 26,883.28 kilometres, at an estimated cost of Shs 12,996,059,982. However, only 76 per cent were undertaken at a cost of 77 per cent due to shortfall in funding. The figures are in there. I hope Members will read – 

Meanwhile, municipal councils planned to undertake 2,229 kilometres at an estimated cost of Shs 2,556,114,713. However, only 2,059kms representing 92 per cent were actually undertaken, at a cost of 88 per cent.

As indicated above, Wakiso, which is the worst performing districts planned to undertake a total of 524 kms at an estimated cost of Shs 206,120,000. However, all the kilometers were done 100 per cent, at a cost of Shs 166,193,000 at 81 per cent budgeted money, resulting in an alleged saving of 39 per cent. Members should interest themselves in reading about Wakiso because many anomalies were found. I cannot read it all. I would like to go into general observations of Uganda Road Funds.

The committee observed that a lot of works were incomplete, because of the contractor’s inadequate capacity to execute the work. Several contract periods expired, some of which were even extended but in spite of the extensions of the several working days, the projects were still not completed. 

Committee Recommendations

    1. The accounting officers should always revise the budgets and submit them to council for approval.
    2. The accounting officers should ensure that proper planning is made prior to implementation of activities.
    3. The accounting officers should ensure that funds are allocated in a timely manner and effective supervision to ensure that projects are completed as per the contracts.
    4. Accounting officers should ensure that district roads committees sit on quarterly basis and deliberate on issues within their scope.
    5. The District Engineer of Wakiso District, Mr Sam Mwesigwa should be interdicted to avoid interference with investigations.
    6. All funds that have been identified above should be recovered by the Accounting Officer.

Mischarge of Expenditure 

Audit revealed that: 

    1. In some local governments, funds were spent on items, which were not budgeted for and approval from relevant authorities was not sought. 

    2. In other cases like Lira District, funds amounting to Shs 1,379,832,000 on Account No. 0145066337000, were reportedly spent on various codes, which were posted inappropriately to other codes, hence resulting in mischarge.

The district notified the office of the Accountant-General of this matter but by the time of audit, there had been no response. The observation is there but I would like to go to the recommendations.

The committee recommends that: 

    1. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should review the tier system and if found necessary, improve upon it to avoid items appearing as mischarged items. 

    2.  The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should ensure that it sensitises all Heads of Departments in local governments to enable them to learn and appreciate the requirements of the Chart of Accounts. 

    3. The accounting officers should always seek authorisation from the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury before spending money for a purpose for which it was not appropriated. 

Unaccounted for Funds/Unsupported Expenditure 

Madam Speaker, audit revealed that expenditure worth Shs 1,193,738,407 for district local governments and expenditure of municipal councils worth Shs 263,269,202 lacked supporting documents as at 30 June 2018. The auditors were, therefore, unable to confirm whether the funds were used for the intended purposes.

In Apac District, for instance, audit revealed that Shs 2,3O8, 536,895 was paid to six district officers without authority from the accounting officers of the district. Refer to details in the main report. This matter is very serious and it attracts a lot- I wanted just a few- it attracted a lot of attention from IGG, MsNakalema team and Parliament. However, up to now, this matter was not resolved.

Audit further revealed that funds totaling to Shs 4,791,519,000, paid to the same officers mentioned above lacked payment vouchers. Consequently, the auditors could not confirm the purpose for which the funds were utilised.

Recommendations

    1. Considering that the Police and the IGG had been carrying out investigations on this matter for more than a year, the Minister of Internal Affairs should table before this Parliament the respective reports on the suspected fraudulent transactions in Apac District Local Government, within six months after the adoption of this report. 

    2. The Auditor General should carry out a forensic audit of all fraudulent transactions, within three months after adoption of this report. 

    3.  The IGG should not only investigate the officers who were interdicted but the entire chain through which the suspected fraudulent funds were released, including the Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Madam Speaker, allow me to say something about Apac District. It is quite difficult to understand some complexities when investigating matters of fraud. Ms Nakalema’s team was investigating this matter, Parliament’s Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) was also carrying out its duty and the IGG was conducting the same. 

In this confusion, it was very difficult for this committee to come up with a proper solution. This is because none of the above, especially the two bodies, had come up with the conclusion. Therefore, we tried to seek advice from relevant bodies, even from CID but up to now, this matter is still at large - and some politicians were involved in this. 

Monies that are sent to the district amounting to over Shs 4 billion meant to carry out activities to benefit the people of Apac are swindled by six people. Therefore, it is not easy and I really beg that the committee recommendation on this matter is further pursued.

Unpaid Pension, Gratuity and Salary Arrears

5)  	Audit observed that districts had Shs 20,670,224,592 outstanding as unpaid pension and gratuity, as at 30 June 2018. Meanwhile, municipal councils had not paid pension and gratuity amounting to Shs 2,273,928,574, by 30 June 2018.

Madam Speaker, a lot also needs to be understood under the pension and gratuity issues. Many elderly people are suffering out there; some actually die before receiving their money because of the challenges that are between the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the districts especially the human resource officers.

In summary, we found it quite difficult to understand in-depth because when you talk to the human resource officers, they say it is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development –the Accountant-General’s office - that delays.

At the end of the day – I will not read the whole of this because I have mentioned the figures – the old people find it very difficult to receive their pension benefits and gratuity because of those challenges. Some of the human resource officers make it difficult for them by asking for some kitu kidogo, which is quite difficult for the old people to find.

I would like to read the committee recommendation: The Ministry of Public Service should ensure that all pensioners’ files are verified and sent back to the districts to enable their respective districts process the pension of the beneficiaries. This should be completed within six months after the adoption of this report.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should ensure that it allocates an IFMS supplier number to each beneficiary to enable them access their benefits.

Low Absorption and Unspent Balances

It was observed by audit that in 10 district local governments and one municipal council, Shs 11,771,488,982 had not been utilised by the end of 30 June 2018, contrary to Section 45(3) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. 

I will not read the observations but we were informed that many times, funds were released towards the end of the financial year and could not be put to good use. At the end of the financial year, relevant officers fidget around with trying to formulate accountabilities to use money and no work is done using the money. 

The recommendation is that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should release funds early enough to enable the entities to execute the planned activities.

Inadequate Controls Surrounding Management of Payables

Audit observed that payables for district local councils increased from Shs 43,605,504,762 in the Financial Year 2016/2017 to Shs 104,061,463,566 in the Financial Year 2017/2018, while those of municipal councils increased from Shs 19,940,772,057 to Shs 28,514,331,251 in the same financial years.

I will not read the observations but that is about delayed payments of payables by districts. 

The committee recommends that accounting officers should adhere to the commitment control system put in place by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to avoid committing Government to payment of more domestic arrears. This is big anomaly in all districts.

Accumulated Domestic Arrears

This was also common. The committee observed that several districts, which had accumulated domestic arrears, had not complied with the established commitment control system, which caused poor management of their commitments.

The recommendation is that districts should always adhere.

Accumulated Court Cases

This was also quite a big burden on some districts. I am not going to read all the details. However, districts that were affected were Kumi, Gulu - they are quite a number. You will find details in the main report.

The committee recommends that –

1.	The accounting officers and others in the same category should institute measures aimed at minimising legal cases and costs of suits.

2. 	The Attorney-General should avail services to Government as required of his/her office.

3. 	In the event that the Attorney-General is too occupied, he or she should appoint representatives to handle local government issues that require the support of the office of the Attorney-General.

Payment of Avoidable Court Awards

I will not read all this, but it was yet a big matter. In the executive summary, we cited the example of Kaberamaido District where audit observed that a sum of Shs 15,851,000 was paid arising from a court order awarded against the district through a summary suit by the Magistrate Court of Kaberamaido to Arrow Auto Services. There are details in the main report, but this was one of the challenges in one of the districts. 

The committee recommends that the accounting officers should observe the commitment control systems through proper budgeting and timely settlement of district obligations. Most of them do not follow it.

Management of Medical Equipment

This, and many others, were mainly not about money but they had policy issues; for instance, the one of management of medical equipment. We also realised that most health centres and units across the country had challenges with failure to maintain inventory or repair and maintain other hospital equipment. That cuts across almost all local governments in this country. 

I will not read details but the recommendations of the committee are as follows: 

1. 	The Ministry of Health should always, as a matter of priority and urgency, assess the health centres countrywide, especially the ones at the local governments, with the view of devising ways on how they can be assisted with the basic medical equipment.

2. 	District local governments affected by lack of medical equipment should endeavour to bring the shortage to the attention of the Ministry of Health for further management.

3. 	The Ministry of Health should reinstate the PHC Development Grants to the districts to help them procure what they need for the health units.

Those are the recommendations from the committee and this should be taken up very seriously by the Ministry of Health because all district medical units are in bad shape.

Lack of medical protective gears: I will not read that because they are all still under medical equipment. I will go straight to No. 10 on staffing.

Staffing

Section 15(a) of the Public Service Standing Orders, 2010 mandates the Ministry of Public Service to determine the structure, terms and conditions of service of local government staff. Audit, however, observed that while many districts and municipal councils had staff structures in place, they were understaffed. 

I am not going to read this but here, we also found out that almost all the districts had inadequate staff and in high percentage. This must also be addressed.

The committee recommends that the accounting officers should liaise with the ministries responsible for Public Service and Finance to ensure that the gaps are filled. 

The ministries of Public Service and Finance should ensure that all approved staff structures of district local governments are adequately provided for the annual budgets and are fully financed.

Management of natural resources

I am not going to read this but the overview is that we realised that almost all districts had the same issue of lack of proof of ownership of land for the districts, land for forests, forest reserves and wetlands. 

There were also other issues such as the non-existence of the land office for staff was also common in all districts of Uganda, underperformance of district land boards which also cut across most districts, lack of environmental committees, lack of a district environmental action plan and lack of physical planning committees so this rendered most of the districts powerless in terms of how to handle environmental concerns. 

The committee recommends, therefore, that the accounting officers should ensure that physical planning committees are formed in accordance with the law and that they are operationalized within six months after the adoption of this report. 

Other anomalies include:

Unlicensed activities on natural resources and lack of registers for wetlands and forests.

Management of road equipment was another problem we found in all districts. The equipment that Parliament gave all districts is not being maintained well. They are non-functional and most of them are grounded; nobody is taking care of them. 

There is loss of road equipment, motor vehicles and motorcycles. We visited some districts and found a lot of equipment just in the yard; unrepaired and nobody takes care of them. We were told that for the case of motorcycles, some officers just come and pick them and repair and start using them as personal property. Those were some of the observations.

As a committee, we would like to recommend that the districts should ensure that the officers responsible for the missing motorcycles be investigated by the IGG.

Capitation Grant

This one was common in almost all the schools under the Auditor-General’s observation; capitation grant releases to primary schools and agreement with enrolments. 

The recommendations of the committee are: 

    i. The Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Finance should always calculate capitation grant basing on actual number of pupils enrolled. Here we found mainly that some schools gave a high number of children because they wanted to attract more funds but some were under stating.
 
    ii. The Ministry of Education and Sports should regularly carry out head count of pupils to ascertain the actual number of pupils in each school. 

Supervision and monitoring of reports by the districts; this was also lacking in most of the districts above. 

Inadequate infrastructure in UPE schools 

This was cutting across the schools that were mentioned. I will not give the examples but they are in the executive summary and in the main report. 

The committee reports that the accounting officers should liaise with the Ministry of Education and Sports to ensure that adequate funds are availed. The head teachers of schools should ensure that the funds are utilised for the activities for which they have been given and not to clear outstanding obligations because that is what most schools were doing.

Lack of financial statements and books of accounts: 

The details are contained in there. 

Garbage management; this was yet another problem with most municipalities and town councils. 

Under collection of local revenue, this was also common in most districts, most local governments, districts, municipal councils and so on. The details are in there. I will not read them. 

The committee recommends that the accounting officers should:

    i) Ensure that proper and realistic local revenue assessment is carried out before estimating the budget for the subsequent financial years.

    ii) Ensure that they enhance supervision of revenue collection in order to realise the budgeted revenue collection and to avoid leakages. 

Here, I would like to expound a bit. Most of the district local governments, sub counties and so on, who were in charge of collection of revenue, could collect this revenue and use it as pocket money. They did not remit nor account for it. Whenever the Auditor-General asked for accountability, some of them would run away and fail to avail the necessary documents for approval. 

We recommend that we establish revenue enhancement committees which should be in place; they should lay down strategies for mobilisation, collection, monitoring and ensure that all budgeted local revenue is collected.

Failure to assess local revenue sources was yet another one.

Outstanding utility bills 

Recommendations: 

    i) Public hospitals should be put on industrial billing since they are not profit-making entities;

    ii) Hospitals should be connected to the National Grid to enable them to use electricity from any power station from any part of the country in order to effectively serve the patients and to reduce on their bills;

    iii) Funds should be provided by the ministry of finance to clear all outstanding arrears of water and electricity bills to zero balance. 

Failure to deduct Local Service Tax 

We found unfair treatment. You find some districts were deducting Local Service Tax, while others were not. We cited this in Hoima and many other districts but some districts were complying. The committee wondered why these differences when the law is one. 

The committee recommends that the accounting officers should ensure that all arrears of Local Service Tax are deducted from the employees from whom it had not been deducted and should be remitted to URA. 

Procurement compliance is yet another big problem on procurement with the PPDA in all districts. Procurement made outside the procurement plan was very common. The committee recommends that:

    i. The Head of Procurement and Disposal Unit should upgrade all items in the annual procurement plan for their entities.

    ii. Where it is found necessary or inevitable, the plans should be updated in accordance with Section 31(f) of the PPDA Act, 2003. 

Irregularities in evaluation of bids; this was yet another anomaly. 

The committee recommends that the heads of procurement and disposal units should always ensure that evaluation committees conduct detailed evaluation in accordance with the regulations. 

Failure to obtain performance securities 

The committee recommends that heads of user departments should always obtain performance security before the contract becomes effective.
 
The accounting officers and heads of procurement should be held liable for flouting procurement regulations. 

Inadequate contract management records

The committee recommends that:
Contract supervisors should submit regular progress reports and detailed contract management reports, as per their functions.

Non-disposal of obsolete Assets- I tried to allude to this in the previous statement.
The accounting officers should ensure that the obsolete assets are disposed of without further delay.

The ministries should always ensure that equipment and vehicles that are obsolete are immediately boarded off rather than grounding them at the head offices. 

Sub-counties of Financial Year 2014/2015 (Financial management)
There was failure to prepare financial statements by most sub counties. I will not go into details. I think they lacked some sort of knowledge and experience.

The committee recommends that:
The accounting officers should devise means of building the capacity of the technical personnel at the subcounties to enable them effectively carry out their duties.

The chief finance officers should ensure that sub-accountants perform their duties.

Lack of books of accounts, accounting records and poor record keeping.

This was also common in almost all districts. We noted extra abnormalities in Kolo subcounty in Arua District. You will take interest and read the abnormalities.

The committee recommends that the Accounting Officer should ensure that books of accounts are properly kept to facilitate timely preparation of financial statements. 

Unbudgeted-for expenditure 

Some officers just spend money without budgeting and then, they budget later, which is not according to the law.

 The committee recommends that the Accounting Officers should always obtain approval from Council before spending extra money.

Payment vouchers not approved/authorised 

The committee recommends that the accounting officers should ensure that the vouchers are always signed as required by law. I will not read the examples of Bugondo sub-county, which had a serious audit issue. Members will read for themselves.

The committee recommends that the accounting officers should ensure that the payment vouchers are always counter signed by the Senior Accounts Assistants to avoid instances of abuse of funds. This was common in almost all sub counties.

1.4 Unaccounted-for funds

Audit revealed that many sub counties lacked supporting documents for funds spent. There are examples there; Katumba sub county, Kabale District, Rigbo sub-county and so many others.

The committee recommendations that:

    i) The Chief Administrative Officers should recover funds from the responsible officers.

    ii) The Accounting Officers should ensure that respective sub county officers account for funds in accordance with Section 43(2) of the Local Government Act.

1.4.2 Shs 7,713,000 unaccounted for in Akoromit sub-county in Kapelebyong District. I will not read the details but some money was swindled there. 

The committee recommends that the Accounting Officer should recover Shs 7,273,000 from Okisiomo Robert and Apio Sarah and Shs 273,000 from Ojilong Paul.

1.4.3 Shs 86,361,000 spent on NAADS and Shs 10,720,000 in respect of works in Kitgum District, Namukora subcounty was observed to have Shs 86,361,000 spent on NAADS - the details are there.

We observed that money was spent and work was fully accounted for later.

The committee recommends that the officer in charge of NAADS at that time, in Kitgum District, should be interdicted and the matter be investigated by the IGG for the loss of the above figures.

1.1.4 Shs 22,322,060 unaccounted for in Bubyanguin Mbale District. The figures are Shs 22,322,060 and Shs 4,472,000. For all this money, we recommend that the Chief Administrative Officer should recover from the responsible officers.

1.5 Lack of internal audit reports 
We noted this in many districts. I will not mention but we recommend that the chief administrative officers should ensure that internal audits are carried out and audit reports shared with sub counties to enable the officers at the subcounties take corrective action.

The chief administrative officer should always give quarterly audit reports to the subcounty to enable the officers there have reference points for taking corrective action.

1.6 Lack of acknowledgement of receipt books. This was common in most districts.

Failure to deduct and remit taxes - I had already alluded to this under a previous section.
The committee recommends that the accounting officers should ensure recovery and subsequent remittance of tax to the Authority.

1.7.2 Non-remittance of tax deductions to Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) 

Some sub-counties of Karangura, Kabarole District and some names are mentioned in there, the figures are also there.

The committee recommends that the Accounting Officers should comply with the Income Tax Act and remit the taxes to the Authority accordingly.

1.8 Lack of Sub-Accountants 

We noted this in almost all districts. You would find three sub-counties sharing one sub-accountant. He has to run to three or four sub counties and this becomes difficult for them to manage. That is why the anomalies were so many.

The committee recommends that the Accounting Officers should ensure that all sub counties under their jurisdiction recruit substantive sub accountants.

1.9 Failure to operate expenditure accounts 

The committee recommends that the Accounting Officers should ensure only one general fund account is operated and all expenditures should be made from respective expenditure accounts. Some of them were using this loophole to open other accounts where they run other businesses other than the main account, which the sub counties and the district know.

1.10 Lack of Board of Survey Reports 

The committee recommends that the chief administrative officer should ensure that board of survey reports are produced in time.

Inadequately Supported Expenditure

They cited some good examples of many sub-counties. The committee recommends that the Chief Administrative Officer should recover Shs 1,298,000 from Hanna Mutesi within six months from the adoption of this report because she was found to be the one who stole the money. Also, Shs 1,820,000 from Munyirwa Henry should be recovered within six months from the adoption of this report. 

Those two personalities were the ones found to have stolen the money and they must pay back Government money. 

Doubtful Expenditure

It was observed that there was no contract before the money was disbursed, contrary to the law. The case was cited in Katebwa Subcounty in Kabarole District.

We recommend that the Chief Administrative Officer recovers Shs 400,000 from Adonia Kimanywenda, the former Senior Assistant Secretary of the sub-county, within six months from the adoption of this report.

In Karangura sub-county in Kabarole District, expenditure amounting to Shs 300,000 lacked appropriate supporting documents. Here, we also recommended the accounting officers to ensure that all officers account for the funds within the stipulated time.

We also observed for Lubalangit sub-county in Kaabong District that expenditure worth Shs 8,841,000 lacked supporting documentation. We recommend that the chief accounting officer should recover the Shs 8,841,000 from Loyala Alfred Ben.

Similarly, all accounting officers should recover from the respective officers all funds that had doubtful expenditures as detailed. More details and examples are contained in the main report.

Local Revenue Collection and Management 

Non-remittance of shared local revenue to the district and lower local councils

The failure to remit shared local revenue creates a burden of unfulfilled commitments. There is some portion of money which is collected locally by sub-counties, which is supposed to be paid to local council chairpersons and parish councillors. However, most sub-counties could collect revenue and not share with the local councils as required. Most sub-county chiefs, who are now called senior assistant secretaries, have been ignoring these and the LCs are complaining.

We cited some examples of sub-counties like Kapyanga sub-county in Buyende District. The money should be remitted and then the respective LCs be paid their money.

We also recommend that all sub-counties, which did not remit their respective required amounts of local revenue, should do so within six months after the adoption of this report.

The accounting officers in subcounties should learn to budget for their activities appropriately to avoid using the share of other local governments to fulfil their own sub-county obligations at the expense of service provision in the lower local government.

Under-Collection of Local Revenue

I alluded to this earlier on and I will just go straight to the recommendations. The committee recommends that management should put in place a mechanism to manage the sub-counties’ reporting methods and to ensure that the financial statements are prepared and derived from accurate figures. All receipt books should systematically- I think I jumped the recommendations of the other one, I beg your pardon. 

The accounting officers should liaise with the relevant authorities to ensure that all budgeted funds are collected.

They should develop strategies to enable the sub-counties to collect all budgeted local revenue. 

Unsupported local revenue was identified in many districts like Namutumba, Ivukula sub-county, and many others. The committee recommends that management should put in place mechanisms to manage the sub-counties’ reporting methods and ensure that the financial statements are reported and derived from accurate figures.

All receipt books should be systematically recognised, and there should be proper and clear control over both the used and the unused receipt books. 

The accounting officers should ensure that the subcounties’ sub accountants are equipped with the basic bookkeeping and accounting skills.

Lack of Revenue Assessment

The committee recommends that the accounting officers should carry out revenue assessment for proper revenue management in all sub-counties.

The accounting officers should constitute revenue assessment committees at every sub-county.

Anomalies in the Revenue Report

I am not reading the details. The committee recommends that the accounting officers should ensure that mechanisms to manage the sub-counties’ reporting procedures and preparation of financial statements are put in place.

Weak Budgetary Control System

The recommendation of the committee is that the sub-counties should always adjust their budgets to suit the available funds. 

Unbanked Local Revenue 

I stated this earlier; I will not read more about it. However, it is a big anomaly and the committee recommends that the accounting officers should ensure that all revenues are banked intact before utilising, and provide accountability for the funds.

Failure to Maintain Revenue Registers

This was common in almost all sub-counties. The accounting officers should always update their revenue registers.

Failure to Produce Quarterly Revenue Returns

This was another one. The committee recommends that accounting officers ensure that monthly revenue returns are made and submitted to the councils as provided by the regulations.

Lack of Stores Ledgers

This was observed in may sub-counties. The committee recommends that all sub-counties establish stores ledger books at their offices to enable monitoring of items moving in and out of the stores.

Under Land And Fixed Assets Matters

Fixed assets registers: Lack of fixed assets registers was noted in almost all districts and sub-counties. The committee recommends that all accounting officers should ensure fixed assets registers are put in place and updated. Most of them were not updated. Those that had them did not update them.

Redundant assets: I had already said something about this under the district local governments. 

The committee recommended that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should always align their interventions to the particular needs and circumstances of entities that are meant to be beneficiaries.

Lack of Land Titles

It is almost the same case with the districts, schools and land titles for other institutions as mentioned above. The committee here recommends that land titles should be processed for all sub-county land under their jurisdiction.

The central Government should intervene and hold negotiations with Buganda Kingdom over the matter because most of these were found in sub-counties within Buganda but we also found some cases with sub-counties that had church land.

iii. The Ministry of Local Government should support and facilitate the acquisition of land titles for all sub-counties.

Staffing

Understaffing

We observed that this was common in most districts. The committee recommends that accounting officers should ensure that all key positions are fully filled.

Lack of segregation of duties

This was also common and we recommend that the accounting officers should ensure that appropriate staff are recruited and duties segregated.

Public procurement and disposal of assets under sub-counties

Non-compliance with PPDA guidelines

This was also almost the same with the previous one under district local governments and municipal councils. Therefore, the committee recommends that all subcounties should follow PDU guidelines as standards for procurements.

The Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) should recover the withholding tax from the Senior Assistant Secretaries and Senior Accounts Assistants in all subcounties where it was not deducted and remit it to URA, in accordance with the law. All subcounties that flouted the regulations should be reprimanded by the Accounting Officers.

Lack of procurement files

Here, the committee recommends that the CAOs should ensure that the procurement files are shared with sub-counties.

Micro-procurements not reported to the contracts committees

On this, Madam Speaker, we recommend that the accounting officers should ensure that micro-procurements are submitted to the contracts committee on a monthly basis, for ratification.

The Uganda Road Fund

Diversion of road funds for community access roads
This was very common, Madam Speaker. We implore Members to take keen interest in this because some monies sent to sub-counties to do community roads are being misappropriated by those accounting officers at sub-counties.

Therefore, the committee recommends that the CAOs should ensure that funds are used for activities for which they have been released.

Shortfall in grants

Shortfall in Government grants

Under this, there is a lot to read, Madam Speaker. The committee observed that unrealised revenue negatively affected the implementation of budgeted activities. The committee recommends that the accounting officers should endeavour to liaise with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to always realise their full budgets. Secondly, budgets should always be adjusted where funds are not realised.

Shortfall in donor funds

This was also cited in some cases where donors are supporting sub-counties. There are some details in there with tabulated information.

The committee recommends that all funds approved are realised from Government, otherwise service delivery will be affected. Secondly, sub-counties should budget for donor funds for which they have written commitment.

Secondary and tertiary institutions
Under collection of school fees and uncollected fees
The audit revealed that several secondary and tertiary institutions had fees uncollected by 30 December 2017. I will not read the examples but several schools were victims, for example, Lugogo Vocation Training Institute, Nabisunsa Girls School, Otoboi Comprehensive Secondary School; so many schools, the details of which Members will find in the main report.

The committee recommends as follows:

    i) The head teachers should ensure that all uncollected fees arrears are collected.

    ii) The boards of directors of various schools and institutions ought to consider the defaulted fees and decide which amounts ought to be written off, considering the prevailing circumstances, to avoid continued reflection of the same amounts in their statements; and

    iii) The principals of tertiary institutions should initiate measures to ensure that enrollment increases in their institutions.

Revenue shortfall

Details are there and I will not read them because there are some details which are tabulated. There are more details in the main report, which I already have tabled to this House.

The committee recommends as follows:

    i. The accounting officers should undertake further efforts to increase school enrollment and prepare realistic and achievable budgets;

    ii. The principals should make deliberate efforts to inform and encourage secondary school leavers to join their institutions; and

    iii. Head teachers of secondary schools and tertiary institutions, which were affected by the failure of the central Government to realise what was expected of it, should ensure that they engage the Minister of Education and Sports to ensure all the money is remitted to them in future.

Understaffing 

The details are here, Madam Speaker. This was common in most Government schools and tertiary institutions. Examples are in the table below. Other examples are in the main report. The ones in the executive summary are Katakwi High School, Matumu Secondary School, St Victorious, St Joseph’s College Layibi, Katakwi Technical Institute, Uganda College of Commerce Aduku, Mbale School of Hygiene, Canon Apolo Core PTC, Canon Lawrence Primary Teachers College, Soroti School of Comprehensive Nursing, Kaliro Primary School and so on and so forth.

Madam Speaker, I will not read all and so, let me go straight to the recommendation. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports should address the issue of understaffing in all secondary schools and tertiary institutions in this country.

Lack of approved staff establishments

The committee recommends that all schools should ensure that their school staff structures are duly approved. We found this common in almost all schools in the country.

Unconfirmed staff in the service

This one was also common, Madam Speaker, where the committee discovered that some staff connive with human resource officers to keep paying them even when they left the service. This is very common and we think this august House should pay attention to it. The House should discuss this matter and make a decision.

The committee recommends that all schools should ensure that they have structures that are recommended and duly approved. On the unconfirmed staff, the committee recommends that schools that choose to privately employ staff should stipulate, clearly, the agreed to terms and conditions between the schools and the temporary staff that they have employed.

School infrastructure

Inadequate training equipment for both secondary schools and tertiary institutions

Madam Speaker, here, there are some pictorials in the executive summary, for your perusal, but for the detailed findings, Members can find them in the main report, where we have put pictorials of so many schools and other institutions that have dilapidated structures including other challenges.

Here, we recommend that Government should provide facilitation to ensure schools and tertiary institutions acquire the required equipment and then renovate structures that are dilapidated.

3.4 	Lack of completion and occupational permits for the new buildings

The details are there but the recommendation is that the board of governors of schools and institutions should desist from using buildings that are not permitted by the respective authorities.

3.5 	Inadequate classrooms and workshops

This was also common and we cited examples of Nyondo Secondary School but there are many other examples in the main report. The committee recommends that Government should provide funds for infrastructural development at all schools.

3.6 	Lack of staff accommodation

This was also common in almost all schools and tertiary institutions in all districts. We were able to have a look at the ones that the Auditor-General audited. The committee recommends that Government should provide funds to enable the school put up staff accommodation.

3.7 	Dilapidated school dormitories
We recommend that the Government should provide funds for the refurbishment of all dilapidated school infrastructure.

3.8 	Lack of lightening arresters

Madam Speaker, the House talked about this several times but we got shocked, as a committee, that this still appeared in the audit report of Financial Year 2017/2018, yet, we thought the Government had resolved to provide large lightening arrestors to all schools. 

Therefore, we still recommend that all headteachers should ensure that all buildings are given occupational permits before they are used in order to avoid putting the lives of the occupants at risk. Also, all schools and tertiary institutions, which do not have lightening arrestors should install them within three months after the adoption of this report. 

3.9 	Inadequate school laboratories

This is the same issue with almost all schools. We cited many such as Gulu Army Secondary School and many others in the main report; Members will be able to find them. The recommendations are that: 

    1. The Ministry of Education and Sports should increase inspection of schools to ensure that they have the right teaching aids. 

    2. Accounting officers of local governments should ensure that they enhance the inspection departments to enable regular inspection of Schools in their jurisdiction.

    3. The Ministry of Education and Sports should ensure that it gives schools reagents that have a long lifespan. 

    4.  The Government should avail funds to enable all schools to build separate laboratories.

4.0 	School budgets

Unauthorised excess expenditure

This was common in many schools. We cited examples of national teachers’ colleges like Kabale and many others that I will not list. Kyambogo University was also among them. Some of the details are entailed in the tables that will be found in the main report.

However, the committee recommends that the accounting officers should ensure that all expenditures are spent as per the approved budget provisions and, where inevitable, they should seek authority from the governing council as required by the regulations. 

5.0 	Finance Planning and Management 

5.1 	Lack of approved strategic plans

This was common in most schools. Kitagata Secondary School was an example we decided to put in this summary report. However, the committee recommends that all secondary schools and tertiary institutions should establish strategic plans and present them for approval.

5.2 	Lack of internal audit reports

We cited examples here of Wekomire Secondary School in Kyegegwa District but many others are mentioned in the main report. Here, the committee recommends that the headteachers should liaise with the district internal auditors and ensure that the audit reviews are conducted in all schools as required by the regulations. 

The accounting officers of all districts should ensure that the internal auditors of their districts audit the schools under the jurisdiction of the district in time before the auditors from the office of the Auditor-General visit the schools.

5.3 	Lack of supporting documents

This was similar to those that I mentioned in the earlier reports. The committee recommends that the accounting officers of the schools that did not present supporting documents should recover all unaccounted-for funds from the responsible officers. We realised that some schools were mismanaging Government funds and, therefore, we recommend that monies are recovered.

5.4 Accumulated domestic arrears

Details are in the report there. However, the committee recommends that: 

    i) The Government should increase the capitation grant to all schools and tertiary institutions. 

    ii) Accounting officers should put in place measures to ensure that all private students pay their tuition in time. That is for other tertiary institutions.

5.5 Doubtful payment of domestic arrears

For this one, the details are there. However, we recommend, as a committee, that accounting officers should always ensure full discloser of all outstanding obligations of the college in the financial statements.

5.6 Non-compliance with statutory obligations, especially PAYE

The figures are indicated in the report. The committee recommends that headteachers should ensure that PAYE is promptly remitted within six months, from the date of adoption of this report.

5.7 Unaccounted-for funds 

Funds amounting to several – I cannot read all, Madam Speaker. However, a good number of funds were unaccounted for. Details will be found in the report. The recommendations are that:

    i) All pending accountabilities should be submitted to the auditors for reconsideration within six months of the adoption of this report. 

    ii) Institutions should ensure that they make timely accountability in accordance with the law.

5.8 	Delayed salary payments

This was also noted by the Auditor-General and the committee observed and recommended that the principals should follow up the matter with the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to ensure that the salary arrears are fully paid.

5.9 	Inadequate capitation grant

This was already alluded to. We recommend that the capitation grants of secondary schools and tertiary institutions released should be consistent with the enrolment of the schools.

6.0 	Compliance with PPDA guidelines

6.1 	Lack of procurement plans

The committee recommends that all schools that did not have procurement plans at the time of audit should ensure that procurement plans are always put in place in time and ensure that no procurement in done without a procurement plan. 

6.2 Lack of procurement officers

This one brings the previous challenge and we recommend that:

    i) Considering the time the school structures were established and the prevailing circumstances, the Ministry of Education and Sports should consider including the position of procurement officer in all schools and tertiary institutions because they do not have them and that is why we have that anomaly.

    ii) The same ministries should also consider reviewing the structure of schools and tertiary institutions to provide for all positions that may not have been envisaged at the time of establishing the school structures. Positions such as internal auditors and procurement officers cannot be overlooked.

6.3 	Irregular contract variations

Some figures are there, which were cited from the Auditor-General’s observation at Uganda College of Commerce, Aduku, where additional works were awarded and the construction of the administration block cost up to Shs 759 million, which was only 35 per cent of the original contract. There are some anomalies, which are noted there and some funds were lost. 

The committee recommends that accounting officers should always bring the variations to the attention of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority before –(Interjections)- I am actually concluding.

6.4. 	Lack of procurement quarterly reports

We recommend that the heads of institutions should file the quarterly procurement reports as required by law.

6.5 	Unqualified Suppliers

The committee recommends that schools and tertiary institutions should abide by the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act (PPDA) Regulations.

Failure to Dispose of Dilapidated Assets

The recommendation of the committee is the same as the previous, that the items that required disposal should be disposed as soon as possible to avoid further deterioration. 

Assets Register 

Lack of fix asset register: Here, we cited examples of San Giovanni School-Makiro and so many others. 

The committee recommends that all institutions should ensure that they have assets registers that are properly maintained and regularly updated.

Failure to Engrave School Assets

That was also another anomaly. 

Lack of Land Titles in Most Schools

Here, we noted several examples, which I will not read.  However, the committee recommends that the school administrations should work with the relevant ministries to ensure all land belonging to schools is titled in the names of the respective schools. Where districts have no surveyors, the head teachers should seek advice from the relevant authorities and seek services of private surveyors. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports should engage the church and the kingdoms where schools belong to on that matter accordingly. 

Boards of Governors 

Expired Board of Governors

We noted that some schools had expired boards. Here, the committee recommends that the boards of governors should be fully constituted, and where others are expired, they should be renewed and constituted as required by the law. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

Madam Speaker, as I table this committee report, I know it will be debated later but I would like you to allow me say a word of “thank you” for the support you gave us as a committee. You know that the load of work that is embedded in the mandate of this committee was enormous; imagine all the sub-counties of this country, the tertiary institutions, the district local governments and all other small units. 

Madam Speaker, I must state that Members of Parliament that were assigned to this committee were extraordinary. In some cases, when we would go to do our work in the sub-regions, Members would sit beyond mid-night. I remember when were in Mbale, we sat up to 2.00 a.m. Therefore, I must thank members of this committee for their commitment. 

I know this work cost some Members their seats. Some of them were totally committed to work and this is the reason we were able to produce this work. The workload was excessively bigger than that of my predecessors but we were able to finish it within the stipulated time. Unfortunately, we did not have enough time to present it last year, when it was ready, because of the challenges of COVID-19 and so on. 

I would like to thank my colleagues and above all thank you, Madam Speaker, for availing the resources. What we had in the budget could not allow us to do the work. Much as we were not able to do everything, we still have one, which is pending, on roads. I think it is because of the COVID-19 challenges that we were not able to do so. I am sure that my successor or whoever is coming will be able to conduct this. The extra resources you accorded to us, as Parliament, enabled us finish the work in time.

Madam Speaker, since this might be my last opportunity to speak in this House, I would like to take this opportunity, from the bottom of my heart, to thank you for the person that you are. Words are not enough to state it. However, the experience I had working with you as my Speaker, right from the Eighth Parliament - I remember how you dedicated your time to come to my district, in the Eighth Parliament, even when you did not know me but you endeavoured to come all the way.

You even endeavoured to walk on foot on Aswa Bridge, which was broken. After walking on that bridge, you came and made statements and contacted ministers. Now, because of that, the bridge is built –(Applause). You touched my life. I thought that before I leave this House, I should thank you for that.

Secondly, thank you for being good to everyone. I know that you are receiving many abuses left, right and centre in this country. Surprisingly, you do not respond to them, which is typical of you. I would like to say that the next Parliament should consider retaining you as the Speaker of this House. (Applause) I strongly believe that God is going to make you the Speaker of this House for the next five years because I see the next Parliament having younger people than the Eighth Parliament, which I first joined.

I joined the Eighth Parliament when I was 27 years old. You gave us time, as the young Members of Parliament, to mentor us. I remember how you would take your time to invite the young ones and talk to them in your office and visit them in their homes when they were sick. You take extra duties, which are beyond your responsibility. Such kind of character is not easy to find. For that purpose, I thought I would say, “thank you.” May God bless you abundantly, this country and every Member of Parliament with whom I served from the beginning up to now.

Madam Speaker, before I rest my case, I would like to thank the staff of the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government). They were able to work beyond the time limit of their schedule. I would like to particularly thank the two staff in my office, Caleb and Tom Kijoli, who have always been able to sit in the office. Even during the COVID-19 times, when all members of staff would not be able to come, these two were always in office to make sure that work of this committee is done.

Above all, I thank the entire staff of Parliament. They have been a nice team to work with. For that purpose, I would like to pray that God will enrich the hearts of the coming Parliament to ensure that they have you as the next Speaker of this House. I know that is not part of this committee report and it should not be part of the debate, but I thank God that I was able to say it. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Thank you, honourable chairperson and members of the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government).

Ms ogwal: Madam Speaker, I am rising for guidance on a procedural matter. We are always very well constituted and the panel of ministers is always here, when we are presenting requests for loans or matters of that nature. 

Madam Speaker, we have given the responsibility of identifying accounting officers to the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development, and they are therefore, the main stream ministry to supervise these people. The report we have received today is very important, and the recommendations are actually a prescription to correct our systems.

For us to make this report and receive these recommendations when we have only the Minister of Integrity and Religious Affairs, who does not directly supervise money - I feel that we all make sacrifice; it is a matter of sacrifice. 
I think that the Government is actually facilitating ministers even better than members of Parliament, but I see these members of Parliament sitting here. Some of them are not even members of the committee, but they are interested in learning and making sure that they receive the recommendation, and try to implement them in their various sectors. 

Madam Speaker, through you – I even do not know what to say - can you please talk to the Prime Minister to whip the team so that we feel like we are working together? We are trying our best and we want somebody to carry our report and put it to action. I seek guidance on that. I felt very disappointed that this committee has come up with very strong recommendations, but we do not have any minister from the finance ministry to receive the report. Madam Speaker, we need guidance. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would really like to thank hon. Franca Akello and the Committee of Public Accounts, Local Government, for this very elaborate comprehensive and revealing report.  

Actually, listening to it, you worry. You actually ask yourself if there is anyone supervising these entities; 122 districts with over 1000 sub-counties, 355 secondary schools and very many tertiary institutions. 

I think that we shall demand that the Prime Minister comes together with his ministers and we debate this. We cannot afford to keep quiet about this because eventually, we shall require a treasury memorandum. However, they must hear our thoughts on the report. It is very revealing. 

7.03 
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Franca very much for the hard work she put into the Committee of Local Government (PAC) of Parliament.

However, I would like to say that this committee is faced with in a lot of work due to the laxity at district level. Districts should try to help the sub-counties, the divisions and the municipals as well. In every district, we also have local government accounts committees that are not politicians like us here; they call them PAC, Local Government. 

I took my time to visit some of the districts, but you will find that those committees were not properly constituted. Besides, capacity building - they have not been helped. Otherwise, these people would find it a little bit easier if PAC at Local Government and district level were able to do their work very well. 

This Local Government Accounts Committee of Parliament did double work. They would go and burn candles to make sure that they come up with this report. I would like to appreciate you very much. 

About two weeks ago, some journalists came to me and were worried about the reports, but I told them that we still have time. 

Hon. Franca, today is not your last time to speak before Parliament. This Parliament goes up to May, I suppose. So, we still have time to interface and interact. 

Nonetheless, we would like to thank you. Of all the accountability committees, you put a lot of effort because you cover very wide areas. Thank you. This does not cover only districts or municipalities or divisions, but up to sub-counties, schools and all other government entities. This was a very hard task, but you accomplished it; together with your committee, and all the staff. 

I would also like to say, “thank you.” Thank you for doing the work of the country. It is not the work of the Opposition but it is work for the people of Uganda; to make us also feel better at local government level, and reduce the high levels of corruption. That is why you have all those recommendations. Thank you very much for the report.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a day will be appointed and the Prime Minister and the Members should appear here, so that they hear this report. We cannot afford to keep quiet about the recommendations. 

Honourable members, there is something a bit urgent. I would like to seek your indulgence that we go to that item. Clerk, what item is that?

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LEADERSHIP CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

7.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Rev. Fr. Simon Lokodo): Madam Speaker, given the time and the situation that surrounds us, I can also say thank you for the opportunity for me to read this Bill. 

I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Leadership Code (Amendment) Bill, 2020” be read for the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Members, is the motion seconded? [Members rose] It is seconded. Justify it. 

REV. FR LOKODO: Madam Speaker, the object of principles of the Bill are: 

    i) To amend the Leadership Code Act, No. 17 of 2002; 
    ii) To clarify what constitutes interest in the property by a leader; 
    iii) To require all public officers to declare their income, assets, liabilities to the Inspector General of Government; 
    iv) To extend the jurisdiction of the leadership tribunal to complaints made by any person aggrieved by the decision of the Inspectorate of Government, under Section 17, paragraph 7 of the code; 
    v) To prescribe remedies for breach of the code; and 
    vi) To provide for other related matters. 

The proposal to amend the Act is intended to further empower the Inspectorate of Government and the Leadership Code Tribunal, to enforce the values of integrity and proper conduct in the leadership of Uganda; values which are critical in the pursuit of development, democracy, good governance and the promotion of the rule of law. 

The defects in the existing law: 

Parliament, in 2017 - I take the opportunity again to thank this Parliament, for it enacted the Amendment Act, 2017 - passed the Leadership Code (Amendment) Act 2017. The Act established the Leadership Code Tribunal that is responsible for enforcing the Act.

Here at the gallery, are the members of the Leadership Code - the first time in Ugandan history to have a Leadership Code Tribunal.

The Leadership Code Tribunal is now operational. Various loopholes have, however, been identified in the Act that will hinder the effectiveness of the Tribunal in enforcing the Leadership Code of Conduct.

Thus, the penalties prescribed in the Leadership Code Amendment Act, 2017 are not aligned with breaches in the Code. Prior to the amendment of the Act, penalties for breach of the code were provided for in Section 35 of the Act. Each of the prescribed penalties corresponded with the particular section regarding breach of the law. 

When the provisions were amended and substituted, there was no consequential amendment of section 35, to correspond with the substantial provisions. For example, section 35(b) imposes a punishment of dismissal from office upon a leader who breaches Section 4(6) and Section 4(8).

The original Section 4(6) and Section 4(8) under Act No. 17 of 2002, referred to failure to submit a declaration within the specified time and failure to submit the declaration respectively, which would result in dismissal under section 35(b).

However, the amended section 4(6) refers to a leader having an interest in property while Section 4(8) refers to proof of ownership of the declared assets.

The two provisions in Section 4(6) and 4(8) are requirements under the law, not breaches yet they attract dismissal under Section 35(b). This will jeopardise the enforcement of the Act since it is untenable to enforce the law hence is without breaches and corresponding penalties.

Therefore, it is necessary to amend the Act to enable the Inspectorate of Government and the Leadership Code Tribunal to enforce the code effectively and to align the breaches with the penalties.

Madam Chairperson, this is an Act to amend the Leadership Code Act, 2002 to;

    1. Clarify what constitutes conflict of interest.
    2. Require all public officers to declare their income, assets and liabilities to the Inspectorate of Government.
    3. Extend the jurisdiction of the Leadership Code Tribunal to complaints made by any person aggrieved by the decision of the IGG paragraph 7.7 of the code. 
    4. Prescribe remedies for breach of the code.
    5. Provide for other related matters. 

Therefore, may it be enacted. 

THE SPEAKER: I think what you are doing is to request us to take the second reading. Anyway, can we get the report of the committee?

7.14
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Speaker, as the honourable minister stated, the committee had the opportunity to review this. Honourable colleagues, I would like to seek the indulgence of the Speaker so that I am allowed to just give a summary of the detailed report because it has been uploaded onto our iPads. 

THE SPEAKER: Please, proceed.

MR OBOTH: The committee largely agreed with the object of the Bill. We had consultations with various stakeholders and as you may recall, this is purely to harmonise the 2017 Bill and give effect to where we left out a few things or due to emerging things.

Clause 2 of the Bill proposes to amend section 4 of the principal Act by substituting for the definition of “interest in property” in Section 4(6)(a) of the principal Act and inserting a new subsection to make provision for “a leader who makes false declaration of his or her income, assets or liabilities as well as a leader who, without reasonable cause, fails to file a declaration within the prescribed time”.

Currently, Section 4(6) of the Leadership Code Act requires that a leader shall be taken to have an interest in an income or an asset and therefore, required to make a declaration of the same to the Inspectorate of Government where the income or asset - The proposal is to expand that.

The committee observes that the amendment proposed in the Bill introduces two matters to the provision. The first matter relates to assets or income owned, jointly acquired or developed by the leader with another person. 

The second matter relates to the requirement for a leader to declare assets and income acquired by the leader or developed by the leader for another person.
 
The committee notes that in obligating leaders to declare their assets and income, regard must be given to the protection of privacy of the other persons who are connected to the leader but are not themselves leaders, like the leader's spouse or children.

The committee, therefore, finds the proposal to require a leader to declare income or assets, which the leader “develops” alone, with or for another person to be redundant since it is not only already covered and required that the leader has to declare assets and income where he or she has an interest but also extends into matters that may infringe on the right to privacy of persons who are not leaders.

Declaration of assets, income and liabilities by public officers
The summation of this is that when we made the amendment in 2017, we talked about “leaders” and we left out “public officers”. Here the proposal is to have every clause and section where a “leader” appears to have “public officers”.

Therefore, purely clauses like 4, 6, 8, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 ,18, 19, 21, 22, 23 and 24 that extend the Act to apply to public officers should be adopted with amendments to include the words “or” before the words, “public officer” whenever appropriate. This is about aligning.

Power of the Inspectorate to Require Clarification
The Bill proposes in Clause 7 to amend Section 5 of the principal Act to empower the inspectorate to, in writing, require a leader or a public officer to account for any matter in connection to a declaration made by the leader or public officer to the inspectorate.

The Bill proposes to penalise a leader who does not, without justifiable cause, comply with the request within 60 days to a warning, caution, dismissal or vacation of office.

Whereas the committee agrees with the principle to penalise a leader or public officer who fails to respond to a request or clarification from the inspectorate, the proposal to vacate office is too harsh when compared to other penalties proposed in the Bill.

The committee, therefore, notes that while a person who does not clarify a declaration maybe dismissed from office, a person who does not file a declaration, under Clause 25, is liable to a fine not exceeding twenty currency points per month, for the initial three months of non-submission of a declaration, rising to forty currency points per month for the next two months.

Madam Speaker, that is also a new thing. The committee is of the considered opinion that the proposals contained in Clause 25 in the proposed paragraph (b) of amendment to section 35 should be adopted since they escalate with every refusal, and they are commensurate with the seriousness of the breach committed.

In light of the above, the committee recommends that clause 7 stands as part of the Bill with amendment to the proposed sub-section (3) (2), by deleting words appearing after the word “code” and instead expand the proposals contained in Clause 25 in the proposed paragraph (b) of the amendment to Section 35 by including a breach of Section 5 (2). This will prescribe a penalty that is commensurate with the breach committed by the leader or public officer, given that non-declaration and failure to respond to requests for clarification are different.

Madam Speaker, our report makes comment on other proposals in the Bill touching on duration of verification, functions of the tribunal and penalties for breach of code. The committee has scrutinised these proposals and made recommendations, which are detailed in the main report that I referred to earlier, and which is in the possession of the Members.

I beg to report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairman and members of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Again, I need to acknowledge the massive work that has been done by your committee in the last few weeks. Many of the Bills here have been from your committee; so, thank you so much. 

The report has been signed by the necessary minimum members; do members have comments?

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, my former deputy chairperson noticed that I had extra files and as you were acknowledging the works the committee has done, I would like to lay a copy of the report on the Table and the records of the proceedings.

7.25
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I have taken trouble to read the Bill and the report and I find very little controversy. I do not think this report will attract debate.

However, I am wondering why the committee did not consider putting in this Bill - maybe they can advise where we can put this idea of lifestyle audit. It is very difficult to hide your lifestyle. I think this is the time and it is becoming a common practice for us to know why somebody should move from a Corona vehicle to a Land Cruiser to a helicopter. You move from one wife to four and you need to provide for all of them according to the Islamic law. We need to have it somewhere; if it cannot come from this - and the Minister of Ethics and Integrity is interested in this - then where will it come from? 

I do not know whether you have observed it. If you take trouble to drive around the seven hills of Kampala, you will find exotic estates and the owners of those estates are little known but they work in Government. We want to know where they get that money to build. I know you can get a loan but we are interested to know beyond what is most obvious. Where can we have a lifestyle audit ever in our law, so that we feel comfortable that whatever wealth you have, you have earned it? Thank you.

7.28
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for this Bill but my worry is the way the chairperson of the committee has given us a summary. I was wondering whether we would be able to debate it properly because he has just told us to add this, remove this, like mathematics.

To add the public officials is agreeable because these are people who are holding different responsibilities in Uganda. However, I do not know whether the chairperson was saying that somebody should not vacate office. I do not know whether that was what he meant. If it is so, then we are going to water down this law systematically, because twenty currency points is just about Shs 400,000.

Somebody will break the law tomorrow and he is sure that he will pay this straightaway. However, if you hold him or her and say that if you fail to declare your assets and liabilities, the consequence is a, b, c, d, - that is why, Madam Speaker, if that bit is what the chairman of the committee was proposing, I would actually oppose it by saying, “No”.

7.30
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, just like you put it, I need to join you and thank the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for the hard work that they have exhibited. They have done such a great job in a very short time; so many Bills at a go.

However, I have a comment. In whatever we do, we need to consider the provisions of Article 28, which speaks to the right to a fair hearing. In whatever we prescribe in this law, let us always be mindful of that.

There is need for us to fight corruption but we also need to fight it carefully without going overboard by abusing the rights of citizens of Uganda.

You talked about issues of dismissal and a penalty that will be harsh in given circumstances. I would like to believe that the committee discussed it well and I think you are on the right track. A penalty should be equated to the depth of the crime committed.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, the committee is spot on; we should not go overboard and give penalties which make people run away from their own country. This House should be mindful that there are also people who have invested in a very hard way to acquire their wealth. 

However, because of people who have dark hearts against them, they can maliciously put you in a certain angle and that will not be good for you. That is why the law must always remain fair. I would like to thank the chairperson and members of the committee. That is wisdom. 

I also want to add to the other point concerning public officers. There are many public officers who have huge assets as compared to the so-called assets of the leaders, who are the leaders indeed, Madam Speaker.

If you look at the houses they have - these are public officers - you are calling us leaders but your leaders here do not even have anything in their pockets. They are not well off. If you look at the houses they sleep in, most of us are still in boys’ quarters.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I think the committee was wise to say that where we see the word “leader”, let there be the word “public officer” to accompany it. That is wisdom. Because of time, Madam Speaker, the brilliant team has already done a good job. If you accept, through your wisdom and guidance, let this continue to the next stage. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear Hon. Dulu and then we go to Committee Stage.

7.33
MR MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani County East, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I thank both the minister and committee for the Bill that they have forwarded to us here.

However, I was thinking about two or three areas where there are certain characters that would be funny enough to make some accounting arrangements in terms of sale and purchase and leases. 

When they know that it is about time to declare wealth, they can play around with accounting. They pretend to have sold like they are raising funds but in actual sense, there has been no sale that took place. By the time of declaration, they would skip that and immediately thereafter, they would have an agreed period of time within which the property reverts back. 

I thought that maybe the minister or committee would take time and have a look at that kind of situation so that people who behave like that can easily be caught. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

7.35
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I always think that these public servants are also leaders in their own way. However, that is where corruption is most. All the time, eyes are on elected leaders but public servants are very corrupt.

If we reduce the sentence or what you deserve after being found corrupt, we will be actually promoting corruption. Instead, there should be restriction. The sentence should be heavy to deter people from this corrupt tendency. You will find that people are living in abject poverty yet a lot of resources are sent to the public offices and they try to use it in their own ways. They say, “If I do not do this, I will not survive”.

That is what I wanted to say; that we should make the sentence very heavy to deter people from thinking of taking public resources anyhow. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is a pity that we have not been debating the annual reports of the IGG. However, I want to assure you that some good work has been going on there. In their last report, they informed me that they were able to trace hidden wealth and recover a full block of apartments from one of the public servants.

It is only that their work is not hyped but there is some good work going on and we should encourage them by giving them the necessary tools.

Honourable members, I put the question that the Leadership Code (Amendment) Bill, 2020 be read for a second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LEADERSHIP CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Chairperson, we propose to delete paragraph (a) of Clause 2. 

The justification is that the proposal contained in paragraph (a) will require a leader to declare expenditure, which shall be contrary to the object of the Leadership Code Act, 2002.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that paragraph (a) of Clause 2 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR OBOTH: In Clause 3, we have a proposal that Clause 3 of the Bill be amended as follows;

    a) In subclause (1) by deleting the words “subject to sub-section (16)”

    b) In Section 4(a)(1) by inserting immediately after paragraph (a) the following and renumbering the provisions accordingly “be within three months after appointment to the public service”, 

    c) in Section 4(a)(3) by 
    i) Deleting the words “or developed” whenever the words appear in the provision.
    ii) Deleting subparagraph (3).

d)	By deleting subsection 4 (a) (16)

The justification is that the requirement for a public officer to declare his or her assets liabilities and income within three months after appointment to the public service or is introduced to ensure that persons who join public service declare their income, assets and liabilities on appointment in order to curtail the illicit acquisition of wealth. This goes into lifestyle audits. The moment you get a job as a clerk, you must declare what you came with before you started work. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, do not respond to heckling.

MR OBOTH: Sorry. Within three months of your appointment, whether you are on probation or not, you must declare so that we know what you have come with and do not claim when you climb to a certain level and say, “I had this one; I got it in Kumi or Tororo Local Government, or, I was a businessman.” You must declare everything.

This is the biggest net that this Bill has brought and among other justifications, Madam Chairperson.

MR AOGON:  The committee chairperson is right. My worry is that when we talk about- I know hon. Ogwal is very much interested in this law; the issue of lifestyle audit. Yesterday, you had two women and today, you have ten. Where did you get the extra eight from? 

However, Madam Chairperson, there are people who also borrow their lifestyle. If, for instance, hon. Abala has a V8 and I always drive my pick up, because he is my friend, I can start enjoying his V8. Next time, I borrow from another person, we must be very careful as we craft these laws.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable member, if you borrow his car, you will not declare it. It is not yours and so, you cannot declare it.  Honourable members I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7 

MS ISALA ERAGU: Madam Chairperson, there is a bit of change of guard and in Clause 7, we propose replacement of section 5 of the principal Act. Clause 7 is amended by;

1. Substituting for Section 5(2)(a) (b) and (c) the following;
“a) 	Pay a fine not exceeding 10 currency points per month for the initial three months after the failure to comply with the request for clarification under subsection (1).
b)	Pay a fine not exceeding 12 currency points per month for the next two months after the request referred to in subparagraph (a).
c)	Have his or her emoluments withheld until he or she complies with the request for clarification referred to in subparagraph (b) and then 
d)	A warning, demotion or dismissal from office in addition to the penalty prescribed in subparagraph (c).”

2. By inserting immediately after Section 5(2) the following; “(3) the authorised officer shall refund emoluments withheld under sub-section (2)(c) to the leader or public officer upon the leader or public officer submitting a clarification of his or her declaration in accordance with this section.”

Justification is; 
    1. To provide for penalties for failure to comply with an order to clarify a declaration made by a leader or a public officer. 

    2. To allow for the refund of a leader’s emoluments upon compliance with the request for clarification.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 7 be amended as-

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, the proposal of 10 currency points, I would like us to equate - I do not know if it is possible to categorise these public officials, if it is okay because you cannot put directors, permanent secretaries and you compare to the accounting officers below. 

I am of the opinion that if it is okay, I am sorry that it appears like smuggling but it would be better if we segregated the fines so that we know what we are talking about. When you put 10 currency points, that is Shs 200,000 yet, someone is worth about Shs one million. That is why I wanted to be helped if it would be better- the committee would categorise them so that we know who these people are specifically.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we do not allow spontaneous amendments on the Floor. No.

Mr oboth: The information is that the ten currency points’ penalty is about Shs 200,000. This is about failure to declare; therefore, as a punishment, in a period, you pay Shs 200,000 and you continue. They will deduct from source until you submit; so, it could even go to more than that. Therefore, it is not that this is small. We are also guided by the principle of having what we talked about - what is the offence we are dealing with here?

Mr aogon: Madam Chairperson, I know that we are concerned about spontaneous submissions, but this is a very critical Bill. My concern is leaving somebody to forfeit 100 per cent of his emoluments. These people have families and this might be their entire survival. 

Therefore, I would think that it is proper to prescribe a percentage and we leave something for such people to survive on as they wait for this matter to be settled. A penalty should not finish somebody. It is deterrent but it should not take somebody to the grave.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, when you are interdicted in the civil service, you get half pay. This is done every month until you comply.

Mr abala: Madam Chairperson, this is why I am of the opinion that this being a critical area, we should stay the matter. The committee could sort it out properly so that when it is brought back here, we proceed.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 7 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12

Ms isala: In Clause 12, we propose an amendment to Section 12A of the principal Act. We propose that Clause 12 of the Bill is amended as follows:

a) 	By substituting for paragraph (a) the following:
	“(a) in sub-sections (1), (2) and (5) by inserting the words, “or public officer” immediately after the word, “leader” wherever it appears”

b) 	By inserting a new paragraph (b) as follows and renumbering the clauses accordingly:
	“(b) in subsection (3) by inserting immediately before the words, “public officer” the words, “leader or a” 

c) 	By substituting subsection (4) with the following:
	“(4) Notwithstanding any direction to the contrary under sub-section (3)(a), a leader or a public officer shall not influence the award of a contract to -
(a) 	himself or herself;
(b) 	any person related to him or her by blood or marriage;
(c) 	a business associate, agent or partner; or
(d) 	a company, partnership or other entity or body in which the leader or the public officer, any person related to him or her by blood or marriage, has an interest.”

The proposal is intended to extend application of the provision to a public officer.

Mr aogon: Madam Chairperson, on the issue of influence, what ingredients shall we be measuring to determine there was influence? I think it is very difficult sometimes to determine whether there was influence or not. People who are related in most cases work in the same organisations. Are we going to say that people are never going to trade in any way if they have a relationship? I think there is a big problem.

The Chairperson: It is a matter, which has to be established through evidence. There is always evidence. They will examine those allegations and see whether they merit attention.

Ms ogwal: I would like the committee to clarify to me whether sub-clause (4) only applies to award of contract or does the contract include employment engagement –(Interjection)– So, it also includes employment engagement. 

The Chairperson: Yes. Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 12 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

The Chairperson: Committee chairperson, I think you have a new clause to insert.
 
Ms isala: The committee proposes insertion of a new clause immediately after Clause 12. We propose that the Bill is amended by inserting immediately after Clause 12 the following:

“Insertion of Section 12B in the principal Act

The principal Act is amended by inserting immediately after section 12A the following:

12B. Abuse of public property 
(1) 	A leader or public officer shall protect and preserve public property under his or her personal use and shall not use such property or allow its use for any other purpose other than the authorised purpose.

(2) 	In this section, ‘public property’ includes any form of real or personal property in which the Government or public body has ownership; a plant, equipment, leasehold or other property interest as well as any right or other intangible interest that is purchased with public funds, including the services of contractor personnel, office supplies, telephones and other telecommunications equipment and services, mails, automated data, public body records, and vehicles.

(3) A leader or public officer who knowingly misuses or allows public property entrusted to his or her care to be misused, abused or left unprotected shall make good the loss occasioned to the property and the value of the property or damage to the property shall constitute a debt from the leader or public officer to the Government or public body concerned.

(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section (3), a leader or public officer who knowingly misuses or allows public property entrusted to his or her care to be misused or abused or left unprotected may, in addition to the sanctions under that subsection, be -
    (a) warned or cautioned;
    (b) demoted; or
    (c) dismissed from office.”

The Justification is to provide for further protection of public property. 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Madam Chairperson and the chairperson of the committee. I am seeking clarification on whether this provision will be applicable to the Office of the President. Thank you. (Laughter)

MR OBOTH: The answer is that the President is a leader under this law. 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: In that case, looking at the sanctions provided for in (4), we need to be practical in making this law. Do you think that the President can be dismissed from office? Can he be demoted or warned and cautioned? We need to know this so that we are sure because we do not want to make a law that appears to target other people and leave others out. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think that the President is not subject to prosecution while in office, so, it cannot happen. 

Honourable members, I put the question that – (Mr Aogon rose_) Yes? 

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, when we use the words “abused” or “misused”, can we qualify them? What would tantamount to abuse or misuse? In this case, if I am carrying my extended family and they fill up the pickup – do you expect me to move alone in that car? I think clarity should be made.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, implementation of this Act will be made effective by regulations, which will give all the other – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to.

Clause 13, deleted.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15

MS ISALA: Madam Chairperson, in clause 15, insert the words “or a” immediately before the words, “public officer”. 

The justification is that this is to insert missing words. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 15 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16 

MS ISALA: Madam Chairperson, it is exactly the same amendment as was in clause 15. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 16 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17

MS ISALA: Madam Chairperson, they are all the same up to – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I still have to put the question. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 17 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18 

MR ISALA: Madam Chairperson, clause 18 is the same – insert the words “or a” immediately before the words, “public officer”. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 18 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20 

MS ISALA: Clause 20 is amendment of section 19B of the principal Act. We propose that paragraph (b) be deleted. 

The justification is that this is to maintain the unfettered discretion of the exercise of disciplinary control granted to the President over persons appointed to constitutional offices as was stated in the decision of the Constitutional Court in the case of Fox Odoi-Oywelowo and James Akampumuza v. Attorney-General, Constitutional Petition No.8 of 2003. 

The proposal to delete paragraph (c) of section 19B will in effect fetter the disciplinary control of the President over persons appointed by him to constitutional offices and will reverse the decision of court in the above mentioned case.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, the question is that paragraph (b) be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23

MS ISALA: Madam Chairperson, in Clause 23, we propose to insert the words “or a” immediately before the words “public officer”. 

The justification is that this is to insert missing words. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 23 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, as emended, agreed to.

Clause 24 

MS ISALA: Madam Chairperson, in Clause 24, the committee proposes to insert the words “or a” immediately before the words “public officer”.

The justification is that this is to insert missing words. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 24 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as emended, agreed to.


Clause 25 

MS ISALA: Madam Chairperson, Clause 25 is a replacement of section 35 of the principal Act. Clause 25 of the Bill is amended- 

1. By substituting for paragraph (a) the following- 
“(a) in the case of a breach under sections 4(10) and 4A(5), be liable to- 
(i) 	pay a fine not exceeding 200 currency points; 
(ii) 	caution;
(iii) 	demotion;
(iv) 	dismissal from office; 
(v) 	have the excess or undeclared property confiscated and forfeited to the Government where it is proved that the excess or undeclared property was unlawfully acquired; or
(vi) 	forfeit the monetary equivalent of the excess or undeclared property referred to in subparagraph (iv), to the Government.” 

2. In paragraph (b)-
(i) 	in subparagraph (iii), by inserting the words “until he or she submits a declaration” immediately after the word “withheld”. 
(ii) 	in subparagraph (iv), by substituting for the word “remedies” the word “penalties”.

3. By  renumbering the current provision as subsection (1) and inserting immediately, after the following:  
“(2) The authorised officer shall refund the emoluments withheld under sub-section (1) (b) (iii) to the leader or public officer upon the leader or public officer submitting a declaration of his or her income, assets and liabilities in accordance with this Act.”

Justification

The amendments to paragraph (a) are intended to expand the provision to include other penalties that may be imposed by the Tribunal and to limit the power to forfeit to property that was illicitly acquired by the leader or public officer.

The amendments to paragraph (b) are intended to prescribe the duration of withholding of the emoluments of a leader or public officer for delay or failure to submit a declaration.

The insertion of new sub-section (2) is to allow for a refund of the withheld emoluments of a leader or a public officer upon submission of a declaration.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 25-

MR ODUR: The proposal in paragraph (a), they are referring to sub-paragraph 4, when it should have been 5 because 4 refers to dismissal from office. Maybe, it could be realigned.

MR OBOTH: That is brilliant, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 25 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, as amended, agreed to.

Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

8.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (ETHICS AND INTEGRITY) (Rev. Fr Simon Lokodo): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House do report thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House do report there to.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (ETHICS AND INTEGRITY) (Rev. Fr. Lokodo Simon): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered a Bill entitled, “The Leadership Code Amendment Bill, 2020” and passed a number of clauses and amended clauses 2, 3, 7, 12, 12 (b), 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 23, 24 and 25. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (ETHICS AND INTEGRITY) (Rev. Fr Simon Lokodo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS

THIRD READING
THE LEADERSHIP CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

8.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (ETHICS AND INTEGRITY) (Rev. Fr. Lokodo Simon): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Leadership Code (Amendment) Bill, 2020” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that The Leadership Code (Amendment) Bill, 2020 be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE LEADERSHIP CODE (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2021”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes. (Applause)

8.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (ETHICS AND INTEGRITY) (Rev. Fr Simon Lokodo): Madam Speaker, this resilience is exceptional. On behalf of the Director for Ethics and Integrity and the anti-corruption agencies and the Leadership Code Tribunal, I would like to register my sincere deeply felt gratitude to you for standing with us and giving us this opportunity to conclude this Bill.

This is a timely action because had we not done it today, it would given the Tribunal no job. Hence, we are now declaring that the declaration is from 01 March to 30 March. 

If this law was not in place, then the Tribunal would be redundant for the next three years until the next declaration. However, you have just made it at the right time. Thank you very much.

Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. It is very exceptional, cooperative and they have been together with us. That is why you saw, I did not say anything to object because Iconceded to whatever was said. We had harmonised everything and we did not want to tie the nerves of the Members. 

Thank you for standing with us and for the contribution in making this Bill a solution to the fight against the malaise called corruption in this country. God bless all of us. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I hope you will now lead us to the canteen. (Laughter)

8.16
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate the honourable minister together with the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Now that the minister has concluded with this, I know two weeks ago, we raised the issue of the non-appointment of the Deputy of the Inspector General of Government. I understand his term has also expired and the other one is remaining with a few days.

I would like to learn from the minister, now that we have passed this, who is going to do the implementation of this? What is coming? It is a serious matter that needs to be addressed urgently.

REV. FR LOKODO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable colleague for raising this issue. Yes, it is true the IGG left office because her contract expired and by law, the IGG has two terms and they are non-renewable. The IGG already left and another deputy left just recently. The other one is at the verge of leaving in the next three or four months.

This is in the attention of the appointing authority. I have discussed with him one on one and I know he is in the process of fully constituting the Inspectorate of Government because without that, this law will be futile. We are very sure that any time from now, we shall have the Inspectorate of Government fully constituted for this function. Thank you.


8.18
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the minister in appreciating you resilience, determination and commitment to the cause.

As the minister stated, in his wisdom, he brought the Bill around November when we had been nominated for general elections. You can imagine and when they called us, we were in the middle of campaigns. I would like to thank the members of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

Madam Speaker, I have had a family for a committee. You see us cascading presentations; every person is knowledgeable about what is going on in the committee. There were a few lapses where two members were not able to do their part, but I want to appreciate hon. Isala Bichetero, hon. Jovah Kamateeka, hon. Rwakoojo, hon. Asuman Basalirwa who is not here, hon. Niwagaba among others. Those are very committed.

I also appreciate hon. Paul Akamba and my vice-chairperson, hon. Sam Bitangaro and the staff headed by Max Komakech and John Tamale, who does not want to be mentioned; he is shaking his head. Without them is without us. They have been there when we needed them. I do not know which other committee has processed a number of Bills like this one. 

We want to thank you, Madam Speaker. We have a few Bills left, the Anti-Slavery Trafficking Bill and some two constitutional amendments. The Succession (Amendment) Bill is already here and the Sexual Offences Bill - just one clause which I am sure that Madam Speaker will further guide on.We have finished the report and the mover is concerned about one clause, which is very sensitive. The committee made a decision, which is super sensitive.

I thank everyone and the members from the other side - hon. Odur, the members for Kumi, Kasilo, and the Leader of the Opposition, among others-

THE SPEAKER: And hon. Cecilia Ogwal.

MR OBOTH: She moved out in protest when we failed to pronounce Oywelowo’s name properly. I think it meant something in Lango.We appreciate all of you, members. May God bless you all. The staff from the Ministry of Ethics and Integrity provided us with the information whenever we needed it. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson and members of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Again, on behalf of the House, I want to record our great appreciation for the tremendous work you have done especially during this Third Meeting of the Fifth Session. We will try as much as possible to ensure that the remaining work is concluded. 

I instruct the Clerk to work expeditiously on proofreading this Bill and sending it for assent because time is of essence; the declarations end on the 31st. Minister, ensure that His Excellency the President assents to this law as quickly as possible so that it can come into force.

I thank the members and the staff for staying here for many hours; this is part of our national duty. I wish you a good weekend.

House adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. Incidentally, Tuesday marks exactly 100 years of the Parliament of Uganda - since 1921 - We have the COVID-19 pandemic! (Laughter)

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, COVID-19 or not, we should celebrate the 100 years that we are now here. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, you have heard. Members think that we should eat and they are right. Honourable members, the House is adjourned to Tuesday. Thank you.

(The House rose at 8.22 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 23 March 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 
