


Tuesday, 9 March 2021

Parliament met at 2.33 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I have a few matters to communicate. First, this morning, I received a delegation of the Executive Committee of the Uganda National Students’ Association. Among the issues they raised is that the lecturers in the nine public universities are on industrial strike for the last one month and lessons are not going on in many of them. 

They also had issues of a legislative nature, which I shall be writing formally to the Ministry of Education and Sports, the Chairperson and members of the Committee on Education and Sports of Parliament. I hope that the Ministry of Education and Sports will look at the issue of the industrial strike so that our children, having lost a year, are able to study meaningfully.

Secondly, honourable members, you may recall that this House resolved that all the markets, which are being constructed should have day care facilities to enable the parents working in those markets to keep their children safe. However, I was disappointed to learn that in Gulu Market, the day-care centre was converted into an office of the Uganda Revenue Authority. This is wrong. It means that the mothers have nowhere to keep their children.

Therefore, I would like to ask the Committee on Public Service and Local Government to carry out an audit of the markets to see whether the policy decision was taken and whether, indeed, the day-care centres exist in those working places.

Yesterday, I was invited by the Uganda Law Society to celebrate the women lawyers in the Parliament. Among the issues they told me was that the prison services are no longer available in the court. It is only the bail applications that are being handled and it has been a long time since the lockdown. It means that all prisoners in the different parts of the country are not able to go to court. Therefore, I would like to appeal to the Prime Minister, who is the head of the COVID-19 task force and the Cabinet to consider this matter and ensure that these people are ably represented in court. 

In addition, they appealed to us to enact the Witness Protection Act. However, that is not in our hands; it is in the hands of the state. I have seen it a number of times in the communication from the President but I have not seen the Bill. I would like to ask the ministers who are present here - I only see the Minister of State for Primary Education, whom I would like to request to pass on this message to the Government - that this Bill is overdue.

Similarly, they asked me about the Bill enacting the law concerning the Office of the Directorate of Public Prosecutions. I said, Yes, I have heard about it but we have never seen the Bill for the First Reading. Honourable minister, please pass on that message that there are Bills, which are still pending. 

I would also like to remind the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development that when they were being vetted, we gave them a condition to ensure that the Uganda Law Reform Bill is presented quickly. We are ending our tenure but nothing has happened. It is also an outstanding matter.
Thank you very much.

There are just a few matters of national concern. Let us have the Opposition Chief Whip and then Hon. Rwabushaija. 

4.38
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): I would like to thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. The issue I am raising relates to your communication about the industrial action by the lecturers. I think the Government has not prepared itself properly in handling of the education sector during the COVID-19 period.

Madam Speaker, your Office received a petition from teachers, who were conducting classes on television but they have not been paid. Now, they have been asked to go and resume normal teaching. Therefore, the obligations that the education sector took during COVID-19 period are not being fulfilled. I thought that I should raise that matter.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Indeed, I remember that petition and we passed it on to the Ministry of Education and Sports. Those teachers will have to be paid because they worked on behalf of the Government instructions. I hope, honourable minister, you will be able to – when can you come back to us on the issue of the industrial strike and the teachers’ outstanding pay?

2.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Madam Speaker, allow me to inform this House on the issue you have raised about the industrial action in the universities. I would like to inform you that we have received this information and I request that we come back and give more information to this House.

On the issue of the teachers, raised by hon. Ssemujju Nganda, as far as I know, the teachers who were teaching on radio and television stations were paid. For the teachers who were probably not paid, we are aware that there are some schools that were conducting similar training on radios. It could be a case of such teachers that maybe were not paid. However, we are going to investigate this and inform this House.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can you report back to us next week, on both issues?

MS SENINDE: Yes, Madam Speaker. We shall be able to present next week. When we are put on the Order Paper, we shall ensure to respond.

THE SPEAKER: The Clerk will put you on the Order Paper for next week. 

2.41
MS MARGRET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national concern on the current KCCA action of taking over Kampala markets, such as St Balikudembe - popularly known as Owino Market, Nakawa Market, Nakasero Market, Kisekka Market and Bugolobi Market.

This is in effect to the Presidential directive in a letter dated 25 September 2020. Madam Speaker, at a later stage, I will lay on the Table that letter. 

The pertinent issues concerning these markets are as follows:

St Balikuddembe Market Stalls, Space and Lock-Up Shop Owners Association Limited (SSLOA), on 4 March 2011, made a payment of a land premium of Shs 3.8 billion and ground rent of Shs 200 million, that was obtained from a loan as from Dfcu Bank. The funds were wired directly by the bank to Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) for six plots. These are: plots 24B, 24C, M584, M53, M58 and M585. However, KCCA failed to fulfil their end of the transaction; by handing over the land titles to (St Balikuddembe market stalls, Space and Lockup shop Owners’ Association (SSLOA).

Through court, it was later discovered that actually KCCA owned only three acres out of the nine that make up St Balikuddembe, as they had claimed to be the owners. They had duped SSLOA by getting full payment of the nine acres instead of three.

Kampala District Land Board, under the leadership of Counsel Nsibambi, leased the said remaining six acres to SSLOA for 99 years, thereby making the market vendors the rightful owners of the markets because they owned the majority shares of the said market land.

KCCA is now using the presidential directive to forcefully take over the market, and not adhering to the pre-existing court order; to steer clearly the affairs of the market.

The second one is Nakawa Market. In the communication from the President, there was no mention of this market in his directive; Nakawa as one of those markets whose management needed to be taken over by KCCA. KCCA is the body that indeed collects funds in Nakawa Market. However, KCCA is using the presidential directive to oust the leadership of Nakawa Market Traders’ Development Association and impose the KCCA selected leaders, which is against the will of the people. They want to forcefully remove those leaders who are there and replace them.

In Nakasero Market, the Sitting Vendors and Traders Limited purchased the land on 02 June 2010 on plots 7B and 48 – (Interruption)

Mr ssemujju: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am raising a procedural issue. Our rules are very specific. When you are raising a matter of national importance and when reading a statement, the content of the statement notwithstanding, which I also contested and contained some falsehood -I am raising a procedural issue whether a member should use the rule used for raising a matter of national importance and then presents a statement or actually a report?

The Speaker: I believe she is using her notes to refresh her mind because they are five markets. You raise the issues.

Ms rwabushaija: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is important to note that the taxes collected at the market are done by the contracted KCCA interim committee. That is a one, Faridah Kimuli. Therefore, following my interaction with the market vendors –

The Speaker: You do not have to say what you discussed. What is the issue that you want Parliament to help you with? You haven’t said anything about Bugolobi yet -

Ms rwabushaija: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My prayer is that the Minister for Kampala and Metropolitan Affairs should come to this august House, and give us a detailed report concerning these markets. She should also provide us with a compensational programme that KCCA intends to use to execute in regard to the rightful owners of these markets. I submit. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.48
The government chief whip (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister requests to report tomorrow. I talked to her but she is in Gulu. She said she will be ready to explain the matter then.

The Speaker: Honourable members, it is refreshing to hear that the minister is already willing to come. Nevertheless, for the record, let us invite the Minister for Kampala to come and advise the House on the affairs of St Balikuddembe/Owino Market, Nakawa Market and Nakasero Market.

The honourable member did not talk about Bugolobi market but maybe let her also brief us about the policy on the remaining markets in the city. If she is ready to come tomorrow, we shall put her on the Order Paper.

2.49
Mr Geoffrey Macho (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have the most important matter of the nation, today. Two days ago, Ugandans woke up to the shock  with headlines in almost all media houses, that Kenya has banned Ugandan and Tanzanian maize, from entering her country. Once again, the East African Community (EAC) is under attack by Kenya targeting Ugandan maize export, which we see as a trade war that is most likely to cause a very big political disagreement in the region.

After last weekend’s 21st Meeting of Heads of State Summit, whereby President Uhuru Kenyatta was elected as the new chairperson for the East African Community, we thought the situation would be better and some of the problems, especially trade barriers would be solved. Little did we know that Kenya is yet to hit a blow to almost four million Ugandans, who are maize growers and traders!

Right now, this has happened when the East African countries are undergoing a constitutional development for the East African Political Federation. Some of us who are analysts of integration of East Africa, see this as a big joke that is trying to hinder the cooperation and growth of the integration.

We keep asking ourselves why whenever new chairpersons of the integration come, Uganda is paid badly. When the President of Rwanda, His Excellency Kagame was elected the President for East African Cooperation, what he paid Uganda was closure of the border. Up to now, Uganda is facing financial challenges because of that. 

Right now, when His Excellency Uhuru of Kenya was recently made head of the East African Cooperation, Kenya has paid us by blocking and banning our maize from entering Kenya. I would like to call this a shame. We should separate politics from development.

At the same time, all this happens when Uganda is sugar-coating our partner states. We have allowed them to make Uganda the supermarket of their goods. Moreover, most of them are not qualified to enter the markets of our region.

The common market is not functioning per se, as per the signed protocols. This is because Kenya keeps shifting goals and we are just watching. Madam Speaker, it is my prayer –

The Speaker: What are your prayers?

Mr macho: Madam Speaker, it is my prayer –(Interruption) 

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Madam Speaker, this time, I am representing the people of Kasambya County but I even have interest in Igara West. 

The information I wish to give to my colleague is that in Mubende, we are in great pain because we rely on produce. If you have been keen, you will notice that most of the vehicles that were stopped from entering Kenya are from Mubende. 

I do not think this “marriage” of the East African Community is a good one. It is the worst “marriage” we have ever seen. A few months back, they banned our milk from the Kenyan market and it was even tagged “cheap milk from Uganda”.

The reason we are in great pain is because if you go to all the supermarkets, you will find a lot of commodities from Kenya, including fruits, yet we have nice fruits from Soroti. Why shouldn’t we run away from this “marriage” of the East African Community since we are not benefitting from it? I thank you. 

MS CHEMUTAI: Thank you, hon. Macho, for giving way. As we speak now, we have over 100 trucks of maize stuck at the Suam border.

I would like this House to note that the maize seed planted in the Sebei subregion is hybrid and the only supplies we get are from the Kenya Seed Company. The fertilisers and acaricides we use also come from Kenya. Now that they have banned our maize, I wonder how we shall still continue buying their seed. 

Madam Speaker, from today, I think I will not be singing the East African anthem unless this issue is sorted out. Thank you. 

MS NABULINDO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you go to Busia now, you will notice that the situation is alarming. This is a very serious issue since the maize has started germinating and we do not have a warehouse. The trucks that had already reached Nairobi were forced back to Busia. 

These farmers get loans from banks. Children are going back to school and universities have started exams; so, the situation is alarming. Thank you. 

MR ANGURA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This problem is very serious and the Government of Uganda must take it very seriously.

We are being told of aflatoxins in the maize. Our scientists could probably get an opportunity here to tell us what levels of aflatoxins are in the Kenyan maize. From what we have heard, as of yesterday, the Kenyan maize being consumed in the market in Kenya now has more aflatoxins than ours. I am told it is at 33 parts per billion, yet here we are between seven and nine parts per billion. I think there is a problem that we do not know of and we need to open our eyes and verify.

Just the other week, we discussed poultry products. These ones are now trying to cement the situation that because our poultry is also fed on this maize bran, it means our negotiations to open for the poultry products are also unlikely to succeed. 

Whereas this may have hit us hard and it could also be a quality issue that we need to address for the future, it is high time Government took the issue of our relationship with Kenya very seriously. If you look at our trade balance, Kenya is at over $400 million and ours started to move up - it reached $130 million - but it has now dropped back to negatives. It is the same thing we continue to have. So, where could the problem be? We need to harmonise this. 

We are referred to as smugglers and the borders are referred to as smuggling areas. We probably need protection from Government and security. I know that the word “smuggling” is going to come up. The borders are going to be opened because Kenyans are going to cross over here looking for food. Save us.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Where I come from, it is now double jeopardy. We no longer have a market for the sugarcane and we now do not have a market for maize; so, how will the people from Busoga sub-region survive? 

This is not about quality control; it is about protectionism. If we do not make the necessary noise, I do not see Uganda benefitting from the East African Community. I think both the ministers in charge of trade and East African Community affairs should come and make a statement about this very important matter. It is not only about maize but also dairy products and other agricultural products. 

It looks like Kenya is more interested in protecting the interests of their farmers. As Government, we have been telling our people that they can grow a lot of crops and make a lot of products because we have a wider East African market, but now there is no market. Presumably, the biggest market is now being closed; so, this is not a small issue. We would like the Government to come in and explain to the nation what is going on.

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude. 

MR MACHO: I have very good news for this country. Two days ago, Kenya banned the import of maize from Uganda and Tanzania. I would like to thank the people of Tanzania that closed their border yesterday and by 2 O’clock, Kenya had accepted Tanzanian maize to enter Kenya. 

Therefore, my prayers are: 

1. 	The Ugandan Government should, with immediate effect, ban the import of Kenyan agriculture products like Irish potatoes from Kericho, carrots, Ahero rice and mangoes because they use more toxic fertilisers than those used in Uganda. 

2. 	The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, with an inspection office at Busia one-stop border point, and the Ministry of Trade, through UNBS that also has an office at that one-stop border point, work in conjunction with the Kenyan Government. They should therefore tell the common people why they are disqualifying our produce and bringing trade wars within the region when they have those offices. 

3. 	The Ugandan Government should buy maize from the traders grounded at the borders, because almost all borders such as Malaba, Mutukula, Lwakhakha and even the fields of Mubende and Busoga – As I speak now, today’s newspapers reported that 150 trucks are stranded. However, a team of RDCs and traders from the whole country said that we have 554 trucks stranded in Busia Town and almost 100 other trucks are being driven from Kenya to Uganda. 

Kenya must stop fooling other partners in the region and must stop trade wars in disguise of having toxic products in the region. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, again, this is a very painful and grave matter. First, it was the milk, then the eggs, then the poultry, then the sugarcane and now it is the maize. What is remaining in the Ugandan market?

We were told that the Ministry of Agriculture has an inspector at the border; how can 150 trucks be rejected after they have gone through our inspection at the joint border post? Again, I would like to ask, when will Uganda reciprocate? Why are we always being beaten and only turn the other cheek? Where are our people going to get money? When will Uganda reciprocate?

3.04
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that good question. Members will recall that I raised the issue of the eggs here; reciprocation is key. Kenya has over 2,000 companies operating in Uganda.

However, when you go to Kenya, you can hardly find 100 Ugandan companies operating from there. Therefore, I think we have taken ourselves very lightly whereas others are benefiting from us. Unilever - I do not want to mention the companies, but if I am given room, I will mention them.

Let me speak as a primary school teacher because that is my major profession. We taught about the East African Community in primary school and among the key areas we teach is cooperation in trade. You cannot find a brilliant child who cannot answer that question in the Primary Leaving Examination, even if it were brought tomorrow.

However, the manner in which we are being treated is unbecoming. The Government must also come in. Otherwise, if we keep a deaf ear - they are making money here; they have their companies running here. That is why up to now, they take maize brand from Uganda to Kenya and then they end up failing to buy our eggs because our country has become weak and left these people to carry out business at the cost of Ugandans. You can imagine the money spent on all those trucks of maize. If they are stopped, it means they have to come back to Uganda.

Under NAADS, Members have been carrying maize from Kampala to our constituencies. Now that we are harvesting to export, we are being accused of having poor quality. Let me stop here but I am in for reciprocation.

THE SPEAKER: Senior government minister, what do you say about this? This is a very serious issue for our country.

3.06
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Macho and all the colleagues who gave this very touching information. The matter that has been raised on the Floor is a matter for all Ugandans. Therefore, as you saw, I was trying to trace the minister of trade and the one of agriculture to come here and make an explanation.

I would like to pledge that we will receive a response tomorrow regarding this matter, which touches the economy of our people and especially the poor people of Uganda.

I would like to thank all the colleagues who have raised more information and I pledge that we will receive information from Government through the relevant ministers.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter is extremely urgent. It concerns the economic rights of our people - Point of Order to who?

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would not have liked to raise a Point of Order to my senior. However, is she in order to run away from the question you put forward? You asked her what the Government was thinking and you asked her, as the senior minister. In addition, as a senior minister and Government Chief Whip, I think from the Members’ information and the one who raised the issue, I expected the senior minister to tell us something, considering that the Government signed the treaty of free movement of goods and persons.

We, at the Pan African Parliament, did our part and the Afrcan Union, they also did their part, where our counterparts in Kenya highly participated and I am sure the Government is aware. My senior minister is aware that the President of this country signed that treaty. Is she in order not to answer the question as you put it and feign ignorance of what is happening within Government? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think it is difficult for me to know what is inside the Government. Are you talking about the Cooperation for Fair Trade in Africa (COFTA) - The one which was signed for the whole continent, in Rwanda? Is that the one?

MS KAWOOYA: You are right, Madam Speaker. That is the treaty we signed and East Africa, where Uganda is part of the African Union Charter also signed it. Therefore, I anticipated the honourable minister to have knowledge of what is taking place regarding the free movement of goods and person.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you aware of the continental free trade area where we are members and which has come into force because it got the necessary signatures from the continent?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker and colleagues, all that has happened but some of our sister countries have continued to behave the way they are behaving. That means we have to hold side-line meetings to remind those people of the commitments that we have made; papers alone cannot solve the problems. We are still suffering despite the fact that we have appended our signatures on so many conventions. Therefore, we need to sit and remind those who are not respecting the conventions that we signed to respect them.

The ministers I mentioned are the ones in charge and are the ones who have been meeting their counterparts across and I thought it was proper for me to give it to the relevant ministers to come here and tell us the details. That does not mean that I am ignorant about the conventions that we have been signing -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, this is not the first time that this House is raising issues regarding the unfair treatment meted on the Ugandan traders by our counterparts from Kenya.

Wouldn’t it be better if this Parliament demanded a statement from the Right Honourable Prime Minister because first, we had the issue of milk and eggs. They always come here and give half information. There was the issue of sugarcane and now maize. 

We need a statement from a top leader and none other than the Leader of Government Business to tell Ugandans what crime they have committed to deserve such treatment from our neighbours.

The Minister of Trade or the Minister of East African Affairs will tell you this and that but if this can go some way in helping Ugandans understand where the problem is, I would demand that the Right honourable Prime Minister, Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, appears tomorrow or he would even have been given hours to appear here.
It is not the first time, unless if he is not in the country –(Interruption) 

MR KATUNTU: I thank hon. Elijah Okupa for yielding the Floor. We seem to have a motion by hon. Macho on the Floor and he has suggested a way forward; that as this matter is being handled and as we wait for explanation, we take four steps. That is what we should be debating now. 

Do we take the proposals given by hon. Macho? It would be better that we take those steps as it sends a clear message and signal to the Government and the people of Kenya that we are partners who are not ready to be bullied because trade is a mutual benefit. They are not doing us a favour.

Even when we talk about professional services, whereas we signed the necessary protocols, it is very difficult to go and practice in Kenya and yet they are here and are getting lucrative contracts. 

There is a lot of unfairness in our trade relationship with the Government and the people of Kenya. It is a high time we sent a clear signal that what is going on is mutual benefit and not a favour for our people to trade with Kenya. Since we have proposals, why not try to adopt them?

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, let the Prime Minister be given hours to appear because it first started with milk, eggs, sugarcane and today it is maize. Tomorrow it might be Uganda Airlines that may be banned from flying to Nairobi.

That would show the level of seriousness because we would like to hear from the Prime Minister himself. Other ministers have tried to come and explain but their explanations have not yielded anything. We also need to take drastic action.

I would agree with the proposals by hon. Macho but after having given the Prime Minister time to tell this country where the problem is because all the other ministers have tried but nothing has happened. We should be seen to be taking this matter seriously.
 
At one time, South Africa had a problem with Nigeria. I was in the Pan African Parliament. Nigeria responded by demanding for HIV test results for every South African entering Nigeria. When the British banned their airlines from landing in Heathrow, the Nigerians reciprocated seriously saying, “We shall not see British airways landing in Nigeria unless everybody has tested for AIDS.” The following day, things were sorted out.

Madam Speaker, remember how President Trump handled the Chinese. The Prime Minister should appear here and after his presentation, we shall see whether we shall be able to adopt the retaliatory measures proposed by hon. Macho.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you in touch with the Prime Minister? This is beyond the minister; it is an issue of our foreign policy and sovereignty.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Prime Minister is not in the country and according to hon. Elijah Okupa and you, it is the Leader of Government Business to answer. Gen. Moses Ali is upcountry.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, let us have an answer tomorrow from the Government; whether from Gen. Moses Ali, the Deputy Prime Minister or the Minister of Agriculture or Trade. Someone must tell us what we are going to do because the Government has let us down by allowing our neighbours to mistreat us. It is not fair.

MR MACHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for always fighting for the vulnerable people but as I speak, there is a very big problem at the borders that cannot wait up to tomorrow. 

Uganda is one of the countries with the biggest Cabinet in the world. We have the highest number of Prime Ministers. The Office of the Prime Minister cannot remain without a person in the name of a Prime Minister. 

The senior minister here should tell the people because as I speak, 5 million traders and farmers of maize are watching. These people got money from banks, they hired trucks and are being charged Shs 2 million everyday but you are saying that we wait up to tomorrow.

Is this the love we are showing the people of Uganda, people who have given NRM 80 per cent of votes? Minister, please come and give a statement. I have no answers to give to my people of Busia who are traders because this is their only livelihood. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the absence of the Cabinet minister in charge of Agriculture, Trade and the Prime Minister, let us give them until tomorrow. Whether they are here or not, we shall take a resolution on what to do about this issue with or without the Government. Clerk, please identify the areas which hon. Macho mentioned for reciprocation. 

3.21
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national interest regarding the ever rising costs of electricity. These days, accessing electricity is almost becoming a preserve of only the rich. 

There is a new service fee which you are supposed to pay even if they disconnect you for more than 5 months. Even if they disconnect you for more than five months, the moment you are reconnected, you are supposed to pay Shs 9,700. 

Besides, when you want to get electricity, in order to access a pole, you have to pay at least not less than Shs 5 million. If you have a pole at your home and you want to connect it, you have to pay not less than Shs 700.

Madam Speaker, as Parliament, I beg that we set aside a day and invite the Umeme people to explain to us why, almost every day, the cost of accessing electricity is increasing. That is my prayer, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We will ask the minister in charge to come and explain to us the new service charge. Today is Tuesday; if you could come in next week.

3.23
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning security personnel extorting money from people under the pretext of curfew violation.

Some time back, the Government pronounced a curfew in this country. I would like to categorically state that curfew time is being violated and has become an avenue for security personnel to extort money from the citizens.

A case in point is what happens in my district, Amuru. The Resident District Commissioner (RDC) directed that by 8.30 p.m., all business people at the trading centres must close their businesses. As we talk now, big trading centres in Amuru, like Olwal and Keyo, close their businesses by 8.30 p.m. From 9.00 p.m. onwards, the security teams that were recruited recently, - the police constables – move from shop to shop and village to village. Wherever they get people, they ask for money strictly.

I also witnessed this within Kampala. Roadblocks are being mounted everywhere. After 9.00 p.m., anyone stopped at the roadblock must part with money. The curfew time is doing more harm to Ugandans than good.

My prayer, Madam Speaker, is that Government stops the police officers from extorting money from the community. Secondly, Government should really disband the so-called curfew, aware that currently, big markets are open, auctions are going on, barbershops – In fact, people are going on with their normal lives. Why is curfew time still being implemented? I pray that Government disbands the curfew time because it is being used to extort money from the community –(Interruption)

MR KINOBERE: Madam Speaker, my colleague, for giving way. Yesterday, I was going back to my home between Kawempe and Kagoma. I found a line of people being tied like the slaves they used to tie those days. I stopped my car. The police officer came to my door and asked, “What do you want?” I asked, “What is happening?” They had tied the boys and ladies. He said, “It is curfew time.” 

I realised there was only one qualified police officer there; the rest were – I call them election officials. I think the time for the elections is done; they should go back to their villages. I told the police officer, “Can’t you take these people to the station, other than tying them while squatting?” What are they waiting for?

Madam Speaker, the issue is that they do not take the people they arrest to the station. If you are arrested, you call your relative and they come with money and you are released. Their bond is always given at night.

Madam Speaker, this is a serious issue. The minister should come out very clearly to clarify whether we have curfew. He should also clarify on who the police officers manning the curfew are - other than using election officers who are soliciting money and spoiling the name of the Government.

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank my colleague who has raised this matter. 

Last week, on Wednesday, in a special Cabinet meeting, I presented a petition from the private sector regarding the curfew and the manner in which it is being managed. This was after a presentation from the Minister of Health on the progress of COVID-19.

Madam Speaker, Cabinet decided that the national taskforce on COVID-19 sits and reviews all those standard operating procedures to make sure that some of them are withdrawn, because we are progressing very well with the management of COVID-19.

The matter is very important. The private sector and everybody are crying, including us, Members of Parliament. By the time you leave Parliament, you are worried about curfew, yet we have a lot of work to do. This is the information I wanted to give, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay; if it could be handled urgently. It is really difficult. You go to your village, then you have to decide how to leave in order to be in Kampala before 9.00 p.m. 

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, the situation is worsened as Kenya is closing the borders and we cannot export maize. Now, the curfew is also barring us from trading internally. I think this is really – I do not know how to term it.

Madam Speaker, it is high time – We do not even need a meeting; just withdraw curfew and allow Ugandans to trade. It is time for us to recover; we are badly off. We cannot waste any more time. How many meetings do we need? The country needs to be opened. We are doing badly. I am speaking on behalf of the people of Uganda who are doing badly. Personally, I am also doing badly. Open the country.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This matter is urgent. Ugandans are crying silently. Money is being extorted from them. The people who are suffering most are the boda boda riders. They are really suffering. Whenever they are arrested, they are asked to pay a minimum of Shs 50,000, yet someone can work for less than Shs 10,000 per day.

Madam Speaker, let the Government take this matter very seriously. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this is a matter which is really urgent. We do not think you need to meet for very long over this matter; it is a clear matter. 

What is the use of the curfew now? There is no need to confine people anymore. Update us before the end of this week. This one touches the human rights of the people of Uganda. Handle it quickly. We want an answer next Tuesday about the curfew and the other special operating procedures.

Hon. Sebaggala, I think this is the same issue you wanted to talk about on Ramadhan.

3.31
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My issue is related to what we have just handled. I believe that I am in agreement with all other Members who have suggested that we do away with curfew.

However, I want to say that as long as the curfew is still in place, we are definitely encroaching on many human rights.

However, I would like to bring it to the attention of the House that as we approach the month of Ramadan - last year, because of COVID-19, we did not participate well in our night prayers during the month of Ramadan. I would like to suggest that the curfew hours be extended in the period of Ramadan, which is next month. Otherwise, I am in agreement with the opinion that there is no need to still have the curfew because we are progressing well.

My issue was about having that extension but given the fact that we have heard from so many Members about this issue of the curfew with the minister saying they are reviewing it, then as the Muslim community, we will be glad to go into fasting next month without such obstacles of having curfew at 9.00 p.m. yet our prayers end at 10.00 p.m. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.


BILLS
FIRST READING

THE FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE BILL, 2020

THE SPEAKER: Is there anyone to lay the Bill for the First Reading?

3.33
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill, 2020” be read the first time.

I have the Certificate of Financial Implications and the planned expenditures for this Bill will be catered for under the MTEF. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development authorised the Bill to be processed. I beg to lay on Table, the Certificate Of Financial Implications.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill is sent to the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for expeditious perusal, bearing in mind that the term of this Parliament expires in the middle of May. Therefore, the committee needs to work and maintain the 45 days. Thank you very much.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS PROTECTION BILL, 2020

3.34
MR KAMAKECH LYANDRO (DP, Gulu Municipality Gulu): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Human Rights Defenders Protection Bill, 2020” be read the first time. Accompanying it is a Certificate of Financial Implication together with a copy of this Bill. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, at first, I had wanted to send this Bill to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs but I realised that they have the biggest bulk of business remaining in the House. I will now send this Bill to the standing Committee on Human Rights but they can be supported by the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Again, use the 45 days so that it is within the term of the Tenth Parliament. Thank you very much. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE PRESIDENTIAL INITIATIVE ON WEALTH AND JOB CREATION (EMYOOGA)

3.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we seek your permission to present this statement tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it will be reflected again on the Order Paper.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE IMPENDING EXPIRY OF COFFEE SEEDLINGS DISTRIBUTION PROGRAMME

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is not here. Okay, it will be reflected again on the Order Paper.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA RED CROSS SOCIETY BILL, 2019

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was informed that Hon. Bakunda is slightly indisposed but he had nominated Hon. Ssempala to do the second reading.

3.37
MR EMMANUEL SSEMPALA (DP, Makindye-SSabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Wednesday, 4 December 2019, the Uganda Red Cross Society Bill, 2019 was read for the first time and was referred to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for processing.

However, on Tuesday, 3 March, under your wise guidance, Madam Speaker and after being notified that some contents in the Bill fall across different ministries, you opted to send it to the Committee on Presidential Affairs to consider and report to the House.

Today, I stand here to move that the Uganda Red Cross Society Bill, 2019 be read the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by several Members. Can we have the committee report? Since it has been seconded, you can now justify it.

MR SSEMPALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The justification is drawn from the objectives of the Bill and they are:

    1. To provide for the continued existence of the Uganda Red Cross Society of Uganda and for the management and operations thereof;
    2. To bring up to date the regulations on the use and protection of the name or emblem of the Red Cross and the Red Crescent; and
    3. The red crystal, red line and the red sun and to repeal the Red Cross Act, Cap 57.

Whereas the Uganda Red Cross society has a special and officially recognised status under both international and national laws, as an auxiliary voluntary organisation in the humanitarian field in Uganda, its objectives, functions, management, governance and funding are not expressly catered for under the Red Cross Act, Cap 57.

This has presented many challenges relating to lack of integrated and coordinated disaster risk management, the lack of clarity on the Government financial support to the Uganda Red Cross Society, administration of the monies and property held by the Uganda Red Cross Society. 

The objects of the society, as stated in Section (2) of the existing Act, are defined in the general terms but do not specifically provide for the most critical roles and mandates of the Uganda Red Cross Society today. 

The provision relating to the use of the protection of emblems and the symbols of the Red Cross and the Red Crescent Movement is very limited in scope and does not adequately reflect the legal entitlements of the Uganda Red Cross Society, to make use of the emblem under the international legal frameworks regulating to the use of the protections, nor does it provide for the punitive and prohibitive punishments for misuse and violation of the Red Cross emblem.

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, the Bill therefore, seeks to strengthen and promote the capacity of the Uganda Red Cross Society as the sole national Red Cross Society, by securing the protective and indication of the emblems of the Red Cross in accordance with the standards and guidelines set forth under the 1949 Geneva Conventions and their additional protocols on the protection of victims of war.

It also seeks to provide for effectiveness, efficiency, transparency and standardisation in the administration and management of the society to curb maladministration, corruption, abuse of office and poor corporate governance.

I beg to move.

The Speaker: Thank you. Can we have the committee’s report? Is Hon. Asamo standing in for the chairperson? Where is the vice-chairperson of the committee? (Mr Katuntu rose­_) Yes, Hon. Katuntu.

Mr katuntu:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. If we take our business seriously, we expect Government to take it seriously too. A Bill of this nature and the report itself should be debated when the line minister is here but the minister is not. The chairperson of the committee and the vice-chairperson are not here. Therefore, none of the owners of this business is here. Now, we are going to debate to ourselves.

If this is serious business that necessitates amending the existing law, I expect the line minister, the chairperson of the committee or the vice-chairperson to be here. 

How can we debate important business without the Executive member responsible being in the House?

The Speaker: Honourable members, this matter has been on the Order Paper for a fortnight. Therefore, the minister in charge is on notice that this matter is pending. However, I do not see him or the chairperson and vice-chairperson. 

Let me remind members that we do not have much time. We need these Bills out of our docket. I do not know who to ask now. Maybe the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will ensure that the minister in charge of this sector is here tomorrow so that we get this Bill out of the way. We have a lot of business and very little time.

Therefore, the matter will be reflected, again, on the Order Paper. I hope my chairperson will be able to travel from Adjumani and be here tomorrow – is she on her way here now? Okay, the matter will be reflected on tomorrow’s Order Paper. Let us go to the next item.


BILLS
 SECOND READING

THE ADMINISTRATION OF ESTATES (SMALL ESTATES) (SPECIAL PROVISIONS) BILL, 2019
           
The Speaker: Where is the Attorney-General?

Mr ssewungu: Madam Speaker, it is still the same story. We need an evaluation of all our ministers before we conclude this House, apart from Hon. Bahati who has saved Hon. Kasaija throughout the term of his ministry.

I have been here for some time; 10 years is not a short period. After elections, people lobby for ministries and committees. Here we are, ready to carry out our work as mandated by the Constitution but we have the usual same members that are always here: Hon. Baryomunsi, Hon. Seninde and Hon. Bahati. The Front Bench is empty. We, the backbenchers, have come in full swing.

Wouldn’t it be procedurally okay that for next term, those who will qualify to be members of the Appointments Committee must first look at the performance of the former ministers before they take offices?

When we are in Kampala, these ministers have lead cars and sirens in their vehicles. They are not entitled to the right of way but we give it to them. Even Members of Parliament clear the way for them, thinking that they are coming here to deliberate on serious matters. However, here we are and they are not appearing anywhere. (Laughter)

This matter is very serious. In the next Parliament, this road is going to be filled with patrol vehicles escorting big people, the army representatives and others. Their failure to come here makes us also to look foolish in front of our people, Madam Speaker. 

Last week, we had that Bill on the Floor and it failed. We have come in and another Bill has been read and ministers – in the last sitting, I read the number of ministers in Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda, Burundi and South Africa. We read that Uganda has 80 ministers. I was here when the Prime Minister by then, Hon. Amama Mbabazi, gave reasons why they wanted more ministers.

Our Constitution, with its clawbacks, says that the President can decide to increase the number of ministers in case he feels he wants them for the efficient running of Government. 

Here we are. Gen. Moses Ali is not around. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda is a rare visitor here, as the Leader of Government Business.

Wouldn’t it be procedurally okay that you get us a good evaluation – we can bring our input as well – so that when we go for the next vetting, we look at those people categorically and say: “Honourable minister, you never said a single word on the Floor of Parliament. You came 30 times in a period of five years. You are not fit and proper; go back to the appointing authority.”

When you meet the President out there talking, he is frustrated with police, ministers - What do we do!

The Speaker: Honourable members, I think we take note of the concerns. You have spoken for all of us about the frustration we get when we come here ready for work and there is no Government. They are very quick to report to Cabinet, where we are not, that it is Parliament delaying their work.

However, in the circumstances, we are not able to do the following:

    1.  Item 6: The Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) Bill, 2019. The mover, who is the Attorney-General, is not here. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs are not here –(Member rose_)- I know that, as a committee, you are here but who will move for the second reading? The mover of the Bill is not here. 

	Honourable member, I know you are the vice-chairperson of the committee but you cannot proceed to the second reading because it is not your Bill. You can present the report.

	Therefore, we are not able to do that, not because of Parliament’s fault, but the ministers are not here. Maybe they went for Women’s Day also. (Laughter)

    2. Item 7: The Probate Resealing (Amendment) Bill, 2019. We are not able to proceed because the mover is the Attorney-General and he is not here. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs are also not here. 
 
    3. Item 8: The Administrator-General’s (Amendment) Bill, 2019. We cannot proceed because the Attorney-General and the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs as well as the Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs are not here.

    4. Item 9: The Estates of Missing Persons (Management) (Amendment) Bill, 2019. We cannot proceed because the Attorney-General and the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs are all not here.

    5. Item 10: The Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2018 –(Mr Oboth rose_)- are you ready for number 10?

3.51
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Speaker, we have two Succession (Amendment) Bills. One is private and it is supposed to be moved by hon. Kajungu, Woman Member of Parliament for Mbarara, who is around. The other one is by the minister. 

I would like to request the private Member to state on the record that she is ready to move. Otherwise, the committee is ready to proceed. As a committee, we had agreed and were ready for a marathon. Even when you do not see the chairperson, he is in the chair. I have the following members: hon. Asuman Basalirwa who will help the chairperson and the committee on this Bill; the vice-chairperson, hon. Sam Bitangaro; and I also have hon. Jovah Kamateeka, hon. Veronica Bichetero and hon. Robinah Rwakoojo. We are all ready with the reports. 

Madam Speaker, this is one of the most fundamental legislations. I would not even expect any Member of Parliament or the Government to miss out on this. In fact, the Government hurriedly brought in a Bill but we had to hold on to the private Member’s Bill. They were obtained from the same research conducted by the Uganda Law Reform Commission, but we found that the one for the private Member was more detailed. We used the precedent set here by hon. Bernard Atiku on merging the children’s Bill. 

Madam Speaker, as you guide us further, I would like to say that the reports were uploaded on the intranet. I do not know whether hon. Kajungu is ready because she had just come in and was whispering a few words.  I do not know whether she wanted to tell me that she is ready. 

In that regard, about the two Bills, we have both the private Member’s Bill and the Bill moved by the Government. We do not know how we shall proceed in the absence of the Government side. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, are you telling me that you have a report on the Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2018 of hon. Kajungu and a report on the Succession (Amendment) Bill of the Government? 

MR OBOTH: The answer would be “yes” but we merged it. Some clauses were similar and we indicated that in the report. Where they are different, we picked from the Government, which the committee thought was unique. We have indicated that in the report and we are going to handle them co-currently. 

THE SPEAKER: Does that mean that the Government Bill was subsumed into the private Member’s Bill? When we proceed with that one, it means we have proceeded with all. 

MR OBOTH: Yes, madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have item No. 10. Let hon. Rosette Kajungu come and move for the second reading. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE SUCCESSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018

3.55
MS ROSETTE KAJUNGU (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. I also thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2018 be read for the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, is the motion seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by several Members. Please justify your motion.   

MS KAJUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This Bill seeks to amend the Succession Act of 1906. As you can see, 1906 is a very long time in the development of our country, taking into consideration the development at international level. 

This Succession (Amendment) Bill also takes into consideration the case that was taken to court and made some of the provisions of the Succession Act null and void. 

We also wish to take into consideration the fact that the Succession Act was not gender sensitive when it came to the relations between men and women. As you are aware, the Succession Act has no mention of “she” or “her”. 

The amendment also seeks to take into consideration the protection of not only women but also children, specifically because it is not clear when it comes to distribution of property.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, as you may agree with me, this amendment should have even come yesterday. However, after reading the atmosphere, it has come now and it is ready. Hence, we should look into it seriously so that we deliver gender equality in this country. 

Some people may think that this is for women but I wish to tell this House that this is for everybody - men, women and children. When we talk about equality, it does not only mean women but it is for both genders. 

I wish to bring to the attention of this House - and some Members already know - that sometimes, when one spouse passes on, especially when older men lose their wives, the children that are already adults do not wish the widower to marry again. They tell him to go away because the property is for their mother. You can imagine what happens when this old man starts a new life. 

The amendment we are bringing before this House will ensure that there is equality of both genders - men and women. It is true that the most affected are women because men own more properties than women. The women will also be protected but this Bill seeks to protect all the people including children, men and women.

I am aware that the Government came up with another Bill but in our consultations, we have also taken that into consideration. As the chairperson mentioned, we actually agree with many of the provisions. Members, I do not see why we should not go ahead and debate the motion on this Bill. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Rosette Kajungu, for the justification. Can we now receive the committee report because the mover is here; they are now together.

4.01
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek your indulgence to allow me present an abridged version of the report because the report, in its entirety, was already uploaded on our iPads and we only hope that the Members have read it, internalised it and will refer to it. Therefore, before me, is an abridged report. 

Madam Speaker, on 9 November 2018, Hon. Kajungu Mutambi introduced in Parliament the Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2018 and the Bill was referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, pursuant to Rule 128 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Later on, the Government, on 12 August 2019, presented five Bills namely: 

    i. The Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2019 
    ii. The Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) (Amendment) Bill, 2019 
    iii. The Probate Resealing (Amendment) Bill, 2019 
    iv. The Estate of Missing Persons (Management) (Amendment) Bill, 2019 
    v. The Administrator General's (Amendment) Bill, 2019. 

The above Bills were referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, pursuant to Rule 128 of the Rules of Procedure.

In considering these Bills, the Committee was faced with a challenge of having two Bills that were both proposing to amend the succession Act.

In this regard, the committee’s work was made difficult by the fact that the Rules of Procedure are silent on the procedure to be adopted where a committee is faced with having to consider two or more Bills proposing to amend a single piece of legislation.

The committee, therefore, carried out an analysis of the Bills to examine the extent to which each Bill proposed to amend the Succession Act. The analysis revealed that;

    a. Both Bills proposed to amend the Succession Act by deletion, variation or addition, by amending 75 sections out of 339 sections currently in the Succession Act; and
    b. Inserting eight additional sections in the Succession Act.

Both Bills also proposed to amend the following sections of the Succession Act;

    i. Section 2: Interpretation.
    ii. Section 3: Interests and powers not acquired nor lost by marriage.
    iii. Section 6: Domicile of origin of a person of legitimate birth.
    iv. Section 7: Domicile of origin of an illegitimate child.
    v. Section 26: Devolution of residential holdings.
    vi. Section 27: Distribution on a death of a male intestate.
    vii. Section 28: Distribution between members of the same class among others.

The Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2018 proposes the following unique amendments to the Succession Act;

        i. Section 9 on acquisition of a new domicile.
        ii. Section 13 on a minor's domicile.
        iii. Section 14 on domicile of a married woman.
        iv. Section 15 on a wife's domicile during marriage.
        v. Section 15 on a minor's acquisition of a new domicile.
        vi. Section 18 on succession to movable property in Uganda and it seeks to delete part 3 of the Succession Act, among others.

The Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2019, on the other hand, proposes the following unique amendments;

    i. Insertion of new section on the short title and commencement.
    ii. Section 13 on notice to be given by a customary heir.
    iii. Section 34 on effect of marriage between persons only one of whom is domiciled in Uganda.
    iv. Section 37 on provision for the maintenance of dependants to be made in every will.
    v. Section 50 on execution of unprivileged will, among others.


From the analysis, the committee decided to use the Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2018 as the basis of the amendment to the Succession Act, and to review and adopt proposals contained in the Succession (Amendment) Act, 2019 to amend the 2018 Bill.

This is because the Private Member's Bill is also broader in scope comparatively, in its proposals. This means that the proposals in the Government Bill, which largely propose similar amendments to that of the Private Member's Bill, are incorporated in the Private Member's Bill, so that only one consolidated report and amendments are proposed to the House for consideration and adoption. 

Madam Speaker, if this House can remember, this methodology was deployed by the committee on Gender, when they were faced with two Bills of amending the Children (Amendment) Act, 2015. The legal committee is, therefore, following a precedent set earlier by this House.

Madam Speaker, the committee, further sought and received opinions on the Bills from the following people and stakeholders;

(a) 	The mover of the Private Member’s Bill, Hon. Kajungu Mutambi.
(b) 	The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.
(c) 	The Attorney-General.
(d) 	The Uganda Law Reform Commission.
(e) 	The Uganda Women Parliamentary Association.
(f) 	The Equal Opportunity Commission.
(g) 	The Uganda Muslim Supreme Council.
(h) 	The Justice Centre Uganda.
(i) 	Foundation for Human Rights Initiative.
(j) 	Apio Byabazaire Musanese & Co. Advocates

Madam Speaker, the objective of the Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2018, is to amend the Succession Act, and to bring it into conformity with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and internationally accepted human rights standards, and provide for gender equality, in accordance with Articles 21 and 33 of the Constitution. 

It also seeks to: 
 
            (i) Repeal sections that were declared unconstitutional by the Constitutional Court. 

            (ii) Streamline the definition of child to conform to the Constitution. 

(iii) 	Refine the definition of customary heir or heiress to eliminate discrimination. 

(iv) 	Clearly provide for the protection of principal residential property for the benefit of the surviving spouse and lineal dependents. 

(v) 	Revise the percentages of distribution of the estate of an intestate. 

(vi) 	Provide for the appointment of a guardian for a child by either parent. 

(vii) 	Provide for the powers and duties of guardians. 

(viii)	Repeal repugnant terms such as "lunatics" and "insane". 

(ix)	Provide for the lapse of probate or letters of administration. 

(x) 	Enhance certain offences and penalties, and to provide for matters related there to. 

On the other hand, the objective of the Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2019, is to amend the Succession Act, in order to align it with the Constitution, 

(i) 	To provide for distribution of the estate of intestate deceased person, in accordance with Article 33 of the Constitution. 

(ii) 	To provide for guardianship of minor children of deceased persons. 

(iii)	To provide for discretion of courts in the grant of probate and letters of administration. 

(iv) 	To provide for the expiry of letters of administration. 

(v)	To provide for spousal consent and lineal descendants prior to disposal of estate property; and to repeal obsolete terms in the Act and related matters.

Madam Speaker, from the objectives of both Bills, it is clear that they both seek to amend the Succession Act and to align it with the Constitution.

The committee notes that the Succession Act, Cap. 162, which is the current law on succession in Uganda, commenced on 15 February 1906. Due to passage of time, some aspects of the Succession Act have become outdated, especially in light of the 1995 Constitution, Government policies, emerging international best practices and the legal environment.

The Act is, therefore, in need of urgent modernisation in order to guide the processes that accrue upon a person’s death and to enhance the protection of the rights of children and women. 

The committee further notes that the Succession Act is a reflection of the colonial influence, which largely continued to uphold the principles of English Law and as such, failed to reflect the different customary and cultural practices of the people of Uganda which are central to their existence.

It should be noted that the last official review of the law of succession was the Kalema Commission Review of 1965 that culminated into the 1972 Succession (Amendment) Decree.

As such, the provisions in the current laws are outdated and do not reflect the contemporary social and economic changes of the day and the changes in other laws, specifically the equality and non-discrimination guarantees enshrined in the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, permit us to comment on a few salient areas of the Bills that attracted the most debates. The rest are issues that are dealt with comprehensively in the main report, which we have been able to upload. 

The first salient aspect of this Bill that should interest the members relates to ownership of property before and during marriage - and this has been a controversial issue. 

Clause 1 of the Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2018 and clause 2 of the 2019 Bill both propose to delete section 3 of the Succession Act which prohibits a person from acquiring interest in property of a person he or she marries but at the same time empowers a married person to hold property exclusively during subsistence of a marriage.

The effect of this provision is that property that married persons have acquired before marriage does not become matrimonial property.

Furthermore, a married person may, during the subsistence of the marriage, acquire and deal with property in his or her right without the same becoming matrimonial property. 

The deletion of the provision as proposed in both Bills will make every property acquired by married people before and during the subsistence of a marriage matrimonial property. It will also outlaw the individual-holding of property during the subsistence of a marriage by either spouse.

The committee notes that the justification for the proposed deletion of section 3 being that it is discriminatory, does not hold since the provision equally applies to both men and women and does not discriminate. 

Married people should be allowed to own property in their individual right during the subsistence of a marriage. A spouse should not lose his or her proprietary rights under Article 26 of the Constitution merely because he or she is now married.

The committee, therefore, recommends the amendment to section 3 proposed in both Succession (Amendment) Bills, 2018 and 2019 to be rejected.

Section 3 as it stands now should be amended to preclude a spouse from acquiring interest in the property owned by the other spouse if it is acquired prior to marriage.

The second provision that elicited debate relates to distribution of property of an intestate and for explanation purposes, an “intestate” is a person who dies without writing a Will or in the absence of a Will.

Clause 13 of the Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2018 and clause 7 of the Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2019 proposed to amend section 27 to make changes to how the property of a deceased person who dies without leaving a Will is to be distributed.

The committee carried out an in-depth analysis of this proposal including requirements under the Muslim faith. This is contained in the main report.

Among the various recommendations of the committee on this proposal, the committee is saying that the role of the customary heir should be maintained as it is a central tenet of succession practice within most cultures in Uganda.

For the avoidance of doubt, the law should stipulate clearly that a customary heir is a ceremonial role and does not entitle one to administer the estate unless otherwise elected by law.

Separation and its effects on inheritance on a spouse 
Madam Speaker, clause 14 of the 2018 Bill and clause 8 of the 2019 Bill propose to amend section 30 of the Succession Act. That section bars a spouse who has separated from a deceased person at the time of death from inheriting that estate.

The 2019 Bill proposes to limit the application where it is the deceased’s intestate who separated from the surviving spouse at the time of his or her death and directs that in such a situation, the estate is considered as if there was no separation.

The Bill also proposes to limit when a person may apply to court for an order excluding the application from the application of the section.

The Bill further proposes that a person may only apply within six months from the death of the spouse, and not any time before death as in the current provision.

The 2018 Bill proposes to amend section 30 by expanding the provision to include both spouses and to allow a spouse to apply to court to be excluded from the application of the section. The proposed amendment will have the effect of allowing a surviving spouse to benefit from the estate of a deceased person where the deceased was the one that separated from the surviving spouse.

It is the committee’s considered opinion that the proposed amendments in both Bills be supported since they deal with one of the most common challenges that faced the implementation of section 30.

The committee recommends that section 30 is amended –

(a) 	to recognise only judicial separation and separation recognised under customary law, as the only bar to a spouse from benefitting from the estate of a deceased spouse who at the time of death was separated from the surviving spouse;
(b) 	to also require that a surviving spouse should not have remarried another person after separation;
(c) 	to require that a spouse’s contribution to the property constituting the estate of the deceased should be taken into account irrespective of the separation.
(d) 	The proposal contained in both Bills should be adopted and harmonised into one provision. 

In the main report, the committee also analysed the proposals relating to persons capable of making Wills, the power of court to order maintenance of spouse and lineal descendants, guardianship of children of a deceased person, implied inclusion of illegitimate and adopted children in a Will; property transferable by gift made in contemplation of death, administration during minority of sole executor or residual legatee, among others, and made recommendations.

Madam Speaker, I therefore implore this House to refer to the committee report to appreciate the analysis and recommendations. 

It is the prayer of the committee that this House considers the Succession (Amendment) Bill and pass it with proposed amendments as suggested by the committee.
I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Honourable members, you have heard the justification. You heard the abridged and the detailed report; you are now free to contribute.

MR BASALIRWA: I beg to lay the report on the Table. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.21
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to first appreciate hon. Rosette Kajungu for her effort. I now realise that it is very important for honourable members to keep bringing these private Members’ Bills on the Floor. I realise that if we do not do this, Government will definitely sit back.

If hon. Rosette Kajungu had not brought this private Member’s Bill for amendment, Government would have probably not acted in 2019. So, we would like to applaud our Member.

Secondly, I would like to commend Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA) for taking the lead. This is not a matter for just the women; it is a matter for Uganda as a whole but they have been the champions. I want to tell UWOPA that we are behind you and we are supporting you. We are with you to the very end; do not get worried. This Bill will be passed into law soon.

Madam Speaker, 115 years is such a long time – from 15 February 1906 and then we are amending this law in 2021. What a long time! We have sleeping problems. These problems pile themselves into a bomb, which was about to explode. Luckily, we are here today to do something and stop the bomb from exploding.

Some provisions have been said to be null and void because they contravene provisions in the Constitution. How on earth can we decide to stay quiet for 115 years without realising that we are operating an Act in a manner which is not constitutional? That is really bad.

Madam Speaker, the women of this world, the women of Uganda, deserve to be protected. The children deserve to be protected. I welcome the revision of this law. I welcome the amendment because we are now talking about the rights of the women and children. Their rights are guaranteed in the Constitution, but we decided to keep quiet for such a long time. Now that we are waking up, we do not need to delay this Bill. It should be passed very fast.

Madam Speaker, there are matters of fairness, equality and equity. This one has to really get the support of the House because if somebody becomes unfair to you, that is when you get to know that someone is feeling the pain, when they are not also fairly treated.

I want to support the committee on most of the provisions. The merger, to me, gives us an opportunity to have a stronger position. Therefore, I do not expect us to have a long debate over these matters. This committee is brilliantly endowed. When you have the brains of Asuman Basalirwa, then you put the ones of hon. Oboth, hon. Rwakoojo, hon. Isala and the rest, what else do we need? I do not think we need a long debate over this Succession (Amendment) Bill, Madam Speaker. If you find it okay, let us simply go straight away to the committee stage, so that we progress with this Bill.

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. I thank you.

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, I just want to seek your indulgence. I only laid the report on the Table and inadvertently omitted to lay the minutes of the committee. I seek your indulgence to permit me to lay the minutes of the committee on the Table.

4.26
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the committee because they have been doing a lot of work, and that is reflected even in the quality of the report.

When we talk about succession in families, it is a very serious matter that needed serious minds to come up with this report. So, allow me to thank this committee and commend your job.

On the matter of spouses sharing property which they found their partners owning, I think the committee has treated this matter very well. Some ladies have property before marriage and the same applies to men. 

There was confusion among several families when they thought that if a woman comes with property, then the husband may not work and will decide to wait until there is a chance to use that property or share that property. This takes away the darkness, which has been existing among families. They know that if a man has got property and he gets married, then they have to work and get matrimonial property and that is the one they will share.

In that way, I support the proposal of the committee that a person can have personal property but that property, which is matrimonial, is shared by both spouses.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, on distribution of property without any will, it is very important to have a law that governs such a situation. Some people die because of accidents and some people do not even think about writing wills, not forgetting that some people die when they are still young and do not expect to die at that moment. So, people are so reluctant. A person at the age of 30 will not even think about writing a will. Some of them are not even married but they have relatives and they die without having wills. It is very important to have this in mind and have it as law. 

It is good that the proposal from the committee says that we do not have to look at the heir as customary, as it has been. The heir must have legality through letters of administration, as it has been. I thank the committee for bringing this light, which will be shared by the entire country.

Lastly, I was also confused about separation. If someone separates with another and then the remaining spouse dies, then someone comes and says, “We have to share the property” when that person separated with the deceased - I think this confusion was a big challenge to most of us. I thank the committee for preparing for this country very well so that if someone decides to separate, then that person has separated. However, if you push away another, then it means that the separation was not initiated by you. In that case, you share the property because the separation was not initiated by you. 

I thank the committee for that and I wish to say that as Parliament, we should support the committee and have this Bill as law. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.31
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for the report and also thank the minister for agreeing that these two Bills be merged to come up with one report. At times they would even resist but thank you very much.

Madam Speaker, this Bill is very important and we have to amend it. I have two to three issues to raise. One, I am happy that properties acquired before marriage should remain for the individuals and I support this because there are some men who have built their houses before marriage and the same applies to their wives.

The properties which are acquired during marriage must be shared. We are talking only of matrimonial homes which are only one type of property, but there are some people who acquire properties during marriage. The man is working and he builds a house somewhere and says, this is my house and not for the woman and yet this woman has been cooking for him, washing his clothes, giving him food which gives him energy to acquire that property.

The same with the woman; there are some women who just pinch money from the family to build houses - big bungalows at their homes. The man doesn’t have a house but the woman is very skilful in getting the money from you to build a house. Therefore, such houses should be acquired and shared. That is very important. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

Secondly, I would like to speak about a person who dies without a will. The chairperson has mentioned this but I remember there has been a dispute concerning distribution of the wealth. The Private Member’s Bill gives different percentages. For example, the spouses must get 50 per cent, the dependants must get 9 per cent, the heir 1 per cent and the rest for the children. However, the minister’s Bill has different percentages. I would like the chairperson to clarify which percentages they have agreed to.

Madam Speaker, on separation, I support the idea. However, we need to define what separation is. There is separation where you had a quarrel and the woman is angry and she goes to her home to rest and then come back. Now, if the man dies at this stage, you say they have separated - I think we need to define this. Otherwise, the best word would be divorce. If a person has totally divorced, that means maybe you had shared the properties before that and when he or she dies, you can take his properties.  

Therefore, let us define separation to make it different from divorce. Otherwise, you may cheat somebody because I have gone home and when I come back, you are dead and then I will miss your properties.

These are the only issues I would like to raise but for widow inheritance, it is very clear that because of this era of HIV/AIDS, the widow must not be forced to be given to the brother or cousin of the deceased. (Interjection)- Yes. Somebody can say after all, there is consent. Consent is different from marriage. I can consent to have sex with you but it is not marriage. 

Therefore, the person who wants to inherit the wife must go to their home and pay bride price, they get married properly and then you can take them but not just a matter of consent; that my brother has died, consent and I marry you. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

4.36
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday was the International Women’s Day. That means that we are still living in a patriarchal society. Worse of all, culture has not been fair to women and girls. Therefore, let me start by thanking the committee for this commendable work. I also would like to thank hon. Kajungu for the work well done and hon. Asuman Basalirwa who read the report on behalf of the committee. 
 
This is in line with what is in the Constitution. It has taken long that to date, women still suffer; women back home are still suffering especially those who are not properly empowered but sometimes even women who are empowered suffer. 

Therefore, when we have laws which guide people, laws which women can lean on, it is very important. It has taken long but it has come at the right time. We always say that God’s time is the best time. We talk about empowerment of women and girls; for succession, if you are a girl child- 

I know culture is not across the board but on our side, a girl child is not entitled to a portion of property in their home. They say that this one will go awawand that has inconvenienced the women so much. It is a lot. 

We find that a lot of our women also go back after separation. Sometimes after separation, you are forced to come back to your home because the atmosphere at your father’s home is not conducive. Your brothers look at you as somebody who is coming to rival with them for property. They look at you as somebody who is bringing children from a different clan to their clan. This should gradually go off. 

The thought that women are second is actually human rights abuse. Therefore, we want equity where women and men, girls and boys, brothers and sisters, husband and wife will always move together. Sharing before marriage is okay but in marriage - even at home for the girl child, it is very important that property rights are given to all. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

4.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Earlier on, you said that we are still in the mood of celebrating the International Women’s Day. I would like to once again congratulate everybody upon this important day in our country.

I would like to thank the Woman Member of Parliament for Mbarara for moving these amendments on this law that appears to becoming a cake. I thank the chairperson of the committee and the members for the job you have done to these amendments and the report made by the Member of JEEMA.

These amendments are very liberating, especially, to the girls and women. I cannot believe that we had a law in place that was not allowing my daughter to inherit what we own. Therefore, to have amended this that gives chance to the girls to be part and parcel of the heritage of their parents is very important. 

Secondly, as Parliament, we have a duty to defend our Constitution. I know that each one of us has a right to own property. Also in the Constitution, I know that there is an institution of a family and we have a duty as Parliament to defend it. 

The honourable member, from the abridged version of report that he has read, seems to suggest that we are now allowing members of this family; the man and woman to hold property individually. This is a recipe for confusion in the home. 

Some of us who subscribe to the faith of Christianity, when you take a vow in church, you say that you will be with your spouse in good and bad times. Whatever you own, she owns and whatever she owns, I own. 

For us to say that we are legislating to give an opportunity for each one of us in the marriage to own the property individually, and I think as hon. Baba Diri has suggested, is proposing confusion to the family.

We had made some progress when we proposed here the mortgage Act. Now, you cannot mortgage some of the property we own without the consent of your spouse. This has been good progress so we should build on it.

We cannot now legislate that we cause confusion. There is already enough confusion in families. We should be protecting them –(Interruption)

Mr makmot: Thank you my friend, honourable minister for giving way. The information I would like to give is that while it is true that under this amendment, we are saying as a committee that property acquired before marriage, whether for the male or female is excluded; there is some exception to the general rule. 

If that property was acquired before but you make it a matrimonial home where the husband and wife are living, generally common law and many case laws have said that, that is not excluded. Normally, for tax purposes both spouses pay tax on a principal home. 

Therefore, for purposes of marriage, that is provided for. However, when you acquire other property in the course of marriage, the property that you acquired before that is not a matrimonial home, is excluded. I remember that argument.

Maybe now that I am on the Floor –

Mr bahati: Honourable colleague, you were giving me information – (Interruption)

Mr ssewungu: Thank you, honourable minister for paving way. I am in agreement with what hon. Bahati is saying. I know this law is old and it has caused a lot of commotion. What hon. Bahati is saying is; imagine that I looked for a beautiful lady but before getting her, I began an establishment. I bought a small car, a plot of land and built a house. Why should I get a wife and say, “As you come, apart from this house where we are having our enjoyment and creating children, that is what we share but you are off the other plot?” I do not agree to that as a Christian as well.

My children are her children. This business of saying that what you acquired before and what the lady came with first – you will have united yourselves in church for life and death or sickness. Why would you then come to property and say, “You’re not party to my plot in Kireka?”

The Speaker: Honourable members, I have been practising law. There are many times when you witness people married formally in church and they say, “All I have, I give to you.” However, when a man is making a will, the wife is not even part of it yet you made the oath and we were all witnesses. You say, “My brother takes this; my eldest son here,” but the wife takes nothing. They made an oath before the church but the reality is different.

Mr bahati: Madam Speaker, then we should cure that but we should not increase the problem. By separating people to own property in families, it is – (Interruption)

Mr ssenyonga: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give hon. Bahati is that as we sit here, you can see what is happening to our colleague, hon. Nabilah. Things can happen that way. 

When you own separate property, even if you have purchased it, the other members will say that you are now trying to go away from the husband - when you have been together, you bring little conflicts. 

Therefore, I support him that let all the property remain for the family as it has been before.

Ms kamateeka: Thank you, honourable minister for giving way. The information I would like to give is that I am a member of the committee. This provision does not bar anybody who says, “I married my wife; everything I own is hers and what she owns is ours.” 

If you think that you loved your wife so much that there would be no problem, the law does not bar you. However, it is a provision for those who, when the time things go bad they want to grab the property that was not initially theirs. Thank you. 

Mr olanya: Thank you, hon. Bahati for giving way. The information I would like to give is that I feel what hon. Bahati is trying to emphasise is very important. The case in point are the land issues. For example, in Acholi land, we own our land communally. Land belongs to Olanya’s family. If he starts saying that let my partner have our shares and my children divide the land, we may cause more confusion.

As hon. Bahati is saying, let us get the best way of handling it. What is being owned communally or for the family should remain so. Even if I am not around and my wife is not, my children will continue with the family lineage. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Please, conclude.

Mr bahati: I thank you, honourable colleagues, for the information. I suggest that we look at this provision seriously when we go to the committee stage, so that we can legislate to defend the institution of the family –(Interruption) 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, hon. Bahati, for yielding the Floor. 

It is true that when you come together as husband and wife, you become one. However, on matters of property, there could be some other interests, and I am going to give you an example. If you have minor children and the law has already presumed that the property between you and your wife or between you and your husband is yours exclusively, what happens to the minor children when one of the spouses is gone? 

Hon. Bahati, haven’t you, for example, heard that someone’s wife passed on but with husband wanting to dispose of that property? Be careful! It is not only about the husband and wife. The law should also look at the other people like children, biological and adopted. Where do you leave them if the property is all about you and your spouse? 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, that is why I am suggesting that we cure that. Otherwise, the suggestion of owning them individually will not even solve that problem. 

I would like to put it on record that I reject that amendment. I would like to persuade my colleagues to join me in defending the institution of the family. Let us not be part of the confusion regarding this amendment. 

Finally, I am glad that we have now made a provision to cater for those that die before making wills. This has been one of the problems in the country. This legislation should help if somebody dies without a will; it will help to solve such problems at the family level. 

I would like to thank the committee and you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to make this historical contribution. 

4.53
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As a ministry, we sought audience with the private Member, hon. Rosette Mutambi Kajungu, the Member of Parliament for Mbarara. We agreed to meet to harmonise. It is on the basis of that, that we request you to give us time to harmonise with the proposals in her Bill and see which ones to agree with or not. Which proposals in our Bill does she agree with? – (Interruption) 

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, the Attorney-General appeared before the committee and presented his position, just like the private Member, the mover of the Bill, did. 

Is the minister, therefore, in order to ask for more time when he came and presented his position, which enabled the committee to marry these two Bills? Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, before you arrived, the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs said they received both your Bill and that of hon. Kajungu. They sat and evaluated. Where they found commonalities, they merged. Where they found areas in your Bill that they needed to incorporate, they also did so as amendments. Therefore, both Bills have been married; there is nothing left to marry now. 

Honourable minister, there has been so much injustice in the country because of the absence of such a law. Let us make it. If there are areas of discontent, it can be amended, but let us liberate the people of Uganda from uncertainty. Let us at least see the Bill moving. 

MR KAFUUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. However, we had agreed with hon. Kajungu to meet on Thursday and after that, we shall be ready to make a presentation. 

4.56
MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for availing me this opportunity to say something on this very important amendment Bill. I would like to appreciate my colleague, hon. Rosette Kajungu, the Woman Member of Parliament for Mbarara District, for coming up with this private Member’s Bill. 

As you have all heard and read through the report of the committee and the Succession (Amendment) Bill itself, one of the most important objectives of this Bill is to make sure that we amend the Act. It will bring it into conformity with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and internationally accepted human rights’ standards, and provide for gender equality. 

One thing that interested me in this amendment Bill is the fact that when we go ahead to amend the Succession Act, we shall eliminate issues of discrimination between the children and who becomes the heir. In the past, we have had issues of children being born out of wedlock and those born in the wedded family. We have seen a lot of discrimination among these two categories of children. However, with this amendment, all children are children and there will be nothing like discriminating against them. 

We have also had challenges of parents who have had girl children but then they pass on, the relatives get challenges of who to install as the heir. This amendment Bill addresses this very challenge. We are going to see even girl children being heirs of their parents’ property. To me, this is very healthy and I think as a country, we should appreciate it. 

Madam Speaker, we are looking at the issue of inclusiveness when it comes to succession, which has not been very prominent in the past. When we try to have inclusiveness on the issues of succession, it is very healthy for the nation; it brings about harmony in society. 

The year 1906 is a long time; that was when the Succession Act came into force. It is, therefore, fitting that as a nation and legislators, we go ahead to amend this because a lot has changed. We need to realise that socially and economically, we have so many changes as of today.  So, we can only try to address all these issues if we go head to amend this Succession Act. 

There is a lot mentioned in our Constitution about equal opportunities. It is only right that as legislators and citizens of this country, we abide by the equality and non-discrimination guarantees enshrined in the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda by amending the Succession Act. Colleagues, I implore all of us to go ahead and amend this Succession Act.  

5.00
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Madam Speaker, I also join my colleagues in thanking hon. Kajungu for coming up with this Bill. However, I was taken aback when the Attorney-General asked for more time. We are all aware that this current Act commenced in February 1906 - that was really a long time ago.

Madam Speaker, we have a number of problems out there in dealing with outdated laws. This Bill is now before Parliament; it has left the committee. Now, the Attorney-General is asking for more time to go and sit with the mover of the Bill. The clarification I am seeking is that, after that meeting, supposing there are some other amendments that arise, what will happen? Will it go back to the committee?

I would like to inform the Attorney-General that this Bill affects the Constitution and Government policies. The Constitution is very clear about gender equality in Articles 21 and 33. This Bill is coming to cure that problem.

We also have a big problem as far as customary heir is concerned. Hon. Bahati has mentioned the issue of Christian life in marriage, which some of us are very eager to contribute to on the Floor. This is a very serious Bill and we need to handle it with the care that it deserves and not to destroy the Christian marriage and way of life.

I would urge the Attorney-General that, if possible, use this evening or tomorrow so that we do not go up to Thursday because whatever you are going to discuss will not change the report of the committee because it has already been presented to us. 

You have been using delaying tactics to bring this Bill before Parliament. Now that a private member has brought it, I request that you do not delay us. Let us move and sort out the problems that are out there. If there is anything that you feel is very important, we can assist you on the Floor of Parliament during committee stage. I beg to submit.

5.03
MS JANEPHER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to, first, thank the private member for the amendments and the committee for the good work. However, I think we should not burry our heads in the sand. There are many types of marriages in this country and most of them are recognised. Whether it is an official marriage, where a man and a woman are wedded, there are other marriages. We have the civil, customary as well as Islamic marriages and they are all protected by the law.

The committee did not consider or I have not heard anywhere where they are considering those women who are not wedded. These women stay in those homes. Someone could have five or four wives. I see that the Bill is protecting the wife in the official home only. Therefore, I want clarity so that I understand what happens to the women who are in the other homes but are for the same man. How has the committee catered for them?

Madam Speaker, in cases where the man dies –(Interruption)

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform hon. Mbabazi that both Bills are not talking about the wedded women. It is general and the term used there is “spouse”. It is not even a wedded woman or customary or what, it is just spouse. Therefore, do not worry. It is not referring to anybody who has been married whether in church or customary or where; it is a spouse. It even talks about several types of marriages. Thank you.

MS JENEPHER MBABAZI: Thank you very much for the information. Madam Speaker, I still need clarity on the ratio: how much are these women going to get in case the spouse dies?

The other thing is that in our African culture, there is the scenario where a woman may not been blessed with a child in the family and they tend to send this woman away after the man has died. Madam Speaker, this is a serious matter and we need to address it clearly that in case a wife has no child in the family, it should be clear in the law that she is still the wife or woman in that family and is going to take charge of the rest of the property the way the law specifies. Thank you.

5.08
MS LOWILA C.D OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the mover of the Bill. Like it has come out clearly, this Bill seeks to amend an outdated law and I think we need to move as fast as we can and have a law that can address the contemporary issues that we have in place.

I would like to address the fears of hon. Bahati. I am also a devoted Christian but we must accept realities. The provisions of owning some property individually are good because it is true that there are couples that make vows and some of them live true to them but there are others who fail. 

Therefore, we must have a provision that protects and this will not be must. It can depend on the understanding of the couple. They can make an agreement after a discussion and decide to do what they feel is okay for them. Therefore, we must really have this provision in place.

Madam Speaker, during the wide consultations that were carried out during the process of considering these Bills, many men raised concerns that there are some women who scheme to get married just to get property. When this Bill is processed into law, it will protect both women and men. I think the men should really appreciate this because there are some men who think that maybe this Bill is for the interest of women but some men also raised that fear.

There are those women who come and after two years, they begin to create chaos, want to divorce and leave you scheming that she is given part of your property. I think such provisions can protect men.

We must accept that there are many marriages now. Recently, one of the bishops said that people keep wedding but that some of the weddings are drama. Couples wed and after three months, they are separated. There are many cases. Even some of my close relatives have experienced that. Madam Speaker, we must accept some of these realities. We are Christians and we appreciate that there are values that we must uphold, but we must also accept the realities that are taking place and try to address them in this Bill, when it becomes a law. Thank you.

MS BETTY OCAN: Madam Speaker, yesterday, some of us gave hope to people that in Parliament right now, we want to work very hard and pass the Succession Bill in the Tenth Parliament not in the 11th Parliament.

We also talked about the Marriage and Divorce Bill, which is highly needed, especially by Christians, although they do not want divorce. I would like to raise something that is very controversial and is giving us problems, which Hon. Bahati brought up. This is about polygamy. Maybe, one day, the Marriage and Divorce Bill will address it.

The moment we accept polygamy – Honourable members, I want to tell you that women can never say they are equal to men. There will be no equity because you are sharing love. Imagine one man having about five wives. This is hurting. I think research   should be done – This issue is bringing confusion.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are diverting from the Bill. This succession law was made in 1906, when we, the natives were not there. It was imported from the UK directly to us. We had no opportunity to give our thoughts and views.

In 1965, the late William Kalema, the then Minister of Culture, after doing research, carried out a report concerning this. We owe it to the country. Let us make an effort. If things are not working, we can amend and there is always Parliament. However, let us not continue to hold people hostage with an archaic law. Is that okay? 

Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE SUCCESSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is an amendment under section (2). Isn’t that the definition clause?

MR BASALIRWA:  Yes, it is the definition clause.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then that should come last. We will come back to it later. Clause 2 on the consolidated report on page 4.

Clause 2

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Chairperson, can I get the consolidated report otherwise, I have the abridged. 

In clause 2, the committee proposes to substitute the following: “Interests and powers not acquired nor lost by marriage.”  

Madam Chairperson, we propose that the clause reads as follows:

    (1) A person shall by marriage acquire an interest in the property of a person whom he or she marries.

(2) 	Except as may be agreed by the parties prior to marriage, a spouse does not acquire any interest in the property acquired by the other spouse prior to marriage.

(3) 	A spouse may, during the subsistence of a marriage, exclude any property from being deemed to be matrimonial property.”

Madam Chairperson, we give our justification as follows:

i) 	To allow the spouses to acquire interest in each other’s property, except where parties agree otherwise.

ii) 	To allow a spouse exclude any property, save the residential holding, from being deemed to be matrimonial property.

iii) 	To remedy an ambiguity in the current provision, which appears to exclude a spouse from acquiring interest in the property of a spouse acquired prior and during marriage.

Madam Chairperson, we also cite some authorities, because this is a matter that the courts have given legislative attention. We cite some authorities to support our justification.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, our position is that we reject the proposal, the justification being that the Government Bill had proposed that Section 3 of the principal Act be repealed. 

We felt that it did not belong to the Succession Act, but to the law on marriage since by the time the Succession Act kicks in, between a couple there is no marriage since one of them is deceased.

The second reason is that the danger of allowing the proposal brought in the consolidated Bill is that once again, it is full of references to matrimonial property, which term is foreign to the Succession Act, since the Act applies when there is no matrimony anymore or when the marriage has been terminated by death. Matrimonial property exists only when the marriage is in existence.

The third reason is that it is a fallacy to state that a person shall, by marriage, acquire an interest in property of a person whom he or she marries. This automatic right means that if my spouse finds that I have inherited land from my father, on day one of my marriage she acquires a right to that property. What has she done to acquire that right? Has she contributed anything to the acquisition of the property that I have inherited from my father’s estate? This position is also –(Interjection)– Where I refer to “he”, there is also a “she”.

This position is also at variance with a decision of the Supreme Court in Julius Rwabunumi v. Hope Bahimbisomwe, Supreme Court Civil Appeal No. 10 of 2009, which rightly stated the position of the law as to parties in marriage. Only the property acquired during marriage comes into play and that the contribution of the spouse is relevant when making a decision as to what the spouse is entitled to at the time of divorce.

Fourthly, it is also apparent that this proposal, as contained in the consolidated Bill, is an attempt to smuggle the law on marriage and divorce into the Succession Act. If taken as it is, the provision would mean that if I marry a woman today and she finds me with 100 heads of cattle or acres of land inherited from my father, I cannot use them to clear my debts incurred during our wedding without her consent. This is because even though she has been with me for only one day, she is now a co-owner of the property. 

The fifth reason is that the law on succession is interested only in the property owned by the deceased, not property which she co-owns with her spouse, not with matrimonial property, and not with the so-called family land. All those other properties can be provided for in the law relating to marriage and divorce or under the Land Act. Even though we have gaps in these areas of law, trying to introduce them into a society via the Succession Act is not the way to go. It will just muddle up things.

Finally, it is quite clear that the private Member’s Bill that is consolidated with a Government Bill was largely based on a decision of the Court of Appeal in Julius Rwabunumi v. Hope Bahimbisomwe, Civil Appeal No.30 of 2007. This decision is heavily quoted and cited in the justification for many women-centric proposals that were in the private Member’s Bill, which became consolidated with the Government Bill. It is worth noting that the decision cited above was reversed on appeal by the Supreme Court, in Supreme Court Civil Appeal No. 10 of 2009. All proposals that were inspired by that are hereby rejected.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, there is something you said which really bothered me. The law of succession speaks after death. An issue may arise as to whether the place where you left that woman is a matrimonial home or not. The law speaks after death. Suppose you include it in the will, what will happen? 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, as can be noted, we did not have the minister’s position when we were processing the Bill. However, with further inquiry into this matter, Madam Chairperson, we find that in Julius Rwabinumi v. Hope, the civil appeal went up to the Supreme Court and as it can be noted that in our report, we were referring to the decision of the Court of Appeal in 2007.

It would provide us with the basis to concede though the minister was bringing in very many words. However, that decision has harmonised and weakened our recommendation. So, we would concede to the minister’s proposal and leave the proposal as it is in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we also know what happened in the Supreme Court? Where are we on the law? What is the present law after the Supreme Court? What happened in the Supreme Court? Did they confirm it or did they throw away? 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, I have the Supreme Court decision here, with the leading judgement of Justice Esther Kisakye. I beg to lay it on the Table.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What did they decide on? Just tell us; did they confirm the Court of Appeal? Did they overrule it? That is what we want to know.

MR KAFUUZI: I beg your pardon.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Did the Supreme Court confirm the Court of Appeal’s decision or did they overrule it? 

MR KAFUUZI: The Supreme Court overruled the decision of the Court of Appeal. Specifically, let me repeat my reason six which I had read and refers to this; “Finally, it is quite clear that the private member’s Bill that is consolidated with the Government Bill was largely based on the decision of the Court of Appeal in Julius Rwabinumi v. Hope Bahimbisomwe Civil Appeal No.30/2007.

This decision is heavily quoted and cited in the justification of many women-centric proposals that were in the Private Member’s Bill, which became consolidated with the Government sponsored Bill. It is worth noting that this decision was reversed on appeal by the Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No.10/2009.”

I beg to lay on the Table the Supreme Court decision hereby referred.

MS KUNIHIRA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The minister has said that the home ceases to be a matrimonial home. Now, what is the name of that home when the woman is there? Is it bundled among other properties to be shared equally by everyone when there is a woman in that home? That is the clarification I am seeking.

MR OBOTH: To simplify the decision by the Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No. 10/2009 was that what constitutes matrimonial property at the time of dissolution of marriage is a question of fact and cannot be a question of law. According to the Supreme Court decision, you must prove as a fact that you contributed. That decision is becoming a trend; it may not be very palatable. 

However, in another case in Kenya, which is persuasive also in the Supreme Court, of Gideon Moi, that is a similar one when he was having a divorce; that what a wife or husband has contributed in a marriage should be a question of fact. Therefore, in computing all others, we saw that as an absurdity but that is a decision by our courts. On citation of the same, we agreed with the minister - not because it is a very good position but because it is legally convenient at the moment. 

That for you to say, when you are going to separate - I may say it again that in division of the property, you must prove that you put in 10 bags of cement and you were providing other services that helped the construction of the home. It is a question of fact and no longer a question that you can -

THE CHAIRPERSON: I am surprised that if the Supreme Court overruled the case of Rwabinumi in 2009, why don’t you cite it here? Why didn’t you cite it? Anyway, let us not go there. I put the question that clause 2 do stand part of the Bill?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, when the lawyers came in - we did not understand clearly what we have just passed. What has the “aye” gone to?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, there was a proposal from the committee to amend clause 2. Now that the amendment has collapsed, we revert to the old clause 2.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson, in that argument, the Attorney-General is saying, for example, that some of the provisions will be in the Marriage Bill. When did we start legislating in anticipation? When is the Marriage Bill coming? How do we know what it will contain and when it will pass? 

Madam Chairperson, we are being taken for a ride here. We should consider these provisions as they are here and pass them and then when the Marriage Bill comes, it can repeal these sections in the Succession Act. However, as it is now, we need these sections in the -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I am looking at clause 2. Your committee has brought a proposal but it has collapsed. So, I am going back to the proposal by the ministry; the old proposal.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to request that we stand over this Bill and we analyse it properly because a matrimonial home is defined in the Land Act. Once it is defined, even when you are paying a property tax, it is known. Therefore, why don’t we analyse it properly and make a very good law that does not give a difference in consistency of what we want to do.

I know that a woman sleeps in the home, you have been staying in that home; the land Act gives a privilege that that is property which belongs to the family.

Therefore, once it is not analysed properly, I see a challenge of inconsistence with other laws.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, we are not dealing with matrimonial property but an amendment, which was brought by the committee. However, it has now collapsed. Therefore, we revert to the old position and that is all. 

Mr katuntu: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. If the issue is about the decision of the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court, it would be fair even for you the presiding officer to look, internalise and appreciate the decision as being articulated by the learned Attorney-General and the chairperson of the committee.

I must confess that I have not read the Supreme Court’s decision. It was by error; there is no reason why we should not say we erred. 

However, there are words, which I find offensive to say - that it is “women centric”. We are not making this law for the women; it is wrong. We are making this law for everybody and for good governance. 

A mistake is often made when people think it is all about a woman benefiting when one’s spouse dies. They do not also realise that a woman may own property and then dies and the beneficiary is a man. We need to be careful and not use words that offend gender. I plead that much as we had to pass this law yesterday, let us do it properly. 

Chairperson, if it may please you, we can look at some of those between now and tomorrow. Now that the learned Attorney-General has asked for Thursday to harmonise with the mover of the Private Member’s Bill, we can give them this evening such that we resume tomorrow and talk from a more harmonised position. It will help us other than rushing decisions; and we agree to them when we have not internalised them.

The Chairperson: Can I ask the minister to withdraw – he used the words, “women centric” about four times in his submission. Can you withdraw them?

Mr kafuuzi: Madam Chairperson, I agree with the concerns raised by my senior colleague, hon. Katuntu. You know that it is not in my nature to use such words but I was reading verbatim what is written. Perhaps, if I had been given time to confer with my colleague, we would have realised that some of the diction is not palatable.

Be that as it may, the words “women centric” are hereby withdrawn. Thank you. 

The Chairperson: It will be deleted from the text wherever it occurs.

Mr aogon: Madam Chairperson, I would like to also concur with Hon. Katuntu and those who are asking for this particular provision to – it is one of the touchiest provisions in this Bill. 

I would like to blame the Attorney-General and his office for having delayed. We are now asking the questions here; in your marriage that was happening between the Private Member’s Bill and the Government Bill, what did you exactly do? I thought these were the issues you were supposed to handle. Was dowry not passed to the other side?

Therefore, let us give them the time. This is touchy because it is not about just the women but also the men. We have seen women who have come for men. You want to marry but not spiritually because you are targeting something. The next thing is to see death happening. Somebody may kill their spouse because they are after property. As such, this particular provision needs maximum attention. Thank you. 

Ms namuganza: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to get some clarification. According to what the chairperson was reading about the contribution and even when we are going to have the Bill harmonised, I am wondering whether this Bill is going to do away with the marriage vows, which we say in church that, “All that I have, I’ll share with you?” 

If we go to church and say, “All that I have, I’ll share it with you;” then you say that the succession Bill says this, where do you leave me?

We need to know these things before we even move on. Why do you propose a contribution? That means that if I cannot explain my contribution, which actually is there, where are we leaving the words, “All that I have, I’ll share with you?”

The Chairperson: The reality is sometimes different. 

Mr basalirwa: Madam Chairperson, for the benefit of the members who have kept asking what the Supreme Court said in the Rwabinumi case. We did cite it in our report. Unfortunately, we cited the ratio decidendi in the Court of Appeal.

Honourable minister, for purposes of getting everybody on board, this is what the Supreme Court said with regard to property: “Upon divorce, a spouse could share in the property that was acquired either during the marriage or before, if he or she can prove contribution either to its acquisition or its development.”

The court further held that such contribution can be in cash or kind or it can be made through a spouse’s providing childcare and other household services during the existence of the marriage.

Therefore, it is important for us to reflect on that position by the Supreme Court, which I think we inadvertently failed to refer to but which is now the law in the country. That partly answers the concerns of Hon. Princess Namuganza.

Ms namuganza: Madam Chairperson, as women, we suffer a lot. As Hon. Basalirwa was reading, he talked about the property acquired before as in the ruling. If you say that I must have contributed, when did I come to do so before you married me? 

The ruling of the Supreme Court is now confusing. If I was not there before you married me, what would you have expected me to contribute? I asked you about the marriage vows we make in church, where we state that you will share with me whatever you have. Now you are telling me about the Supreme Court ruling –(Interjections)

The Chairperson: Honourable members, I would like to propose that we stand over this matter.

Mr katuntu: Madam Speaker, religion is a profession. That is why you need people who are learned in interpretation of the scriptures. Do not take that vow of “whatever I have” literally and you imagine it is a spoon, saucepans and so on. It is about the soul and it is very difficult for you to ask hon. Basalirwa to start interpreting that scripture. I would rather advise, quite strongly, that hon. Namuganza goes to her priest; he will tell you what that vow means. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I believe that it is important for the Members to refresh their memories by reading the report again. 

I would also like to read this judgement and give time to hon. Rosette Kajungu and the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to further consult. We shall return to this matter on Thursday this week. Tomorrow, we shall handle the other Bills. Can I invite the mover to move the House to resume? 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.51
MS ROSETTE KAJUNGU (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.52
MS ROSETTE KAJUNGU (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2018 and stood over clause 1 and passed clause 2 with no amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.53
MS ROSETTE KAJUNGU (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, I beg that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as agreed, we will reconvene on Thursday for that particular Bill but tomorrow, we will handle the Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) Bill, 2019. I hope that the Attorney-General will be here on time because these are your Bills. The House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow. 

(The House rose at 5.54 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 10 March, 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 

