

Tuesday, 5 March 2019

Parliament met at 3.08 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the Vice President, members of the Cabinet, members of the Opposition, honourable Members of Parliament, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I have a few issues to communicate.

This morning, I was in Bugiri for the District Agribusiness Expo, which I really commend. I thank the Bugiri Local Government for taking that initiative. There are very many innovations going on there. 

However, they have two issues to raise: Firstly, they are complaining that the indiscriminate importation of rice into the country is suppressing the sale of rice from Tilda. Therefore, they have had to lay off staff because they can no longer sustain them. The increase in the importation of rice is causing them problems. We had a debate in the Ninth Parliament about the importation of rice competing with the local producers. They asked me to raise that question and get some solutions from the Government.

The second one is something hon. Taaka raised – about the low power supply. They raised it again; they have to go to Busia to buy blocks of ice and drive back to Bugiri to put in their shops and restaurants. Therefore, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development should come and explain to us when she is going to solve the issue of the low power supply in Bugiri Municipality. However, they were happy that they have started to connect power in the rural areas but it is a problem in the town itself.

Honourable members, last week, I officiated at a number of activities. The Young Men’s Christian Association (YMCA) Comprehensive College, for the first time, graduated degree holders. They have been doing certificates and diplomas but they want us to support them through a vocational skills training centre. I hope the Minister of Education and Sports can assist in that area. There is also going to be a conference, which they want the women Members of Parliament to support in April. I think the invitation will be coming.

I went to the Institute for Allied Health and Management Sciences here at Mulago. They thank Government for the multipurpose building, which had been constructed but there is a very deep shortage of girls’ accommodation and even the boys. However, the girls were in a very serious situation and are asking the Ministry of Education and Sports to come to their rescue.

On Sunday morning, I officiated at the 20th Anniversary of the Mildmay Clinic on Entebbe Road. Originally, it was set up to address the HIV pandemic but it has now graduated. They now have a training institute for emergency interventions. The location of the hospital means that people are getting crushed almost every day. They have now started training staff to manage accidents like what we were talking about last week, as you recall, honourable members.

They told me something interesting; that in Uganda, most accidents occur between 4 p.m. and 8 p.m. I had never thought about it. So, I would like the Government to take an interest in why it happens around that time. Is it fatigue? Is it stress? Is it beating deadlines? Are they intoxicated? I found that very interesting. They also asked Government to construct a foot bridge in front of their hospital because the victims who go for treatment also get knocked. Therefore, they want a foot bridge in front of the hospital.

In the afternoon, I went to Nkozi University. They have an official culture week where the students display their dresses, cooking, dances and medicines. I found it very interesting. However, they also told me that they have a performing troupe and I would like to call on the Clerk to occasionally allow them to come and perform at Parliament first, so that they can be marketed in the country but also enable them to get some money. Therefore, Clerk, please, follow up on that one.

They also appealed to the Government to invest in the protection and preservation of indigenous languages. They say that these languages are becoming extinct. I told them that we have asked the Committee on Equal Opportunities to examine the situation of the indigenous tribes to make sure that their languages, music, poetry and other things are preserved. Therefore, it is a matter of concern.

What was more exciting, honourable members, is that there is a place called Mirembe Stop-over. You may recall that in the Ninth Parliament, a recommendation was made by this House on the need to establish rest places on all the newly constructed roads. As you recall, it was after a debate on World Sanitation Day. We agreed and resolved that the spectacle of long haul buses stopping on the road for people to urinate and defecate in public was very primitive and should be stopped.

Mirembe Sacco has constructed that facility. It has a restaurant, a bar, 16 toilets, showers and travellers’ lock-ups. It was very exciting. Therefore, I would like to invite the Ministry of Works and Transport – they might not have understood what we wanted. It is there at Nkozi. The Ministry of Works and Transport, Uganda National Roads Authority and our Committee on Physical Infrastructure, please, go there because we already now have an example in the country of what we have been asking for.

The last one has to do with the right to elect and be represented. Honourable members, a number of districts became operational in July 2018. The NRM party conducted elections. A number of flag-bearers emerged at LCV, as well as District Women Members of Parliament. Since November, they have to keep in touch with the population. They have run out of money. They do not know whether elections will be held. No one is saying anything and so, they are asking what we are doing for them and so, I would like to know. These are, for instance, districts of Bugweri, Kassanda, Kwania, Nabilatuk, Kapelebyong and Kikube. They are just there hanging.

Therefore, we would like to know when the Government is going to conduct these elections, both for the people and for the candidates. You must be visible when hanging around with people, which carries expenses. Can we have a position so that we can tell these people whether to go and sit at home or get ready for elections very soon? Rt Hon. Prime Minister or the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, please, tell us when we shall have these elections to save the young people the stress and the waiting. Thank you very much.

3.19
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is unfortunate that our rice is being faced with such high competition. It is our policy that we protect our people doing local production. I am even surprised that there is Buy Uganda and Sell Uganda (BUBU), which the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is always talking about; (Interjections) – Sorry, “Buy Uganda and Build Uganda”; which is wonderful. (Laughter) I am sorry about that but otherwise, I knew anyway.

It is unfortunate that we are enjoying that rice and forgetting ours. We need to go back to that policy or that phenomenon of eating our own food. In East Africa, I think it is only us in Uganda who are reluctant and we do not always take it serious. 

Recently, I remember, we were talking about sugar in this House. Kenya had refused to receive our sugar again; they wanted to consume their own and we were suffering with it here. Rwanda also started refusing some of our products, which we have been exporting there.

It is unfortunate for us who are older than Rwanda and have all this capacity. Why can’t we stop this rice and support our own people? There are very many growers of rice from Teso, Kigezi especially in Kanungu, as well as Acholi. We would support them to produce good rice, pack well and we export it. Therefore, it is right that this House pronounces itself or the ministry and we stop importing this rice. I do not know why we are reluctant. I was happy during the State of the Nation Address when His Excellency the President told us that we needed to support our own industries, which make clothes so as to stop importing second-hand ones. 

However, since he said it, a year has passed and we are still importing. I have visited Nyanza Textile Industries Limited (Nytil) Factory in Jinja but there is nothing like maybe having an idea of improving that factory going on so that it can produce new clothes for us. I do not know what the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is thinking about. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us find out. Honourable members, the situation in Bugiri is worse with high poverty levels. If we are going to oppress them further by not buying the rice made in Uganda and we concentrate on the imported one, we are creating unemployment and more poverty in the place.

Therefore, we want to get answers from the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. When will the interests of Ugandans be prioritised? 

3.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, the Ministries of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; Trade, Industry and Cooperatives are involved in this. I would request the House to permit us to get back after consultation over that issue. 

We agree with you that we should protect our own products. BUBU is the policy that we initiated and we would like to live it. We will get back to you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, treat it urgently.

MR WERIKHE: We will get back next week.

THE SPEAKER: The issue of rice should be handled on Wednesday next week. 

MS ALYEK: Point of procedure.

THE SPEAKER: On rice?

MS ALYEK: Not on rice. (Mr Ssemujju rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, do you want to talk about rice? It is finished.

3.22
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): No, it is about your communication. First, we passed a loan in the last Parliament to help the rice sector. I have seen some improvement. When you go to supermarkets now, you will find what is commonly known as “Super Rice” properly packaged. 
Maybe, now that we have reached that level, Government may believe us on the effect of that particular intervention on the rice sector and tell us how much we are importing and how much we need. If we are producing all that we need, probably, they may have to reduce on the tonnage of the rice we are importing.

The other point you have raised in your communication is the issue of elections. It is not only about the ruling party but all of us. The Electoral Commission announced that we would be going for the elections. We prepared candidates, went through the processes and started waiting, up to today. 

Fortunately, you said that Government should explain and particularly, the Prime Minister who is here. We hear that Government is no longer interested in elections. We have met the Electoral Commission as a Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and they wash their hands clean that they are ready to organise the elections but Government has not given them the green light.

Now that the Prime Minister and the Vice-President are here, they may have to allay our fears. We are told they are no longer interested and that is why these one, two or three elections cannot be organised.

THE SPEAKER: We have already asked the Government to come and explain to us when the elections will be held. The new districts came into effect last July. We are sending money but there is no supervision. There are no chairmen, committees, district service commissions nor public accounts committees. It is a serious issue.

3.25
MS JUDITH ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter. On 22 January 2019, I raised an issue of national importance on the intimidation, torture, death threats and arrest of media house workers in Lira. I made the following prayers:

    1. That the suspended staff of Radio Unity resume their duties and their fines and orders by Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) be revoked.
    2. Harassment, intimidation and arrest of media practitioners who are helping in the fight against corruption and poor service delivery in the areas from the grassroots be stopped.
    3. The suspended programmes on the radios be reinstated as a matter of urgency.
    4. The exorbitant fines that have been levied by UCC on the radio stations in Lira be reviewed by this Parliament.
    5. The loss of income incurred by the suspended employees and the radios, especially Radio Unity, be compensated. 

Madam Speaker, you guided well that the matter be responded to by the Minister of Internal Affairs on 29 January 2019. In his presentation, the minister did not have any answer to the prayers. Instead, he referred the matter to the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance.

In your subsequent guidance, you directed the two ministers to make a joint statement on the issues on the Floor of Parliament, each taking their part.

Are we proceeding well if the two ministers up to now have not given any answer to the prayers that I made on the 22 January 2019? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, thank you for reminding us. The two ministers are directed to come and give us a response on Thursday this week. This matter has been long outstanding.

3.27
MR GENENSIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. On the evening of 1 March 2019, the people of Kitura sub-county of Kashongi County experienced heavy rainfall with hailstones that affected most families.

Over 652 homes were affected in the parishes of Rwemamba, Bweza, Nyaburunga and some parts of my village. 

The roofs of over 17 homes were swept away. Right now, people are sleeping outside their houses. Over 533 homesteads lost banana plantations; over 489 homes lost coffee plantations and several other food crops including tomatoes, sweet potatoes, cassava, among others. Some parts of Kazo were affected and all the homes that were affected were shown live on TV West and Bukedde TV.

Madam Speaker, I have the following prayers to the Government: That the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees should provide relief aid to the people of Kashongi, particularly posho, rice, beans and iron sheets because some homes were swept away.

Madam Speaker, I request to lay at the Table the documents including the pictures of the homes that were swept away and those that were damaged. I beg to lay, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Lay them so that they are given to the Ministry for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to organise itself. I know the minister is here.

3.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that whenever we expect rain these days because of the situations that we all know, it comes as a big bang. Apart from this area, many constituencies have reported a lot of damage as a consequence of the first rains. 
By the time I came here, my technical people were trying to compile all the reports that they have received from the different corners of the country with a view of us sitting down and seeing how we can package the response. We will capture this and see what we can do, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: On the issue of the elections, can the Prime Minister come to us on Wednesday next week and tell us whether there will be elections? If so, when?

3.31
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on two matters. The first is in Kampala. You heard that there was a brawl on a building called Qualicel Bus Terminal down town that got into the hands of the current ownership under Drake Lubega and the deceased Charles Muhangi.

During the transition period when the court had awarded the ownership of the building to the late Charles Muhangi, over 500 tenants of the two buildings and the bus park there were paying a sum of about Shs 5 million each in rent.

On return of the building after four months, the new ownership has increased the rent two-fold. For those that were paying Shs 5 million, they will now pay Shs 10 million and they will pay the arrears of five months. Therefore, everyone is demanded to a tune of about Shs 80 million shillings.

This uncertainty in trade and tenancy in the city has created an aura of indifference among the traders. Some have had their shops closed because the previous ownership under the deceased is the one that let them in and they had running contracts. Even those that were there have been asked to pay arrears. Now this has created destabilisation to the business community.

Madam Speaker, we seek the indulgence of the Attorney-General to give a clear explanation of who is in ownership of this building and in any case as to whether the tenants will not be disrupted as a result of the different court orders that are being issued regarding ownership. To whom are they supposed to pay rent? This disruption creates disruption on not only their businesses but also uncertainty in trade. It affects the revenue that is collected from the area.

Madam Speaker, we the people’s representatives, owe these people an answer because the trade that they do brings taxes that all of us in the country enjoy.

Madam Speaker, on the same note, I was approached by about 100 traders from Kampala City who are stranded at the Uganda and Rwanda borders of Mirama Hills, Kyanika and Katuna. It is appalling today that all of us are in the dark on what is happening between Rwanda and Uganda.

Over 175 trucks are stuck with a stretch of about three kilometres just at Katuna. Uganda alone so far, it is estimated – and Rwanda as well – is losing about $30 million in form of trade. This affects our revenue and the revenue on the Rwandan side. It has broken up families and we have heard the Rwanda Minister of Foreign Affairs clearly issuing a travel ban on Rwandans coming to Uganda including students and traders.

Madam Speaker, at the moment, there are no more Rwanda Air flights into Uganda. We cannot keep in the dark as people’s representatives – pretending that everything is in order when our immediate neighbours in East Africa are building sanctions in form of travel bans and travel advisory warnings. 

If a message is sent out by our immediate neighbour that Uganda is unsafe, there is torture, illegal arrests and it affects our tourism numbers. It affects our trade with our partners. Remember Rwanda at the moment is chairing the East African Community.

Which message is it sending out if nine Burundian trucks, 49 Ugandan, 37 Kenyan trucks cannot cross to Rwanda? People’s merchandise is being destroyed.

Madam Speaker, you have been here before. Recently, where we are yielding to compensation of Ugandans that lost as a result of a trade dispute in South Sudan – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last week hon. Bitangaro raised the issue and the Prime Minister said it was being handled. However, throughout the weekend, we have continued to see a lack of handling because the blockade has continued and is increasing. It has now gone to the human beings. Can we know what is happening – fish and oranges are rotting.

3.37
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, what is happening at the border is not a secret. As Government, we cannot say that we do not know what is happening at the border. However, we want to inform the country and the Parliament to stay calm. Government is taking action. This House will be informed at an appropriate time when the Government is ready –(Interjections)– yes, if we are not ready- (Interruption)

MS ADEKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 18 September 2018, while you were chairing, I raised this same issue and I gave names of people of Rwandanese origin who had been arrested and I raised the concern about our diplomatic relations with Rwanda in the spirit of the East African Community solidarity.

The Minister of Internal Affairs wrote to me asking me to furnish him with further and better particulars about persons who were detained. I was surprised because I do not own detention centres and neither am I in charge of them. Madam Speaker, your office was copied into that same letter. 

It is like a cat and mouse game between us and Government. I think we need to speak candidly and be very honest to the honourable members. Where do we stand with Rwanda and what is our Government doing? We need a timeline within which that information should be brought to us because we are people’s representatives. We have students that are stranded. They are working on an academic year calendar and they are stranded because of this same situation. 

Therefore, is the Prime Minister in order to give us a haphazard response, bearing in mind it is not the first time this issue has been brought to the Floor of Parliament? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like the Government to take this issue seriously. I think Ugandans want to know whether they can continue carrying their goods to the border or the bus owners can continue carrying passengers. Will the students continue – that is what we want to know.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I said Government was preparing to come and brief the House. We shall only come when we are ready. 
 
MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give hon. Nsereko is that one of my constituents works in Rwanda. He called me yesterday and told me that they were informed that by next month, they will no longer continue working in Rwanda. They were told that from now onwards, they need to organise their report and consider coming back to Uganda. 

There is a terrible problem going on between Uganda and Rwanda. Let the Rt hon. Prime Minister and the Government clearly explain to Uganda what is going on. They are hiding some information because we are being taken by surprise. We are seeing things happening but we do not know exactly what is going on. 

Our traders are suffering. People working in Rwanda may get expelled any time and we may never know the end result. Let the minister clearly explain to us what is going on between Uganda and Rwanda. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.42
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, we are good at pretending when issues have gone wrong. The Government of Rwanda is deploying its forces, just as the Uganda Police Force is deploying at the border. Our business community is stranded with perishable goods and the Prime Minister is telling us that they are handling it. 

Many times, I have said that there are some countries that were forced to join the East African Community while they were not ready. Whenever issues come up, the Government of Uganda keeps silent. I believe it is high time we, as the grandfathers of the East Africa Community, said enough is enough. 

At the moment, when the Ugandan business community goes to Kenya to buy Irish Potatoes, they pay money and get difficulties. Now, Ugandans are facing the same problem in Rwanda. They have reached an extent of even stopping their citizens from entering Uganda. The Government of Uganda must come out openly and say something.

What annoys me is that this morning, I was reading the national newspaper and it quoted a one Dickson, who is the Commissioner of Customs, communicating to Uganda Revenue Authority. Where are the Ministers of Foreign Affairs in this country? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are not yet debating this issue. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I know you are getting ready to present a statement on this issue but we want you to be ready as soon as Thursday this week. There is uncertainty and we need to give comfort to the people of Uganda. Prime Minister, let us have a statement on Thursday this week. 

Honourable members, join me in welcoming our guests in the gallery, a delegation from Sierra Leone. They include: hon. Abdul Karim (Member of Parliament), Mr Gabriel Malcolm Kpana (Youth Commissioner), Mr Salifu Conteh (Aide), Ms Alicia Venati (Delegate). You are all welcome. 

We also have a delegation from Ghana. They include; Dr Zanetor Agyeman Rawlings, hon. Ebenezer Nartey, Collins Owusu. You are all welcome. They are here to attend the Commonwealth Youth Inclusion Regional Conference here at Parliament. Thank you. 

3.45
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the violation of economic rights of women in the island communities. 

I am reminding this august House of Article 33(2) which talks about the rights of women. It reads, “The State shall provide the facilities and opportunities necessary to enhance the welfare of women to enable them to realise their full potential and advancement.”

Article 33(3) further states, “The State shall protect women and their rights, taking into account their unique status and maternal function in the society.” 

Madam Speaker, I thank you for the support that you always accord the island community and the human rights activists because I know you are an advocate for human rights and freedom in this country. 
The major activity carried out in the island communities is fishing. However, there are some activities that are majorly done by men and women, by their nature and status, cannot afford to carry out those activities. For instance, in the island, the men fish while the women smoke the fish. Smoking of fish enables the women get income to support their families and children. In some cases, they also support their vulnerable husbands who are not working. 

Considering the fact that almost 100 per cent of the women are single mothers and some are widows, they are responsible for looking after the children. The women’s economic rights are violated by completely stopping them from smoking fish and you are aware that smoking fish is one of the preservation means that a person can use to make the fish stay longer. 

To make matters worse, women in the island communities of Buvuma, Kalangala and other districts are jobless. There is no economic activity taking place. They cannot even afford to pay school fees for their children, who are now seated at home.

I would like to remind this august House and the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs that even in the Fish Act Cap 197 in the interpretation clause (a) processing of fish means curing fish by smoking, drying and salting. I wonder why the Uganda Peoples Defence Force (UPDF) who were sent to the lake to see that immature fish is not caught even stop these people who catch mature fish yet, they decided to preserve their fish longer by smoking or salting it. 

This is a violation of the economic rights of our people in the islands. I pray that immediate action be taken by the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs to sensitise the soldiers that this is the right of these people because first of all, they are not dealing in illegal fishing gears but they are fishing mature fish that they smoke. 

They also know that because of the influence of the rich people now in the islands, the middle income earners are just influencing the soldiers so that the middle income people do not smoke the fish and sell it cheaply to them so that they sell to the factory.  You know, there is monopoly of the market and that is why hon. Robert Migadde raised the point last time concerning the low price of fish. Now, we are also getting a problem that we cannot even export our fish to neighbouring countries like Rwanda as it has just been debated.

Madam Speaker, you are always our fighter. I would like to request you –(Interruption)

MR OUMA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, this issue looks very simple but it is very serious. My colleague has already raised it and has called you an advocate of the people. You came to the islands and a committee was constituted to go and look at these issues.

I would like to report to this House that if that is the way we are going to proceed, your coming to the islands has caused more problems. People are being arrested every day and they are saying, “You go and take your matters to Parliament.” They are beaten and taken to courts and even some of us are not safe because they are saying that when we come to Parliament, we report them and we are telling the soldiers that they are the people who can decide for this country. This is something that is very serious. 

Madam Speaker, the report that was written by the committee should be brought here so that we discuss it because there are more problems in the islands. At the moment, women are suffering and as she is saying, rich men have taken over the islands. They are using the soldiers the way they want and when you tell the ministers, they say you cannot transfer a soldier.

Therefore, if these soldiers have become a problem, what does Parliament do? When we come here, they abuse us and say we do not mean anything.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report on that fishing investigation is on the Order Paper and either today or tomorrow, we shall discuss it. When we do, honourable members, be forthright. When I go and speak and they attack me, no one answers from here. The soldiers collected people and went on radio and said that the Speaker does not know what she is talking about. Me, with a Master’s degree and I do not know what I am talking about? They paid people to go on radio and no one answered from this House. I remain there being harassed alone but I will not stop. I want you people to stand up for the rights of our people. (Applause) Our people are being chased out of the lake and it is being privatised. 

MS EGUNYU: Madam Speaker, ministers always come and promised us that as soon as possible, they shall do this. Such kind of words hurts the students and the children are not studying. People are economically doing badly and I feel very annoyed. I even do not know - the Prime Minister and the Vice-President are here and the ministers concerned. I even do not know what I should do so that they can know that our women are struggling. 

I feel like crying and I can even undress here so that you can know that we are dying. (Interjections) I can do it.

THE SPEAKER: Members, order.

MS EGUNYU: Madam Speaker, I am speaking that I can undress myself here because of the magnitude of what is paining me. Can they help us? Our women want to take their children to school, our people are dying of poverty and every day, they tell us today and tomorrow. 

Madam Speaker, I am asking for your intervention. Please, let them tell us here because they are the owners of these soldiers and they were sent by Government of Uganda. I can do anything that it takes so that my people can work. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Order. Honourable members, I shall ensure that the report comes quickly and we discuss it. If not today, we shall discuss it tomorrow and take decisions and the Government must act. We shall bring the report tomorrow. -  Honourable members, Order.

The issue of teachers not being paid, there is a pending report from the Ministry of Education and Sports. Was the issue of Serere handled about payment of teachers? There is one from Gulu also saying the same thing.                   

3.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Are you ready with the payment of salaries from serere?

DR MUYINGO: I am not ready, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: There is one from Gulu as well.

DR MUYINGO: I am not ready, Madam Speaker. However, I have an item on school fees and –

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I am coming to that. Maybe, raise it quickly. Hon. Alex Burundo, let him raise the Gulu issue first then you come. 
   
3.56
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I rise to inform the Minister of Education and Sports that the Government Seed School that is situated in Laroo Division Gulu Municipality, has teachers in the service of the Republic of Uganda for four years, the whole school has never been paid a single penny. I got this petition over the weekend and the teachers have decided to walk away from the Government school because for four years, they have never been paid. 

Therefore, what is the problem? Private schools are paying. I need the minister to clearly explain why teachers on Government service cannot be paid for four years?

THE SPEAKER: Sometimes, I wonder how they survive. Minister of Education and Sports, can you come and answer on the issue of Gulu as well as the issue of Serere?

Honourable members, there was an issue of the Qualicel Bus Terminal and I think the Attorney-General should come and tell us the position. This is a private building and not Government but they are people working there and getting trouble. Let us ask the Attorney-General to come on Thursday and advise us on how to move for the tenants and owners of the building so that there is no destabilisation of the Kampala business district. 

3.58
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance pertaining cattle raids in Bulambuli. 

For the last four months, the people of Bulambuli, specifically in the sub-counties of Bunambutye, Bumufuni have seriously suffered from cattle raids. 

So far 70 animals have been stolen from the poor people. The most recent raid was last week on Thursday when they stole eight cows from a very old widow. This perturbed me. 

The UPDF followed the matter up to our immediate neighbours, Nabiratuk. To my surprise, the UPDF managed to recover four animals from one of the kraals. After recovering the four animals from that kraal, they impounded the whole kraal of 150 animals so that these Karimojong from Nabiratuk could bring back the 70 animals they had raided from Bulambuli. Up to now, the 70 animals have not been recovered. The UPDF is stuck with the 150 animals.

Recently, we had a meeting that was attended by me and the Woman Member of Parliament for Bulambuli, our colleagues the leaders from Nabiratuk, the RDCs, the LC V Chairperson, and the LC III Chairpersons; they have completely refused to co-operate. 

My prayers are: 

    1. The Government should arm or recruit the LDUs in parts of Bulambuli. It is very unfortunate that as we are suffering, the people of Nabiratuk have been armed. The people of Mbulambuli are however unarmed and the Karimojong are continuing to attack us every now and then. That is very unfortunate.
    2. It is my humble prayer that the 70 animals which were stolen should be returned to my people. There is no reason why we should continue keeping the 150 animals, which our leaders from Nakapiripirit have abandoned this way and ours are still the other side.
    3. The owners of the kraals in Nabiratuk, where we got our animals, should be brought to book because they have always stolen animals, raped women, killed us and nothing has ever happened to them. I spoke to the minister and it appears that there is no answer at all. (Laughter)
    4. Government should find a permanent solution to the problem of cattle raiding between the Karamoja sub-region and the neighbouring districts like Bulambuli, Bukedea, Katakwi, Kween and Kumi.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I see the minister for Karamoja. I do not know whether you can say something about this. I also thought that we financially support the anti-stock theft units of the police to deal with this. Where are they? 

4.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (KARAMOJA AFFAIRS) (Mr Moses Kizige): Madam Speaker, there are no raids that are taking place but we have common thefts which are usually common during the dry season. This matter has been brought to our attention. The UPDF is holding animals of the suspects and this matter will be resolved. 

We have a meeting on Thursday. We have agreed with the MP and the other leaders in the region. It is uncommon for Bulambuli and the neighbouring districts of Nabiratuk and Napak to have these raids. This matter is being addressed, Madam Speaker. (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: There is a meeting to address that issue. Please go and attend it. That is where the solutions will be.

4.05
MR GORDON ARINDA (NRM, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. On Friday, 01 March 2019, very strong winds and hailstorm destroyed a lot of properties in Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, specifically in parishes of Bulamba, Ward IV, Ward III, Kashenyi and Ward II in central division and in parts of Nyakabirizi division – Mazinga ward. 

Over 1,045 homesteads lost their properties and majorly, banana plantation, coffee plantations, cassava, beans and many other crops destroyed. Some houses had their roofs blown off. 

It is a very big problem in Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality now. Our people have nothing to eat.

My prayer is that Government should send at least a team to verify the damage that has been caused, and to also send iron sheets and emergency relief food supplies to our people so that the affected households can be able to have something to eat. I beg to submit. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The minister is informed that as he is mapping out the areas, to please include Ishaka.

Locusts have also invaded the Ik. I do not know whether this falls in your ministry or the ministry of agriculture. 

4.05
MS TOPHACE KAAHWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

On Monday, at around 2.00 a.m. thieves broke into my home in Hoima Municipality. They hit the gate, broke it, hit the roof seriously with many stones. Then smashed all the glasses in the windows.

Upon hearing the sound, I immediately called the police for help. Police took one and a half hours to reach my place and yet my home is just two and a half kilometres from the police station. 

Upon asking the District Internal Security Officer (DISO) for Hoima District, he told me they have only one vehicle which has mechanical problems. The DISO used his personal car to reach my place. As they were coming, the thieves heard the vehicle and ran. They were three men on a motor cycle with a gun. 

Madam Speaker, I am deeply concerned about the deteriorating state of security in Hoima District. People are being killed. They have so far killed four people around my village. Others are being hit by iron bars men.

My prayers are that I should be provided with security because my life is in danger. I am not free. I am afraid. Even now, I feel like sleeping around this place because it is secure. (Laughter)

The police in Hoima needs to be reinforced to maintain security around. They informed me that they have inadequate staff. That is why they were unable to come to my rescue fast.

Finally, the investigative arm of police should be reinforced because there is a very big gap. Investigations are always incomplete. They always inform us that investigations are on, but nothing comes out. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Commandant of the Parliamentary Police is directed to arrange security for hon. Kaahwa. On issues of the general security in Hoima, we shall ask the Ministry of Internal Affairs to examine the situation and come back to us on Thursday next week. 
	
4.08
MR ABOTT OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Madam Speaker, last night, at round 3.00 a.m., fire gutted a village in my constituency, called Butanira and almost 23 houses were burnt down.
	
My prayer is that Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees - Madam Speaker, we have tried to ask but sometimes, the promises have not been fulfilled. I, therefore, pray that the minister takes this matter and sends relief to my people in Butanira village who do not have shelter and yet it is raining. That is my prayer.

THE SPEAKER: The minister is requested to capture that issue of Butanira together with others. Thank you.

Honourable members, our colleague, hon. Okupa, lost his mother when he was out on a parliamentary duty. There will be a vigil today, at his home in Ntinda at 6.00.p.m. located at 143 Mutesa II Road. There will be prayers at the Central Church at Ntinda tomorrow at 1 o’clock and the body will leave for Soroti on Thursday, 7 March 2019 at 7.00 am.

There will be prayers at Pentecostal Assemblies of God in Soroti at 1.00 p.m. and then the body will go to Apapai at 4.00 p.m. There will be a church service on Friday, 8 March 2019, at Apapai Pentecostal Assemblies of God at 11 a.m. and burial will take place on Saturday, 9 March 2019, starting at 10.00 a.m. in Apapai Village, Bugondo Sub County, Kasilo County in Serere District.

I invite Members to stand up for a moment of silence in her honour.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE SEMI-ANNUAL BUDGET PERFORMANCE REPORT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

4.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the semi-annual budget performance report for Financial Year 2018/2019.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the semi-annual budget performance report for Financial Year 2018/2019 is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back. 
	
REPORT ON THE PARTNERSHIP FOR MATERNAL, NEWBORN AND CHILD HEALTH (PMNCH) MEETING HELD IN NEW DELHI, INDIA FROM 10TH – 14TH DECEMBER 2018

THE SPEAKER:  Chairperson, Committee on Health. He is not here. 


REPORT OF THE DELEGATION TO THE AFRICAN WOMEN’S CRANS MONTANA FORUM IN DAKHLA, MOROCCO FROM 16TH – 21ST MARCH, 2017

THE SPEAKER: She is not there. Honourable members, if you are making contributions to the funeral of the late Mama Ariokot, hand them over to hon. Silas Aogon, Member of Parliament for Kumi Municipality. Can I invite hon. Ogwal to speak before we go to item four?

4.12
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I am standing here on a matter of procedure, on behalf of the Parliamentary Commission and the people of Dokolo to applaud the excellent work done by the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities $ State Enterprises (COSASE), following the presentation of the report on the closure of the seven banks and the exposure of pitfalls in the management of some entities.

As you know, the media has been awash with criticism to the works of Parliament, creating the impression that Parliament does not prioritise the interest of the people in the execution of its legislative and oversight roles.

Madam Speaker, the “Katuntu committee” has exonerated the institution of Parliament on these criticisms. In its strategic mode of work, the committee selected entities with big portion of national budgets to address the challenges in the heavy public expenditure centres and stop further leakages. Top on the list was Uganda National Road Authority (UNRA), which is one of the heavily funded entities. UNRA was allocated Shs 3.1 trillion, out of the total budget of Shs 32 trillion, while National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS), alone was allocated Shs 249.9 billion, in the last financial year.
	
The committee took two months to interact with UNRA and a lot of flaws were discovered and monies were recovered. Among the culprits, were five Chinese companies who were road contractors having used the Project Affected Persons (PAP) funds for other businesses. These companies were forced to refund the monies, which was promptly done to PAP and PAP was refunded Shs 47.7 billion.

Subsequently, these companies were blacklisted and advised not to be relied on for other contracts in the country. This led to the improvement of the contractual obligations and PAPS are now being paid promptly as a result of COSASE’s work.

The committee also recovered Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC) land, which was sold to Goat Farmers Habour Group, worth Shs 11.3 billion.  

Madam Speaker, another big entity, which the committee selected, was NAADS. The committee recommended drastic changes in the mode of procurements, delivery of inputs and payments of suppliers, which were before very flawed. This has led to great improvement in the distribution system of inputs by NAADS. Thanks to COSASE. (Applause)

In the case of Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA), the entity had a lot of challenges. The committee took about one month focusing its attention on poor management of schools and road projects. Madam Speaker, the committee boldly handled the high voltage issue of the “golden handshake” of Shs 6 billion, given to public officers who were already paid to do their ordinary job. Hot and sensitive as the matter was, the committee did not bow down to intimidation but recommended that the money be refunded.

The committee’s intervention in the Centenary Bank Park wrangle saved the tax payers from paying fines to the contractors. The same was done to Dot services Ltd project. After the committee’s intervention, UNRA allowed the company to proceed with the contracts which are going on well like Tirinyi Road. Thanks to COSASE. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, the achievement of COSASE hyped the image of Parliament and its leadership. The committee in executing its mandate broke into non-traditional areas of investigation such as Bank of Uganda, which generated excitement, furry and curiosity. As an institution of Parliament, we are proud of the report because it has introduced various models of reform, not only to tool Members to work better but has also plugged off leakages; thereby saving billions of taxpayers’ money which otherwise would have been lost into private pockets through flows, wastage, mismanagement or lack of effective supervisory and monitoring mechanisms -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, there are some interruptions. Hon. Nandala wanted to intervene.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have a procedural issue. In Parliament, I do not know how many committees we have. On these committees, they have never told us that this one is heavy, short, small or big. Every committee brings reports here; they are debated and concluded.

We are hearing about a report here. A commissioner gets up and picks one committee to talk about. Is it that the other committees are irrelevant? Is it procedurally right for the commissioner to come and only praise one committee and leave others out?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if we have, in the past, made a mistake of not saying thank you; this is a good time to start. You should bring for the others as well. (Applause) We shall ask hon Ogwal to bring for the others as well. (Laughter) Please conclude.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, while Parliament celebrates the recovery of monies that had been lost through Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) and other agencies of Government, Parliament hopes to benefit even more through statutory reforms that will see the Bank of Uganda Act and the Financial Institutions Act amended.

Parliament further hopes to see the corporate reforms that will compel separation of the supervision functions from the liquidation functions to avoid any conflict of interest and roles. Above all, Parliament shall see separation of board leadership from that of management of the Bank of Uganda in compliance with the modern corporate governance principle. The numerous policy recommendations proposed by COSASE and adopted by this august House have already started improving performance in some entities such as UNRA, National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) and Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA).

The recent media attack on the committee of COSASE is not only an attack on the committee but an attack on the institution of Parliament and its leadership. This is a condemnable act aimed at ridiculing the hard work of Parliament. The achievements recorded by COSASE and PAC reports have raised the confidence of the people of Uganda on the working of Parliament, which is people-cantered and aims at addressing the very situation in the country; directing resources to meet the needs of the people of Uganda and stopping impunity which has become the order of the day in the management of service delivery in some Government departments.

In conclusion, the committee, in its unique method of work, demonstrated that it is about quality and not volume of work but how much has been saved within the period of two and a half years. As a senior citizen, a long serving legislator and a commissioner, I wish to urge this august House to collectively commend the committee on COSASE and other committees of Parliament as well including PAC that actually cleared the backlog, for the tremendous work and sacrifice on their part, which was done on behalf of the institution of Parliament.

I beg to submit. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon Ogwal. Honourable members, there are so many things Parliament has done which have not been acknowledged. For instance, in the energy sector, there are new laws being made; resulting from our resolutions here, but of course they do not say that. I think the Prime Minister should give the action taken so that we know whether we have made progress or not; otherwise, a lot of work has been done by this House to shape reforms, legislation and policy. Thank you so much, honourable member and all the committees. 

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS TO ISSUES RAISED BY HON. JOHNSON MUYANJA SSENYONGA, MP MUKONO COUNTY SOUTH AND HON. HILLARY LOKWANG, MP IK COUNTY ON THE ARBITRARY INCREMENTS IN SCHOOL FEES BY SCHOOLS AND THE COMMERCIALISATION OF CLASS NOTES IN PRIMARY SCHOOLS

4.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is the statement on arbitrary increment of school fees.

The Ministry of Education and Sports shares the concern of hon Muyanja Ssenyonga about instances of high school fees charges, which are denying access to basic and secondary education for a number of our learners, hence compromising the Government objectives of providing affordable quality education for all and increasing equitable access to education.

It is against this background that the First Lady and Minister of Education and Sports set up the Kayanja Committee in March 2017. The objectives of the committee included:

    1. Establishment of the current fees structures for Government and private schools.
    2. Finding out the cost triggers of the escalating fees, and
    3. Proposals for any other measures necessary in the management of fees and recommendations for controlling the escalation of fees.

The findings and recommendations of the committee were considered and guidelines issued, that also take into consideration the liberalised nature of the economy and the consequent need for Government to regulate, rather than control, levels of fees by designing guidelines which schools must abide by. In the long term, the basis of the guidelines for fees structures should be the unit cost for each category of education.

From the recommendations of the Kayanja Report, the ministry has come up with measures to curb the rising fees charges. These measures were communicated to the schools and the general public through a press release and circular by the Permanent Secretary. The circular was issued on 24 October 2017 and re-issued on 29 October 2018.

The guidelines in the circular included the following:

    1. No school - private or Government - shall increase school fees for whatever reason without written permission or authorisation from the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education and Sports and/or Chief Administrative Officer/Town Clerk as the case may be.

	Some action has already been taken. One is increase of school fees was approved for seven secondary schools in 2018 and four schools in 2019. Two schools are pending approval. I have attached the list of those schools that got permission to raise their school fees.

    2. Other cash and non-cash requirements outside the approved school fees structure are strictly prohibited. All non-cash items must be catered for in the school budget.

    3. Schools implementing Universal Primary Education (UPE), Universal Secondary Education (USE) and Universal Post "O" Level Education and Training (LIPOLET) shall strictly adhere to the policy implementation guidelines. Where parents decide and agree to contribute towards an emergency in the school and permission is sought and granted by the Permanent Secretary, no learner shall be excluded from school on account of parent's failure to pay the agreed amount in accordance with Section 9(3) of the Education Act 2008. As soon as the emergency is solved, the school shall stop charging the emergency fund.

    4. Where a School Board of Governors or School Management Committee has to employ additional teachers to those on the payrolls, permission shall be sought from the Permanent Secretary in case of a secondary school and chief administrative officers in case of primary schools, to use part of the capitation grant towards the payment of the additional teachers.

    5. In line with (4) above, head teachers are warned against employing additional teachers before all the teachers on payroll have been assigned the minimum required teaching load. All teachers without a minimum teaching load should be promptly reported to the Ministry of Education and Sports in case of secondary schools or respective local governments in case of primary schools for appropriate redeployment. All schools must respect staff establishment ceilings for both teaching and non-teaching staff as provided by Ministry of Public Service.

6. 	Private schools must adhere to the approved staff employment guidelines. They should formally recruit, contract and effectively manage and develop staff on reasonable employment terms.

7. 	All Government and Government aided Schools should desist from taking commercial loans. Any school applying for a loan must seek authorisation from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development through the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education and Sports as provided for in the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.
8. 	Day schools must desist from changing their status to boarding until such a time when the change in status is approved by the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education and Sports. 

Day schools desirous to operate boarding sections or hostels should seek authorisation from the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education and Sports. All unauthorised hostels or dormitories must not open in 2018. 

A lot of action has been taken; Several Local Governments for example Lwengo, Mubende, Mukono, Sheema and others have closed all illegal schools and boarding facilities. The closure of illegal boarding facilities is ongoing.

Madam Speaker, these guidelines have been widely circulated to institutions of learning across the country through Local Governments, Kampala City Council Authority and the Directorate of Education Standards.

Our prayer is that the honourable members of Parliament and all other stakeholders join the ministry to sensitise their communities, the Board of Governors or School Management Committees on these guidelines. 

The Ministry also requests the honourable members to alert the ministry of any school or institution, which flouts the above guidelines so that stern disciplinary action can be taken against it.

STATEMENT ON COMMERCIALISATION OF CLASS NOTES

Madam Speaker, on the commercialisation of class notes in primary schools, the ministry is developing a Textbook and Reading Policy, which is aimed at regulating teaching and learning materials used in schools. We also have an approved list of text books to deliver the curriculum but our learners are also free to purchase any book from the bookshops.

At the moment, there is no law under which users of these unauthorised materials can be held culpable. However, schools are guided to use the ministry’s approved books and apply appropriate teaching and learning processes rather than aim to test recall.

Madam Speaker, I submit. May I go ahead and present the other statement about Kitgum?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lokwang wanted to lay his evidence on the commercialisation of those notes. 

4.33
MR HILLARY LOKWANG (NRM, Ik County, Kaboong): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay at the Table the Sipro Book Company Learners’ Work Book: Primary Three Term I, Christian Religious Education. 

The Sipro Company prints books for primary schools like course units at the university whereby you have to throw it away after that semester because you are not going to do that course unit again. This is also applying to primary schools. 
I do not know whether it is in the national curriculum that before the child completes the year, he or she should buy another book of the same subject. I am not saying that this book is not good but they have written it on termly basis.

The book costs Shs 10,000. If you are to buy five for the child in different subjects, you must prepare that money and multiply it by the three terms you are going to use it compared to one, which you are supposed to use for the entire year; probably in primary one.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I hope you have understood his problem. You have to buy a new book at Shs 10,000 every term.

MR LOKWANG: Our parents in the villages are poor and they cannot afford this. Someone can pluck off this first page and reprint the same notes and call it second term.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Sipro Learners’ Workbook; Revised Edition, Primary One Literacy.

THE SPEAKER: That means that term two and three will have as well.

MR LOKWANG: I beg to lay the Sipro Learners’ Workbook; Revised Edition, Primary Two Term one, English.

THE SPEAKER: Were they supplied by Government? 

MR LOKWANG: It is a private company.

THE SPEAKER: They are sold in the schools. I hope the honourable minister has understood.

MR LOKWANG: I beg to lay the Sipro Learners’ Workbook; Revised Edition, Primary Three Term one, Mathematics. Thank you.

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, what my colleague has just laid at the Table is not a recommended textbook. These are just somebody’s notes. Teachers come together and develop their own notes and there are so many of these.

My advice is that let us stick to the list of textbooks that are provided by the Ministry of Education and Sports, which are on the market. 

Secondly, these books are not provided by the Ministry of Education and Sports. Ugandans are free to write anything and put it up in the bookstores. These are not notes - (Interjections) – every time we release examinations we discourage parents and teachers from using people’s notes. These are preparing a person to recall and cram somebody’s notes, which is being discouraged. These are somebody’s notes.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what the minister is saying is that this is not a recommended textbook. It is not from the Government. Therefore, if you are in private sector and you want to buy that is your business. How can you stop the private sector?

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I have procedural problem. The statement by the Minister and accompanying explanation are contradictory. The minister in his statement spoke about the liberalised nature of our economy and then he ends up setting fees structure for all the schools including permission to revise schools fees.

The good thing the minister is a proprietor of schools. Under which law do you regulate? I will tell you, where my children go, we sat as parents and said we want to increase fees because we want the school to provide the following.

By your guidelines which I find illegal, you are now saying that people who have borrowed heavily from banks, established schools and you do not participate in helping them repay these loans, you do not even know their own schedules, you are now saying they must come to you for permission to charge fees.

These are investments of billions of money. When the colleague raised the question, which I understood, was on schools, which are purely public, and schools where Government makes a contribution- Government aided - my understanding was not for you now to determine because tomorrow we will have a problem of money we pay in health facilities and the Minister of Health will come and say, if you start a health facility and you are charging then you will come to the permanent secretary. You are taking us back to Idi Amin era.

4.40
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA SSENYONGA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern was on day Government secondary aided schools. Madam Speaker, I even made research, I went to Jinja, Mbale Senior Secondary Schools- the re-known Government secondary schools that were for the poor.

First, I requested the Minister to know who authorized the change of Universal Secondary Education (USE)? He has just clearly told us that those were day schools but they are now partly boarding schools.

Secondly, we are requesting Government to come up clearly with a structure of school fees in those schools. However when you hear the report, he is talking about private schools. The concern was on day secondary Government schools which were built with an intention of helping the urban poor - (Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, honourable colleague for giving way. I would like to commend you for putting this issue across. When the minister was making a statement and where we as parents and Ugandans need the ministry most is helping us against being subjected to dubious fees charges.

I wanted to bring an example of what is now being called “bank charges” charged only on somebody paying school fees. We have always deposited money. When you deposit money on someone’s account, you do not have to pay. However, it is only parents and students paying school fees that have a component on the very bank slip called “bank charges”. It does not matter how much money you are depositing but you must pay that bank charge.

I wanted the minister to come in and explain how Government is guiding Ugandans against these dubious payments when they are struggling to educate the future of this country.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister did not answer the right question. I think allow him to go on and answer the question which you asked about Government public day schools. That is what you asked. Therefore, let us give him time to answer that question. He will come back with an answer. What he answered is not what you asked.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, as he comes here, I think his other concerns should be- apart from quantitative education, we are talking about qualitative. One of the issues now affecting the secondary schools is that Government is not paying the teachers. For us the parents of Eru Senior Secondary School, we have over 36 teachers that we pay as parents. On the payroll, you find only about 15 teachers. On top of that, these teachers are being deleted every month. Last month alone, you deleted over 20,000 teachers from Government payroll.

Madam Speaker, you know how painful it is to regain your name on the payroll. In the meantime, you are moving from your school in the village to the personnel in the district all the time and not dedicating time to teach the students and this is in Government-aided secondary schools.

Madam Speaker, I need to apologise that I came at a time when I should not have come but this is an essential matter that the minister should address. As he also invests privately, he should also take time to ensure quality education for the poor Ugandans.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS TO ISSUES RAISED BY HON. ATIM ANYWAR BEATRICE, KITGUM MUNICIPALITY ON SUSPENSION OF ADMISSION TO STUDENTS OF GULU UNIVERSITY- KITGUM BRANCH
4.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. At the Seventh Sitting of the Third Meeting of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda held on Tuesday 19 February 2019, hon. Atim Anywar Beatrice a Member of Parliament from Kitgum sought an explanation on the following issues:

    i. Plans by Gulu University to hold admission of the new students at the Kitgum Campus.
    ii. Affirmation of continuation of admission of new students at Gulu University Kitgum Campus.
    iii. Allocation of requisite resources to develop and effectively utilize the 100 acres of land that was available to establish the Gulu University Kitgum Campus.
    iv. Consideration by Gulu University to hold graduation ceremony at their Kitgum Campus as motivation for prospective students in the locality.

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Education and Sports has made consultation with Gulu University Council on the issues raised and wishes to inform the House as follows:

    i. Gulu University Council has no plans to halt admission of new students at its Kitgum Campus. On the other hand, Gulu University has finalized plans to increase admission through the following measures.
    a. Acquisition of new premises that would allow more students to be admitted.
    b. Provision of more programmes of study at it Kitgum Campus to increase the menu of choice for prospective students.
    c. Deployment of addition permanent staff at the Kitgum Campus to augment the administration and management of the campus.

Madam Speaker, Gulu University Council has affirmed to the Ministry of Education that continuation of admission of students at this Kitgum Campus will be strengthened as explained above.

Gulu University Council has in addition informed the ministry that utilization of the 100 acres of land availed to it in Kitgum District will commence when the legal acquisition is completed. The survey process is already on going.

Honourable members may wish to know that the legal process is also taking place in Pader District where the district leadership offered 500 acres of land and also in Agago District where the leadership offered 200 acres of land to Gulu University Kitgum Campus.

Gulu University has already graduated students at Kitgum Campus on the 8 November 2014. The graduation ceremonies have not continued since then due to financial constraints. The university council has, however, confirmed to us that these will resume as soon as funds permit.

Madam Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, the Ministry of Education and Sports together with the Gulu University Council will ensure that there is better information flow concerning this matter, to guide the parents and the potential students. I submit. 

4.48
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for making an effort to come and brief this House about the predicament of the children in northern Uganda, particularly Kitgum District. 

My strong prayer was that we have the admissions to Gulu University, Kitgum Campus, take effect. As I heard from the minister, this seems not to be clear. I would like to restate that this academic year, for continuity in this public institution, we get admissions. 

I stated that this is affirmative action. For the last 22 years or so, the children in northern Uganda, particularly Kitgum, were in Internally Displaced Person’s (IDP) camps and right now, they are coming up to pursue education. This was affirmative action. You cannot actually kill the baby at birth. For the minister to come here and not reaffirm this clearly, it adds salt to the wound.

The minister has also said that even the graduation ceremony, which is supposed to attract and motivate children to go to school and get educated, will come when funds are available.

Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: Members, how can you have graduation ceremonies in different campuses? Let us be reasonable. It is expensive to move the whole senate and everybody to Kitgum and then another day you go to Anaka and then Muni – 

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, with a lot of pain, the information I would like to give my senior sister is that when the President was in Kitgum, the villagers raised this issue. He said that he had directed the minister that admissions take immediate effect – 

THE SPEAKER: The admissions are very important, but graduation – 

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, I think these ministers intentionally side-line the north and east. As we talk now, the one in Busoga is closed and my voters are asking me why. Honourable minister, I do not know whether it is intentional. Go to places where there is poverty, no education; every time people are going through Makerere University and you leave out universities like Gulu University. This is a senior cadre; do you want her to be killed? That is the information I would like to give.

MR OKIN: Thank you, my sister, for giving me the opportunity to give additional information. Madam Speaker, I have never seen this anywhere in any country in any part of the world – that an institution has been given a precise resource like land and they do not want to utilise it. Land has been given free of charge and the university is operating but they have refused to use it.

Madam Speaker, when a branch of Gulu University was opened in Kitgum, it was not meant to operate as an independent institution. It was actually part and parcel of Gulu University. Therefore, the whole running of the administration and finances is part and parcel of Gulu University. 

My dear sister, hon. Beatrice Anywar, the information I would like to add to what you are submitting is that the Government is just simply not willing to help the people who are affected, infected and afflicted by the aftermath of conflict – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you have deviated from the question. It was about why admissions were stopped at Gulu, not about land. Minister, why did you stop the admissions? That is what we want to hear. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues, for giving that information. The most important prayer is that we need a continuation of the admission, and that is correct, but we also hoped that the other prayers would be considered. The graduation that we are talking about happened once and was abandoned. They would have come and told us that there were some hiccups and that is why it did not continue happening, because it has ever happened. That is why we mentioned it. Otherwise, we would have preferred that we have the admission continue. 

Concerning accreditation, I think it has even affected so many others. We have the National Council for Higher Education and they need to do their job. You cannot have an institution of Government operating and then in the middle of its operations, you say it is not accredited. This is “sitting on the job”. 

I would like to know from the minister when we shall stabilise this institution of learning and have our children continue with education. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when will you stabilise the Kitgum branch of Gulu University?

DR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before we talk about stabilising, let me say something small about graduation. Organising a graduation is something that requires quite a lot of money. One university may have more than one campus and you cannot have a graduation on each and every one of those campuses, so this is why –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, the Kitgum campus is a branch of Gulu University and the Lira campus used to also be a branch of Gulu University. During the graduation ceremony, students would travel from the Lira campus to the main campus in Gulu. In 2014, students of Gulu University, Kitgum Campus, went for the graduation ceremony in Gulu. As the main university, all the constituent colleges go to Gulu University for the graduation ceremony.

Madam Speaker, is the honourable minister in order to mislead the House and say that the branches of various universities are supposed to organise their own graduation – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you were not listening. The minister was explaining the difficulty in holding different graduation ceremonies. 

DR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for that wise ruling. About the graduation, depending on the amount of resources the university management has, they decide where the graduation ceremony of a particular year will be hosted. 

As I said in the statement, we have not closed and we do not intend to close the Kitgum campus. We have just released A’ level examination results and very soon, we shall start the recruitment process. This campus is one of the campuses that is expected to attract students for the coming academic year. Therefore, I do not see why –(Interjections)- The university is functional and it is not going to be closed. Instead, we are devising ways and means to improve on what we have and expand it.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, join me in welcoming our guests from the regional Commonwealth conference Vickram Grewal and Zainab Gulamali. They are in the public gallery. They have not given me the names of their countries, but you are welcome. (Applause) 

RESPONSE TO ISSUES RAISED BY HON. ELIZABETH KARUNGI ON THE CONTINUED HARASSMENT, EVICTIONS AND ARRESTS OF SOME PEOPLE IN KIHIHI BY UGANDA WILDLIFE AUTHORITY (UWA)  

4.58
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. During the session of Parliament held on Thursday, 28 February 2019, hon. Elizabeth Karungi, Woman Member of Parliament for Kanungu District, raised concern about what she called the continued harassment, evictions and arrests of some people in Kihihi by Uganda Wildlife Authority. 

Madam Speaker, you directed me to prepare a statement and report back to Parliament today. This statement I am going to make is in response to what you directed me to do. 

There is a contention on the boundary of Queen Elizabeth National Park, along the stretch that falls within the villages of Kameme, Kinyabutongo and Rushoroza in Kibimbiri Parish, Kihihi Subcounty. This section of the boundary follows the eastern bank of Kazinga river. The boundary is defined and that is why I am saying this contention should not be that controversial. The boundary is defined in a Legal Notice No. 292 of 1962. This notice describes and defines the boundary. 

As a result of the impact of climate change, the persistent drought, coupled with the uncontrolled drainage of wetlands, River Kazinga has dried. As such, local communities neighbouring the park have taken it as if the boundary changed and they have started cultivating and planting trees. This encroachment assumed that wetlands could not be detected. However, this cannot be the case. When the floods come, of course the contested settlement is shown.

In 2016, UWA in an effort to contain encroachment on the park, engaged Government surveyors to trace the boundary of the park as per Notice No. 292 of 1962, so that the marked boundary can be effected with permanent pillars. I would like Members to see how easy it is. There is a Gazette which defines the boundary and even though the river dries, the boundary does not change but people take advantage of this and when UWA wanted to clearly have permanent pillars visible, there was a contention.

The communities could not trust the Government surveyors. We then agreed that instead of having central Government surveyors, we could use the district surveyors if that can be credible to the communities, and this was done. It was agreed that we use the Kanungu District surveyors to survey and reopen the boundary between the park and communities in Kameme area. This also followed a series of sensitisation meetings led by the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) of Kanungu and involved UWA, local leaders and communities prior to the boundary survey for demarcation. 

The boundary surveys were eventually done in May 2018 with the participation of the Local Council (LC) I and III chairpersons of the neighbouring communities. All these boundaries were eventually earmarked then. During the survey, it was established very clearly that there was indeed encroachment on the national park in form of cultivation and planting eucalyptus trees in the wetlands. The affected communities requested – Colleagues, this is again appreciated. The communities had already planted their crops, boundaries were established and the communities asked to be allowed for their crops to be harvested and this was done.  

In January 2019, a new RDC was posted to Kanungu. The communities wanted to take advantage of the new RDC. Therefore, the new RDC, who had been briefed about the matter, addressed the communities and directed that the planting of boundary pillars should be undertaken. Indeed, he launched the exercise of planting concrete pillars on 19 January 2019 in the presence of the LC I chairpersons of the neighbouring communities and villages, LC III chairperson and the LC V vice-chairperson who is also the area district councillor. All these were there when the launch of planting concrete pillars was being done, so that the boundary can be marked without any ambiguity. 

The encroachers, however, remained adamant and they continued to cultivate inside the park even after the boundary pillars were planted. It is these encroachers that UWA has been trying to stop from illegally cultivating inside the protected area. On Thursday, 28 February 2019, seven people were arrested while illegally cultivating inside the protected area. These people were taken to the police in accordance with the law and have been charged and were released on police bond. Other than these, no one else has been arrested or evicted as there is no settlement in the park.

Uganda Wildlife Authority is continuing to engage the local government of Kanungu and has continued to sensitise the communities to respect the gazetted national park boundaries. However, Madam Speaker, there is immense pressure and maybe I will come another day to talk about this. There is immense pressure on settlements in protected areas and sometimes this comes with incitement.

Together with the local leadership, we are planning a visit and we will invite the area Member of Parliament to join us so that we can explain to the communities and the leadership that protected areas are important and they are in the Constitution. If you look at the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, the state is obliged to protect these areas for the present and future generations. Again, in the Constitution, Article 237, Government must protect important national resources including lands, wetlands and national parks for the benefit of Ugandans.

Therefore, my appeal to colleagues here in Parliament, especially Members of Parliament neighbouring national parks, is to assist Government and Ugandans to sensitise the population and communities to appreciate, preserve and protect our wildlife for the benefit of mankind. 

Madam Speaker, I was in Arua last Sunday to celebrate Wildlife Conservation Day. I think the people of Arua are really great; they asked me if I could gazette some of their areas for the conservation of wildlife. That is fantastic! However, elsewhere where I go and there are protected areas, they demand de-gazettement so that they can allocate the land to the people. 

Our democracy is being undermined by popular politicians who are demanding de-gazettement so that they can allocate the land to the people so they vote for them. This is a dangerous precedent. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.08
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this statement. I believe it will be perfected when we actually reach on the ground and meet those people without relying on information through the phone. 

This area, which is contested, is believed to be a Banyabutumbi area; this is the original area of the Banyabutumbi. The Banyabutumbi depend on fishing and they have been fishing in that area. One mzee, who is above 80 years, showed us the graves of his grandparents there. 

It is an area, which they have used since the 1930s. It is an area, which is known to have hosted this small tribe of people. What surprises us is that the Government, especially UWA, did not recognise this area and yet the people have used it for all these years and have buried their dead there. More so, the Constitution says that people who were on a certain land when the 1995 Constitution came into place should remain and use that land.

I am very happy that the minister has said we are going to go to the ground and have a meeting with them. My prayer would be that they leave these people to utilise this land. The honourable minister is saying that we are looking at this as an avenue for people to vote us but it is not the case – (Interjection) - Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, why don’t you go to the ground and then we take a decision? The minister has offered to go with you. Take him to the Banyabutumbi so that he gets to know. For you to make prayers now - We do not know because we have not gone there. 

MS KARUNGI: Madam Speaker, the other day another honourable minister promised to go with me but he did not. You were here when he promised. Therefore, I do not trust them. I do not know up to when - This area is not big; it is about seven by five kilometres. I do not see why UWA is trying to chase our people from there. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you tell us when you are going with hon. Karungi and hon. Kaberuka? We would like the minister to go there with the members and ascertain the boundaries. When can you go?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I would be very pleased to go with the honourable member. In fact, we had already set up a team from the Ministry of Lands, our ministry and Uganda Wildlife Authority – 

THE SPEAKER: When? She has been waiting.

PROF. KAMUNTU: As soon as we come back from Kyankwanzi.

RESPONSE TO ISSUES RAISED ON THE STRAINED RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN UGANDA WILDLIFE AUTHORITY (UWA) AND THE LOCAL COMMUNITIES OF BUDUDA BORDERING MOUNT ELGON NATIONAL PARK

THE SPEAKER: That is similar to the one we were discussing. Can the minister answer so we know what to do? 

5.13
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. During the Third Session of Parliament on 11 December 2018, hon. Apollo Masika raised concern over the alleged bad relationship between the locals and Uganda Wildlife Authority. Relatedly, at the 19th Sitting of the Third Session of Parliament held on Tuesday, 26 February 2019, hon. John Baptist Nambeshe raised concern again about the strained relationship between Uganda Wildlife Authority and local communities of Bududa around Mt Elgon National Park.

Consequently, Madam Speaker, you referred this matter to me to investigate and report back to Parliament on the situation and the progress that was being made in re-opening the boundaries of Mt Elgon National Park. I am making a statement in response to this directive. 

Mt Elgon National Park was first gazetted by the colonial Government as far back as 1938 and it was a Crown forest. That is why boundaries of national parks are very easy to re-establish when there has been encroachment, because these things were done a long time ago. It was later converted to a Central Forest Reserve (CFR) at Independence in the 1960s. In 1993, the central forest reserve was upgraded to a national park and handed over to the then Uganda National Parks, the predecessor of the Uganda Wildlife Authority.

Prior to its gazettement as a national park, the forest reserve had been heavily encroached by communities, completely destroying the forest cover in some of the areas where they established cultivation land and settlements. Most of this happened during the period of lawlessness. We had a period of turmoil where law and order was not respected and people settled anywhere. This is our history.

When it comes to re-opening, it should be easy because we know how it came about - there was breakdown of law and order and people settled in protected areas. When you want to restore these areas, problems set in. It is not un-clarity of boundaries; it is simply people not wanting to move.

During the early 1990s, Government made efforts to restore the forest reserves after realising their ecological role to the country and more importantly, to the local people as the water tower was being compromised and the lives of the local people were at risk. I would like to emphasise that these forest reserves have an ecological role; the moment they are encroached on, even the communities settling there are at risk. 

As a result, Government secured external assistance from the International Union for Nature and Conservation and in 1992, this money was used to reopen the boundaries of the forest reserve. This exercise resulted into the eviction of all the people who were found in the reserve by Government. By evicting them, the beginning of this bad relationship started. Again in 1992, Government sought assistance and secured project funding from the European Economic Community, which was used to upgrade these forest reserves. It helped the local people because they were participating in replanting of indigenous trees and upgrading the national park.

In 1994, Government secured another loan to support the rehabilitation of Mt Elgon by planting more trees and maintaining them. The understanding was that restoring the ecological system would help in mitigating the impact of climate change. The communities were employed under these various projects. They helped in planting and maintaining trees, which was benefiting the community through employment and intercropping.

Around 2001, during the general elections, the communities took advantage of that period and forcefully and illegally invaded the national park, heavily destroyed the planted trees and started planting their own crops. This was done under heavy hostility, which resulted in the deaths of Uganda Wildlife Authority rangers, Uganda People Defence Force’s (UPDF) soldiers and some community members. The invasion was as a result of instigation. Madam Speaker, I went there during the campaigns and I could see that those communities had been incited during elections. It is popular to say, “if you de-gazette these areas and give them to us, we will elect you.” –(Interjections)- It is true and even candidates get intimidated because at such times, voters become forceful. 

Madam Speaker, some people kept encouraging communities to take up the forest land as they promised to negotiate with the Government to free land for cultivation. The result is what we are witnessing today - UWA staff were harassed, insulted and branded rebels as they attempted to stop the instigated encroachment of various areas of the park. Nonetheless, UWA with the support of the police and UPDF, resumed the evictions of people that had illegally encroached on the national park. It is these evictions that have marked the beginning of the current hostilities between UWA and the communities living round Mt Elgon.

The communities have continued to use force sometimes to resist evictions. Other times, they have secured court injunctions against UWA and the Attorney-General. We are in a kind of trap because people have continued using the parkland up to date. Some people have used courts to get injunctions, thereby perpetuating encroachment deeper into the forest. Today, the encroachment of Mt Elgon National Park has become a persistent challenge both to UWA and the areas surrounding these communities.

Madam Speaker, I have been to Mt Elgon several times and the case of Mt Elgon reminds me of a trap. You have the population of both human beings and animals increasing and yet the land is fixed. In 1969, the population of Uganda was merely 9.5 million. By 1980 when we had a population census, it was 12.6 million. In the last census, it was 34.6 million. As a result of peace and security, people and animals are producing more and yet the land is fixed.

Madam Speaker, to get out of this trap, we have to transform our economy so that less of the population depends on land. This encroachment has continued to breed a bad relationship between UWA on one hand and the local communities on the other hand, who simply want to use the park for cultivation and they do not seem to appreciate the importance of these forests for ecological survival. His Excellency the President has consistently advised local communities not to tamper with the forests to avoid incidents like those that have happened in Bududa thrice, killing dozens of Ugandans. This is a matter of survival and we need to support the restoration of these wetlands and mountain reserves.

At one time, it was believed that the cause of the conflicts was lack of clear boundaries. This is not the case because the boundaries can be established. We have and we will continue to engage the community leadership around Mt Elgon to stop inciting communities against UWA. We must protect the fragile Mt Elgon Forest ecosystem to avoid catastrophic environmental calamities. We must also have an effort to engage in restoration activities through communities. We must not allow people to grow crops and stay in the restored areas.

Madam Speaker, whenever some people are arrested for illegal activities inside the park, Bugisu and Sebei regions have had a tendency to forcefully prevent UWA from arresting and taking these people to court. There have been a number of clashes, some of them fatal, where communities have invaded UWA posts to either rescue their arrested colleagues or to intimidate staff into allowing encroachment to continue.

Since 2001, Uganda Wildlife alone – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this statement was supposed to take five minutes but you have taken 15 minutes.

PROF. KAMUNTU: I am summarising, Madam Speaker. Since 2001, 12 staff members and 12 UPDF staff have been injured in these confrontations. My appeal to leaders is that they should join Government to sensitise the communities about the importance of Mt Elgon National Park. We need to educate people because unless this forest is protected, their own life is at risk.

Madam Speaker, I wish human beings could empathise. I was in Arua and it was great. I wish all the communities would be like Arua.

Finally, as Government, we sincerely regret all incidents that have resulted in loss of lives and injuries due to the bad relationship between UWA staff and communities over the years. We shall continue to prevail upon UWA staff to exercise restraint and handle communities in accordance with the law. 

We have a duty to protect and preserve the integrity of Mt Elgon as a water catchment area for the entire eastern Uganda and for future generations. We shall not sit and allow the forest to be wiped out through encroachment. If we did, we would be violating the Constitution and betraying the generation yet to be born. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nambeshe, do you have one supplementary question?

5.28
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Madam Speaker, I thank you. With all due respect to the honourable minister, the good Professor has been digressing into a lecture, giving an exposition of how Mt Elgon National Park graduated from a central reserve to what it is now.

The question was about the plight of those that were arbitrarily arrested and the current strained relationship between UWA and the community. However, he is talking about crops, settlements and the injured UPDF soldiers yet in the introductory remarks of the statement, he had assured us that he had conducted a thorough investigation.

Could he please come out and give the fate of those that were arbitrarily arrested and harassed? They even extorted money from these people. As we speak, they are still languishing in jail; they have never been arraigned in courts. The honourable minister has actually wasted our time with irrelevancies.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I do not know whether you had captured the question. Did you capture the question as originally framed?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I thought I did. Let me be very specific. Whenever there have been any arrests, everything has been done in accordance with the law. Hon. John Baptist Nambeshe has also told me – which I will investigate – that sometimes our officers in UWA are paid or bribed to carry out encroachment themselves or to do things illegally. I assure you that there is nobody who will do anything with impunity under our supervision.

Secondly, there cannot be any arbitrary arrests; that is not us. All arrests – (Interjections) 

MR KABERUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been constrained to raise a point of order against my friend and senior colleague, Prof. Kamuntu, the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities.

I listened carefully to the Professor when he stated that there are no arbitrary arrests. I do not know in which context he speaks. However, basing on what happened in Kanungu where the UPDF and UWA wardens arrested people in the morning, beat women and detained them in the bush up to 6.00p.m., isn’t that arbitrary arrest? Is it in order for the minister to allude that there are no arbitrary arrests by UWA when people are being incarcerated and are suffering?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you aware of people who are confined in the bushes from morning until evening?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I am not aware at all. Let me just answer this question because I would like Members of Parliament to be assured that this Government is a government of laws. There is no way we can allow an officer of Government to arbitrarily arrest citizens. Absolutely not! I am saying, no. I have reported -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, why don’t you investigate? Why don’t you take the information and investigate?

PROF. KAMUNTU: I will oblige.

THE SPEAKER: Please investigate.

MR KABERUKA: I can volunteer information to you, honourable minister.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I oblige. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you can see there are so many incidents.

PROF. KAMUNTU: I can promise this Parliament that I will investigate and any officer who arbitrarily arrested any citizen of this republic will be punished in accordance with the law.

THE SPEAKER: Can I require the Members of Parliament to name the areas and the people so that the minister can actually investigate. (Applause) 

MR CENTENARY: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think what the minister is trying to clarify is just a handful of the many incidences that happen along protected areas. We have wildlife sanctuaries where people are living. They have buried people there, they are cultivating and the terms and conditions under which they live there are not clearly stipulated in our laws. They are just there; you do not know whether they are squatters or landlords. Wouldn’t it be procedurally correct –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you enacted a law a fortnight ago; did you include those issues in the law?

MR CENTENARY: That law was actually rushed. The minister has infrastructure along the protected areas and Uganda Wildlife Authority has a whole directorate of community conservation. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the honourable minister to invoke this directorate to first of all come out with a clear policy on how people will access and use those resources under contention; and two, open boundaries so that the communities neighbouring the parks know their limits? Otherwise, if you do not do that, you will continue harassing, arresting and detaining people.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to propose that those who have complaints write to my office this week and I will send them to the minister. (Applause) Write your complaints to me from Pader, Kotido - I saw Kaabong very unhappy - and even Kilak.

RESPONSE TO ISSUES RAISED BY HON. JANEPHER NANTUME EGUNYU ON THE BROKENDOWN KIYINDI-BUVUMA FERRY

5.36
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Ntege): Madam Speaker, I am here to answer a question that was raised by hon. Egunyu on the breakdown of the Kiyindi-Buvuma ferry.

The Kiyindi-Buvuma ferry route is on Lake Victoria and it serves the districts of Buikwe and Buvuma. During its operations on Saturday, 23 February 2019, it was discovered that the ferry had broken components that required critical repairs to guarantee the safety of its operations.

This calendar year, the ferry has had maintenance works on its structure between 20th and 24th January and we engaged stakeholders, through our Twitter handle, to convey information to the ferry users based in Buvuma. The ministry regrets the inconveniences caused to the stakeholders, especially regarding the intermittent ferry services.
 
The damage that was made on that particular day – 23rd January - was due to impact landing as a result of low water levels. Madam Speaker, We have been experiencing low water levels in January and February and this caused that impact. Immediately, the repairs started and they are on-going. We expect to finish the repairs and the ferry to get back to its route next week, on 12 March 2019. 

As of now, people are not taking their vehicles across. They leave them on land and move on private boats.

This ferry is worn out but we have plans to replace it in the following ways:

    1. There is a ferry under rehabilitation - the one which used to ply the Bukakata - Masaka route, where the Kalangala Infrastructure Services (KIS) ferry took over. It is currently under the dry dock undergoing refurbishment and is expected to be operational by the end of August 2019.

    2. We have a newly constructed ferry, which has been funded by the Vegetable Oil Palm Development project. The ministry has an agreement with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to also fund it. 

The contractor is on site; they are already working on it and it will be ready by April 2020. Once it is ready, the ministry will take over and the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) will start running it.

Madam Speaker, the non-functional ferry will resume operations on 12 March 2019. By end of August, we will have another ferry so that we can have two ferries plying that route. In 2020, we shall have another ferry and we will remove the old one, which is limping. I beg to submit.

5.41
MS JANEPHER NANTUME (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the minister’s statement because that is exactly what is on the ground.

However, a ferry is our “national road” that connects the mainland to the island. Can’t you improvise emergency means for our people who cannot afford public means and for patients from the island that are referred to Mulago or Kawolo Hospitals by paying for them? You could provide fuel and a boat so that our people can be brought out of Buvuma and taken back as we wait for the ferry to resume services.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, how do you handle the emergencies in the meantime? 

M	S NTEGE: Madam Speaker, right now we do not have another ferry that can operate in the meantime. However, I am going to consider that request.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT TO ISSUES RAISED ON THE STATUS OF FUNDING OF NEWLY CREATED LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATIVE UNITS RAISED BY HON. WILLIAM NZOGHU, BUSONGORA NORTH

5.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I am responding to the question raised by hon. William Nzoghu on the status of funding of newly created Local Government administrative units.

I would like to state that all the seven districts, which were created to start on 1 July 2019 have been provided for in the Financial Year 2019/2020. 

Implementation of the newly created town councils and sub-counties that were created in the Financial Year 2017/2018 and Financial Year 2018/2019 have been stayed until resources are available because of competing priorities and the resource envelope. 

We have communicated this to all the lower units. However, if the situation improves between now and before we end the Budget process, the House will be informed on the next course of action. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nzoghu, do you have a supplementary question?

5.44
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Bahati has not –

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the chairperson of the committee first.

MR ONZIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I remember that this issue was raised some time back by hon. Moses and it was also referred to our committee. We interfaced with the relevant ministries and a report was submitted. 

Unfortunately, this report has been put under business to follow. Right now, it is item No. 27. A Member has also brought it up as an issue. I do not know whether it would not be procedurally right to bring that report as an emergency issue to be discussed. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will move it up so that we discuss it this week.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED, “THE EXTERNALISATION OF LABOUR BILL, 2019”

5.45
MR ARINAITWE RWAKAJARA (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Madam Speaker, I move a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Externalisation of Labour Bill, 2019” moved under Articles 79 and 94 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rule 120 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS the International Convention on the Rights of Migrant Workers and the members of their families, 1990 and other international labour and human rights conventions and treaties ratified by Uganda, mandate Government to establish a safe and fair system of migration, to ensure rights and welfare of migrant workers and members of their families;

RECALLING that this House has documented numerous challenges and that are still faced by Ugandan migrant workers;

AWARE THAT under the National Employment Policy, 2011, Government committed to the development of institutional and legislative reforms to ensure decent employment opportunities and labour productivity for social and economic development of all Ugandans;

NOTING, however, that regulation of the individual employment relationship between an employee and an employer under the Employment Act, 2006, does not extend to Ugandan migrant workers given that the Employment Act is limited to the geographical boundaries of Uganda as prescribed in section 3 (5) of the Act;

CONCERNED THAT the Employment (Recruitment of Ugandan Migrant Workers Abroad) Regulations, 2005 and Rules made thereunder: are inapplicable under Employment Act, 2006 and do not establish a mechanism of protection and promotion of welfare of migrant workers as mandated under the convention; concentrate on the licensing of agencies and are not exhaustive enough to cover the key issues in the externalisation of labour; and have not been enforced and hence have failed to protect the migrant workers;

CONVINCED THAT there is urgent need to uphold the dignity and fundamental human rights and freedoms of Ugandan migrant workers through the enactment of a comprehensive law to regulate the export of labour from Uganda with the full force of an Act of Parliament;

NOW,, THEREFORE, be it resolved that this House grants me leave to introduce a Private Members' Bill, for an Act entitled, “The Externalisation of Labour Bill, 2019,” a draft of which is hereto attached and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.”

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Yes, it is seconded. Okay, can you justify your motion? 

MR RWAKAJARA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This issue of externalisation of labour is unstoppable. The only way is to regulate it under an Act of Parliament.

It is clear that the externalisation of labour business brings in foreign exchange to a tune of $ 224 million every year. So far, we have estimated about 100,000 workers employed outside Uganda. Madam Speaker, it is very important to legislate on this issue and make sure we have a law that regulates this exercise. 

Madam Speaker, this Bill targets the recruitment companies because in most cases, Ugandans are conned that they are being taken abroad and yet do not go. Those that are able to go, sometimes are not told where they are going -

THE SPEAKER: Do not go to the merits. I think you have justified.

MR RWAKAJARA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I need your support so that I can take leave to come up with the Bill.

THE SPEAKER: Can we have the seconder? 

5.53
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the mover of the motion. Since time immemorial, there has been migration of human beings. Back then, people were looking for land but nowadays, people are leaving their countries to look for employment in Europe and even here in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, as he clearly said, there are over 100,000 Ugandans working in different countries. However, there is no legal framework that protects them when outside Uganda; that is the basis on which we think there must be a law. Our constitution provides that Parliament should make laws that would help in bringing peace and harmony to this country.

Secondly, on 16 August 2016, the State Minister for Labour then, hon. Herbert Kabafunzaki, presented to this Parliament a report and he said that one of the biggest challenges that his ministry had was the absence of a law to govern the issue of externalisation of labour. 

Madam Speaker, that is the call we are answering today; that the draft copy of the law is now available. The appeal to this Parliament is to allow the mover and other likeminded Members to come up with this law. We appeal to this House to support this motion.

There are over 90 companies that are already registered doing business in exporting labour beyond our boundaries. Unfortunately, when our Ugandans go and get jobs across, there is no legal framework to protect them. Instead, we only beg the recipient countries to treat our people in a fair manner. However, Uganda as a country does not have a proper legal framework.

Finally, Madam Speaker, this proposed Bill talks about the protection of the rights of migrant workers. If you read Article 40 – 

THE SPEAKER: You do not need to do that. 

MR ABALA: Okay, Madam Speaker. Article 40 is very clear and that is why we must grant leave to the mover of this Bill to do the needful. 

We have read from both print and other media that most of our people are actually suffering. They have been abused; sexually, physically and molested in those countries – 

THE SPEAKER: All those are merits of the case.

MR ABALA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, since the Seventh Parliament, we have been begging the Government to bring a law and they have not responded. Therefore, I think that the Members are right and I am proud of this House for identifying the gaps; they have done a great job. (Applause) 

Honourable members, I put the question that leave be granted to the Members to present the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you can now speak. (Laughter)

5.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. That notwithstanding, the greatest challenge in this country is unemployment. I would like to thank hon. Rwakajara and the people who saw it fit to come up with a Private Member’s Bill to address this challenge. We certainly know that the Labour Bill that he is coming up with is part and parcel of the Employment Act.

Madam Speaker, externalisation of labour is part of unemployment and employment in general is regulated under sections 37, 36 and 38 of the Employment Act. 

Therefore, it is good legislative practise because what might worsen the unemployment scourge and externalisation of labour, which we are trying to see as a gap to address unemployment in the country and beyond, is uncoordinated regulations. 

On issues of this subject matter, as already stated, the placement of Ugandan workers abroad is an issue about employment, which is being addressed now. As I talk, National Organisation of Trade Unions (NOTU), which hon. Rwakajara represents, was this morning seated at Africana for a three-day workshop discussing the new Bill that is supposed to address externalisation of labour to change the Employment Act. 

Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I am sorry - first of all, the convention under which he is proceeding was enacted in 1990. You had an obligation, as Government, to come here and domesticate that convention; you did not. We shall meet in the committee. 

MS NAKIWALA: Madam Speaker, thank you for your guidance.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED, “THE NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE BILL, 2019”

6.00
DR MICHEAL BUKENYA (NRM, Bukuya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to move a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The National Health Insurance Bill, 2019.” This motion is moved under Articles 79 and 94(4)(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rules 120 and 121 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter of peace, order, development and good governance;

AND WHEREAS Parliament enacted its Rules of Procedure pursuant to Article 94 (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Article 94 (4) (b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rule 120 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament empower a Member of Parliament to move a Private Member's Bill;

AWARE that objective XX of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy mandates the State to take all practical measures to ensure the provision of basic medical services to the population and Goal 3 of the Sustainable Development Goals aims at ensuring healthy lives and the promotion of well-being for all at all stages;

FURTHER AWARE that Article 16 of the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights of 1981 is to the effect that every individual shall have the right to enjoy the best attainable state of physical and mental health, and State Parties to the present Charter shall take the necessary measures to protect the health of their people and to ensure that they receive medical attention when they are sick; 

NOTING that Uganda lacks a National Health Insurance Scheme, which would ideally assist in improving universal coverage and accessibility to health care services, regulate health insurance across the country and avert financial risks that arise from high out-of-pocket expenditure on sickness, disability and others;

FURTHER NOTING that currently in Uganda, there are two health insurance arrangements, that is, the private commercial health insurance by Health Membership Organisations (HMOs) and commercial insurance companies and community health insurance schemes. However, the existing community health insurance schemes cover about 1 per cent of the population while the private commercial health insurance equally covers a very small segment and whereas health insurance cover is a great idea for all Ugandans, the repercussions for not having one are much more severe, especially for those in lower income groups;

CONCERNED that an analysis of the Uganda National Household Survey 2016/2017 data showed that 14.2 per cent of Ugandan households incur catastrophic health expenditures due to direct household out-of-pocket payments, which compromises the household welfare and affects their ability to consume other basic needs such as food, education and shelter and eventually driving them into absolute poverty;

CONVINCED that there is an urgent need to have a law addressing cost as one of the barriers to accessing quality health care in Uganda and a means by which Government fulfils its obligation to provide citizens with the highest attainable standard of health ultimately contributing to healthy human capital that will facilitate social and economic development;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that:

    1. This House grants me leave to introduce a Private Member's Bi11, for an Act entitled, "The National Health Insurance Bill, 2019;" and
    2. Do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.”

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded by a number of Members. What is the justification? 

DR BUKENYA: Madam Speaker, I have briefly mentioned only four guiding documents of our development:  

    1. Sustainable development Goal 3 is to ensure lives and promote the wellbeing of all ages and 3.8 specifically is to achieve universal health coverage, including financial protection, access to quality essential health care services and access to safe effective and affordable essential medicines;
    2. The National Development Plan II, which is ending soon - one of the sector objectives in the plan is to have a health insurance project rolling out the national health insurance scheme; 
    3. The Health Sector Development Plan, the Health Sector Strategic Plan and the National Health Policy, which are ending in 2020, with specific Objective Number 3 to increase financial risk protection for households against impoverishment due to health expenditures and to establish systems for financial risk pulling; 
    4. There is the NRM Manifesto 2016/2021, which on page 203, section 11(6)(11) talks about the plan to introduce insurance in order to improve access to health services in the country with a phased implementation of the universal health insurance. 

Madam Speaker, given those four points, this law is long overdue. Briefly also –

THE SPEAKER: I thought we would go to your seconder now; do not go into the evidence. 

MR BUKENYA: Okay, I beg to submit and I will let my seconder to also speak to the motion.  

6.06
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you very much. I also stand to second the motion to introduce a Private Member’s Bill on health insurance.

Madam Speaker, as a country, we have seen that the absence of a health insurance scheme excludes a bigger percentage of Ugandans from the health sector or access to treatment. A total of 40 per cent of Ugandans use out-of-pocket payments to access health care, which is higher than the World Health Organisation recommendation of less than 15 per cent. Therefore, because of that need, I support the motion to have a Private Member’s Bill on health insurance.

Secondly, as a country, we have waited so long to have this Bill brought to the House and passed into a law. When you read the literature, we are told that since 1987 - this was got from the Ministry of Health Policy Review Statement, which was headed by Prof. Owori Raphael - it is long overdue and as a country, we need and should have a health insurance.

In the East African region, it is only Uganda that does not have the Health Insurance Scheme. All the other countries have yet even penetration of the insurance companies in this country is less than 2 per cent. This disadvantages the population and it is high time as a country that we came up with our own. 

The National Insurance Scheme will help us to cure the disparities in the health status across the social economic strata, especially those people from rural areas - the islands and rural communities. Therefore, we see this as a solution which will help to boost the health sector, especially for the rural areas where we see ill health and death rating so high.

Uganda has signed very many international protocols. For instance, when we talk about the Abuja Declaration, we are at 8.7 per cent, which is below the recommended 15 per cent. This is - 

THE SPEAKER: You are going into the evidence.

MS KHAINZA: Okay, yes but also to help us to attain our Sustainable Development Goal 3 - hon. Dr Micheal Bukenya talked about the NRM manifesto - actually, for three consecutive manifestos, we have always talked about the need to have this insurance. Therefore, it is high time we had the National Health Insurance Bill. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is just to seek leave. I put the question that this House do approve the motion for leave to produce this Bill - no, honourable members, you have your time in Cabinet. I put the question that this motion be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what is it about? Is it about health insurance? Why don’t you just bring a Bill?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank Members for moving the motion. I am standing in for the Minister of Health and I would like to provide information to the House just for our knowledge. As the Member who has moved the motion processes the Bill, just to know how far we are; it is true that –

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, you will submit in the committee. Thank you. 

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED, “THE NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019”

THE SPEAKER: He is not there. Let us go on to the next item.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED, “THE EMPLOYMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019”

6.11
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to move a motion seeking leave of Parliament to bring a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Employment (Amendment) Bill, 2019.”

The Bill is moved under Articles 79 and 94 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda of 1995 and rule 120 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. The motion reads:

“WHEREAS Article 79 the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter of peace, order, development and good governance; 

AND WHEREAS Article 94(4)(b) of the Constitution and rule l20 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament recognise the right of a Member to move a Private Member's Bill;

AWARE that pursuant to Article 40 of the Constitution, Parliament enacted the Employment Act, to provide for the right of persons to work under satisfactory, safe and healthy conditions, to ensure equal payment or equal work without discrimination and to ensure that every worker is accorded rest and reasonable working hours and periods of holidays with pay as well as remuneration for public holidays;

FURTHER AWARE that the ever rising local and international demand of semi-skilled labour in the form of domestic, migrant and casual workers requires that there is sufficient and special recognition of these unique and hitherto less recognised categories of workers to ensure that the labour rights and protections guaranteed under the Constitution and the laws of Uganda are extended to them;

NOTING that the obvious silence of the laws on the recognition of domestic workers, migrant workers and casual workers as a special category of workers worth mentioning has led to severe exploitation of women and children to the extent of deprivation of workers’ wages, labour conscription, working under deplorable and unhealthy working conditions, sexual exploitation to mention but a few; 

FURTHER NOTING that amending the current law to among others specifically provide for the regulation of the employment of domestic migrant and casual workers and empower the responsible minister to require that all recruitment agencies of domestic, migrant and casual employees obtain a permit before operation will go a long way in curbing the severe exploitation and abuse of women and children and protect the rights of semi-skilled workers;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that-
 
    1. Parliament grants me leave to introduce a Private Member's Bill for an Act entitled, “The Employment (Amendment) Bill, 20l9; and
    2. Parliament directs the Clerk to Parliament to publish the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.” 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, state the justification briefly without going into the details.

MS KUNIHIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Some of the proposed amendments captured in the draft Bill consider categories of workers whose rights are not expressly recognised in the Act. 

Despite the 2011 Employment Regulations governing casual employment, the Act lacks substantive provisions to support the enforcement regulations on casual employment, thereby creating a defect in the law. 

On the other hand, Madam Speaker, you are aware of the new trend of casualisation of labour in Uganda affecting the skilled, semi-skilled, skilled and professionals. 

Whereas the Employment Act, 2006 under Section 2 defines the casual employee, this is the only provision in the Employment Act that talks about the casual workers. 

With the high numbers of casual workers in the private sector, their contribution is undervalued, Government is denied Pay As You Earn yet the burden of care is left to Government when they are sick or aged.

Secondly, when we mention domestic workers, we imagine house maids only but you are aware – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are going into the merits.

MS KUNIHIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like also to mention, in summary, that the Bill is seeking to provide for amendments that can resolve the challenges that some categories of workers are facing. 

I beg that Parliament grants me leave to present this Bill. Thank you.

6.18
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I would like to thank hon. Agnes Kunihira, for moving a motion to seek leave of Parliament to present a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Employment (Amendment) Bill, 2019.” 

I stand to strongly support this motion because I know that there has been a mix up in casualisation of labour. Many workers with specialised skills and training are employed and categorised as casual labourers. I know that there will be a clear demarcation – 

THE SPEAKER: Do not go into the merits of the Bill.

MS RWABUSHAIJA: Okay. Thank you. There will be a clear demarcation and we know that the people who have been suffering – many times, you will find that someone with a factory employing 200 people will only declare four people as professionals and the rest are casual labourers and they never get their benefits. They do not even send their names to NSSF. 

I, therefore, strongly support the Bill because I know that there will be a clear demarcation, which has been missing in the Employment Act, 2006, which was done hurriedly. I thank you and beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I put the question that this House grants hon. Kunihira leave to produce a Private Member’s Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to say how happy I am with the 10th Parliament because of the number of motions that have been brought and all of them are dealing with issues where there are gaps. Some of them, we have been talking about. We have made resolutions of Parliament, recommendations but no one was interested. 

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, though not here, should give us our certificates of financial implication. Thank you very much, honourable members.

The movers of the other items on the Order Paper are not here. Tomorrow, we shall go straight to the reports. The questions will come on Thursday so that we can run through all this work that is here.  House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.20 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 06 March 2019 at 2 o’clock.) 

