


Tuesday, 17 March 2020

Parliament met at 2.27 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I have about five issues to communicate on. First, is that on Friday last week, together with the chairperson of the Committee on Science and Technology, I visited Kiira Motors assembly site in Mawoito. We travelled in the electric buses from Nyega Bridge to the assembly point, some 23 kilometres. I would like to assure the members that this innovation is real and all things being equal, once the factory is fully functional, they will manufacture 500 motor vehicles a month for a start and later, grow to 5,000 annually. They are very comfortable and they work.

The interesting thing is that the inputs on the bus are entirely Uganda-made; the steel is from Uganda, the plastics are from Uganda and the floors are made of bamboo. There is now a new opportunity for us to have a new crop. In the past, bamboo has grown in the wild but if the industry grows, we may start farming it.

I would like us to support Kiira Motors with adequate financing. A lot would have been done already but the funding has not been as it should be. So, I would like to appeal to the Committee on Budget to take into account their interest. They also asked me to inform the Minister of Works and Transport that the access road is not good - I drove on it - please assist them. I will be writing the details of the circular road running in that area.

The second matter is to do with the sugarcane industry. For the third time, I am raising the issue of the manufacture of jaggery in this country. Last Saturday, I was in Kitayunjwa; I met farmers from all over the sub-region. There are still complaints that farmers are being arrested for producing jaggery. This is the third time I am asking the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, to address us on the impact of the Enguli Manufacture and Licensing Act, in particular section 13, which prohibits the manufacture of jaggery unless you have a license from the minister. I really want answers because there is an opportunity for the Government to construct a sugar factory for the indigenous people but if they are not allowed to add value to the sugarcane, this will not be good. I really want answers this week, from the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives without fail. She must answer that question tomorrow.

We have also been informed that a number of milling licences have been issued and they are redundant. This is done with the intention that there should be limited participation in that industry. So, they get the licences, keep them and do not use them. 

So, we want the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to come and give us a census of the licences that have been issued; those that are active and those that are redundant so that we can decide on what to do with them.

The next communication, honourable members, has to do with the continued issue of the COVID-19 in the East African region. We are happy that Uganda has not yet registered any cases but all our neighbours have done so. So, with immediate effect, travel outside the country is suspended; even within the African and East African region.

The other matter is to do with the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises investigating the issue of the Custodian Board. A lot is coming out but it has come to light that there are people who are trying to avoid appearing before the committee, while others are going to court to get court orders; others are travelling outside the country whenever they have been invited. So, I am instructing the chairperson of the committee to write to the Director of Citizenship and Immigration Control and give a list of those who have been called and have avoided coming and who we believe would like to go out of the country to avoid queries. Can you imagine somebody having 998 properties! Who are you to have 900 properties in Uganda; how did you get them? These are people who are avoiding coming before the committee.

If it continues, we shall demand that the Government establishes an account where the rental income on those properties is being paid so that it is paid into an account controlled by the Government. If they do not come, that is the next step we are going to take. In the meantime, I thank the committee for the work and I ask them to complete and present the report so that this House has an opportunity to study it. 

The other matter, honourable members, the chair of the CPA branch of Uganda, hon. Jalia Bintu, presented a statement last week, just before we celebrated the Commonwealth Day. There are areas of the law, which they want to consider. A seminar has been organised on the Sexual Offences Bill 2019; Employment Bill 2019; Marriage and Divorce Bill; and Succession (Amendment) Bill 2018. The seminar will take place at Golf Course Hotel in Kampala on 19 and 20 March, 2020. Members, please attend so that we can be briefed about this legislation and be able to appreciate the issues therein.

The final one, honourable members, has to do with the matters that are appearing on social media. Yesterday, I informed members that some work is going on by some Ugandans to develop medicine in the country. I would have thought that if the doctors in the Uganda Medical Association had brains, they would first have come to me and say, “We heard you talk about this; can you tell us what it is?” However, they went and issued a press statement. 

I would like to educate them as follows: The COVID-19 is a new strain of Coronavirus initially discovered in Hubei Province in China. To date, it has spread across the globe and it has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization. There is no vaccine at the moment against this virus or effective treatment. Therefore, cleaning using a disinfection of high touch surface daily is the best practice for prevention and containment of COVID-19.

The present disinfectants are alcohol-based and are only effective on bacteria but not against viruses. Consequently, Prof. Sarfaraz K. Niazi - I don’t know whether his books are here - developed an effective advanced sanitizer that has been proven to kill the COVID-19 virus instantly. The tests were recently conducted in the US and Glasgow with the certificate for analysis showing the ability of the product to kill the virus in seconds. Actually, the trial of this item in the US is starting today. 

Prof. Niazi is the world’s most prolific solo inventor of pharmaceutical patents with more than 100 US patents in the various segments of pharmaceuticals.

He has written more than 70 books and developed more than 3,000 formulations, which he has donated to Dei Pharma to help Uganda become self-reliant in terms of essential medicine so that we stop importing. 

We would like Uganda to manufacture our own drugs so we stop importing. I believe there are those who represent the interests of those companies. They are the ones who are now fighting though without even understanding what we are talking about. 

There is a young man called Mathias Magoola, whom I told you about. He has established two industries, one in Luzira, which is already manufacturing malaria and cancer drugs; I have been there. The second one is in Matugga. It is going to be the biggest pharmaceutical industry on this continent. This professor came to assist in setting up this industry; to show him what to put where. That is why Prof. Sarfaraz was here. This company will produce world class medicine. They will be approved by the Food and Drug Administrator of the USA, EMA and WHO. 

Prof. Niazi is helping with the design, construction and validation of Dei Pharma – the first research based pharmaceutical company in Uganda. 

During his visit, he met the president and I, and he donated the patent to Uganda so that we can start manufacturing using it. 
Through his Chicago based company he has transferred that technology to Uganda through Dei Pharma. It is called Covanir-R. That is the brand name for this highly effective disinfectant, which is now being manufactured by Dei Pharma in its premises. 

The product is remarkably safe and can be applied on hands and surfaces without any health risk. The plan is to massively produce and distribute this critically needed product to stop the spread of COVID-19 all over the country. 

I would like the Clerk to help me to lay the books because some people think this man is not educated. I want them to see the books he has written. Please help me lay the books and read the titles, please. 

2.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, this is one of the books written by Prof. Sarfaraz Niazi. It is titled: “Biosimilarity: the FDA Perspective.” I beg to lay it on Table. 

He has also written another book titled: “A handbook of Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Formulation Compressed Solid Products: Third Edition.” I beg to lay. 

The third is titled: “A handbook of Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Formulations Liquid Products: Third Edition.”

The others are: “A handbook of Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Formulations Saline Products: Third Edition; Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Formulations: Over the Counter Products; Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Formulations: Semi-solid Products; the Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Formulations, Compressed Solid Products.”  Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the goal of the visit was to develop a robust, world class pharmaceutical industry in Uganda, ready to manufacture urgently needed products, stamp economic growth in this recession-free health industry, motivate scientists to find solutions to Ugandans’ problems and to educate healthier bureaucracy to become efficient.

Honourable members, I do not deal with quacks. And I do not know whether there is any Ugandan scientist who has done that kind of work. This is the man who assisted President Obama to design Obama-care. He is an advisor to the FDA of America now. So when a man says, “I want you to stop spending money on drugs and start making them yourselves, what is the problem?” 

I want that clarification to be made and I hope that these three doctors will have the courtesy to apologise for the press statement issued. The statement was issued today by Dr Richard Idro, President, Uganda Medical Association, Dr Muhereza Mukuzi, General Secretary, Uganda Medical Association, Dr Misach Wanyengera, senior scientist and senior lecturer. They should have had the courtesy to first check with me to understand what I was talking about instead of issuing something like this. Thank you very much.

I also want to give you directions to the factory in Matugga. If you drive to Matugga, you will find huge buildings on both sides of the road; that is the factory. Here is the plan for Matugga. They are already constructing. There is also the one at Luzira. I have already been there and drugs are already being manufactured. A lot of exports are going out from that place. 

Mr Mathias Magoola is not a quack, neither is Prof Sarfaraz and neither is the Speaker –(Laughter)– yes, I am just a good citizen trying to ensure that Uganda moves, we save money and support our people. That is what I am trying to do. 

2.45
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the communication. 

I have two things in regard to the Coronavirus. We are waiting to hear from the Commission on what they are doing regarding the groups of visitors that always visit Parliament. There are concerns from members that maybe it is high time we suspended such visits for groups of Ugandans coming to Parliament. That is something that needs to be considered. 

Regarding the medical practitioners who issued a statement, I think it is just indiscipline in Uganda; because a person of your calibre even if you had made an error, I think courtesy demands that they would come and explain to you that a message like this could be a problem and this is the correct thing, instead of going to address a press conference. 

This business of civil servants going to the press to respond to things, which have been communicated – this was the same case with the National Council for Higher Education. When we raised that matter of the new curriculum, the Executive Director of National Council for Higher Education went online blasting Parliament and the Speaker. Now you have seen where we have gone. 

Today the minister is supposed to make a statement here on why they left out issues about the Buganda Kingdom in our history, the Bunyoro-Kitara Kingdom, the movement of the Luo, the Itesots and Karimajong. How can we leave all these out of the history subject in the curriculum of this country? 

This indiscipline of some of the civil servants is really perturbing. I think they need to be brought to order. The other day when they appeared here, I wanted to raise a point of order on why they had come. 

Anyhow, this goes to the Head of Civil Service. If you think there is an error in what a leader has said, courtesy demands that you just go and tell the leader that we are professionals in this area and the information you brought – or get a clarification from that leader other than holding a press conference. What message are we sending to the young generation - that there is lack of respect?

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, on the question of the management of the Coronavirus, yesterday we asked the minister to come. However, this morning I had a discussion with the President and he is going to issue a statement to the whole country on what we are going to do. I am also summoning an urgent meeting of the Commission for us to discuss how to manage Parliament; our guests, ourselves and our staff. After tomorrow, I think we will be in position to advise on how we are going to manage in this institution.

2.48
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to buttress your communication in respect of the fact that much as Magoola the scientist –(Interjection)– Yes, he is my OB. He went to Jinja Senior Secondary School from senior one to senior six and he was pursuing sciences. He even went to Makerere University where he graduated in sciences. Therefore, it is not true, as it has been alleged, that he is just trying to make ends meet.

In addition, he has set up a very big enterprise. I know for sure that even in this House, we need to applaud such innovative young people. Whereas he has set up an industry and has gone into production, I know many people in this House who do not engage in production. Efforts of this nature need to be supported. 

If there are mistakes, we just need to find a way of supporting people who are in production because this country cannot develop when the majority of our people are not in production. Thank you.

2.49
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am glad you have clarified the issue of Coronavirus. The Ministry of Health keeps telling us that they are ready. I went to a pharmacy to try and buy a mask but they are not available - I went to many other pharmacies. 

The other time I was listening to the BBC and I heard the European Union saying they are not going to export – Rather, their items are going to be used in the European Union. We keep praying that this disease does not come to Uganda. If it comes to Uganda, how are we going to protect ourselves if we don’t have masks and sanitizers?

The Government should take this issue seriously because there are many countries that have put aside millions of dollars to fight the disease. Are we really ready to fight the disease if it comes to Uganda? Can the Minister of Health come and clarify to Uganda? Instead of telling Ugandans, “Oh, you don’t have to get masks”, what happens if the disease comes to Uganda?

2.50
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am grateful that you have raised this issue. The other day they said Kanungu had got one case and our hearts were really up – we were worried. Thank God it was found out that the suspect did not have Coronavirus. Like colleagues have said, we need to do something. As we talk, we hear there is no medicine and we believe that we, Africans, may die within a few hours when we get it.

Madam Speaker, I am happy we have young people like Dr Magoola doing all this work for us here. We really appreciate them and the factories that we have. I have tried some of the medicines, which are made in these factories, especially the antibiotics for children and medicine for flu and cough. Most of them are not very good. You use it and the cough does not go. 

When you made the communication, I somehow got worried that maybe we shall get a problem. Maybe the Government needs to come in and help so that if we say, let us support our person and put quarantine on others, we are very sure that the product coming is very good. For us who have babies and big families, we get a lot of health challenges. I beg that we do more research in that area. 

I remember when the tiles factory came up, they hiked taxes for tiles from Spain and other countries. However, when you look at the tiles being made in Uganda, they are fake. When you use them, they break easily and they do not stay for a long time. One wonders, if this was to be a drug, it means our people would get finished. 

Therefore, much as we have to support our people, we need to ensure that whatever they are going to be doing is really up to the standard because we need to protect our people.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we recently got Cipla. Do you have a problem with Cipla chemicals? I think we should celebrate innovations by Ugandans instead of worrying. By the way, the President is not mad. He has actually paid for the patents; for the drugs this young man is making, drugs for cancer and others. 

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give hon. Karungi is that as Ugandans, we normally undermine ourselves. We think we are less important and we think we cannot innovate or come up with something that can be supported by the world. I think we need to start valuing ourselves. We need to start supporting our young innovators. You cannot keep on insulting someone who has come up with very good ideas for this nation.

Finally, Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give is that right now, our businessmen are using this opportunity to extort money from the community. Prices of many commodities are rising rapidly. Sanitizers that we used to buy at Shs 15,000 are right now going to Shs 70,000. Tomorrow, it may go to Shs 100,000. Therefore, people are utilising this opportunity to extort money from consumers.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, the biggest worry is about the quality. If the quality can be to standard, there would be no problem –(Interjection)– Madam Speaker, I need protection.

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I pray that we start planning to have many children study in universities abroad; in China or America, because they really get a lot of knowledge and do well in terms of innovations.

It is good that we have scholarships for our children to go outside the country and study such courses but we have been having a small number. I pray that Government allocates more money for scholarships so that when they come back - for example, in the area of roads, we are able to give them contracts and they can construct roads, which are up to standard. The same would apply in the areas of health and education. 

It is good to support our own people but the challenge is the quality of the products we produce. Thank you.

2.57
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I commend you on your fight for jaggery. I would like to make it clear to this House and the entire country that there is nothing like entrepreneurship when there is no innovation. Since 1930, we have not had a Ugandan who has started a sugar factory. I read and I know when Uganda started producing sugar. The sugar was produced by people of Indian origin here. Ugandans started their jaggery slowly. At the moment, if we do not allow them to continue with the work they have been doing, we shall not get people who will innovate using our sugarcane.

We have been growing sugarcane for so long. I think at the moment, we should have innovated many things from our sugarcane. Madam Speaker, I support you on the fight for the jaggery owners so that Ugandans can bring out innovations using sugarcane, which has been grown here.  

Madam Speaker, it has been a practice in Uganda that when someone has come up with something new we say, “You cannot produce it” yet the Indians and Europeans who came here started like that. Madam Speaker, I support you on that issue.

Madam Speaker, the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should allow these people to do their work so that their science can grow. You cannot innovate unless you are working –(Interruption)

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate that many times God uses you to bring things that are very necessary for Ugandans. The issue of the Sugar Bill and the matter you have talked about concerning people getting licenses in zones - in some particular places, this is a big factor because it has reduced development in those areas. This monopoly must be discussed by this august House. Otherwise, these people have made these areas not to grow. They tend to control the prices, business and yet cane is one of the key major cash crops of this country. I would like to therefore inform my colleague that the Speaker brought out a very pertinent issue that I think we need to discuss as the august House. Thank you.

MR TIMUZIGU: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to pray that the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives allows the jaggaries to do their work such that the knowledge, which is within them can come up in order for us to get more products from sugar, since we already have fertile soils and the rains that supports the growth of sugarcane. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to request you to welcome delegation of farmers and millers from Kamuli District; they are sugarcane farmers. They are here to follow up on issues happening in the sugar industry. (Applause) You are welcome. 

3.00
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to address myself to the issue related to establishment of pharmaceutical industry.
It is true that there are pharmaceutical industries established in Uganda, which have been practicing protectionist approach to pharmacies that intend to emerge. However, the challenge is that the quantity of medicine they produce cannot meet the demand of the people in the country. I therefore think it would be prudent for them to allow more pharmacies to open.

The other issue is that as a way of trying to encourage themselves - Government has levied a lot of taxes on those who import. These taxes also impact on the citizens since at the end of the day, the owners of the pharmacies transfer these taxes on the citizens. So, if we have more pharmaceutical factories, they will reduce the cost of medicines.

Many times, members have been complaining about malaria in upcountry. Cipla Quality Chemical Industries Limited (CiplaQCIL) in Luzira has been producing Coartem and a lot of support was given to them. However, recently, there has not been much support and so, their production level has gone down. If you move throughout the country, you will find Coartem in short supply and people have now resorted to import them from outside at a high cost. I would like to therefore urge the Government and owners of pharmaceutical industries to allow competition since it is healthy and the citizens can have options to get drugs.

Madam Speaker, in challenging situations like this, where there is Coronavirus, we should be self-reliant. As I talk, the cost of medicine is going high because most of the pharmacy owners have been importing medicines from India and China. Now with this Coronavirus, they cannot import much as they would have done. If we had our own factories producing these medicines here, our market would be satisfied and the citizens would benefit. 

Even some of the raw materials these factories use in Uganda are imported and it has increased the cost of production. I therefore think it is right to encourage those who are coming with more pharmaceutical industries. I support the idea, Madam Speaker.

3.03
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think Government should have courtesy to support investors and innovators we have.

Madam Speaker, sanitisers are produced in Uganda but it is very      shameful that we have shortage of hand sanitisers. The ministry has concentrated more on treating people that are entering Uganda, forgetting people that are in Uganda who are interacting with each other. I would like to request the ministry to subsidise the production of hand sanitisers like it has done in the airport and borders so that these people can produce enough.

Just in Kampala here, we have run short of hand sanitisers. Now at the time when we shall want it to go to Jinja or Kamuli, what shall we do? Yesterday, people moved to all pharmacies in Kampala but they could not find any. I request that Government subsidizes the price of hand sanitisers and puts in some little money so that we can have enough.

The second matter is what hon. Okupa talked about regarding civil servants reacting to comments that we make on the Floor. Madam Speaker, when civil servants make their comments outside, we do not react. The other day, when we were asking about making Kiswahili compulsory they said, “How many Kiswahili teachers are in Kamuli?”

Yesterday, when I was in my constituency, a senior one student came and said that since they began, they have never seen a Kiswahili teacher. We were here asking but a commissioner said we are talking out of ignorance. We asked, “Since you have made computer compulsory, how many computer laboratories are in Kamuli”, they said we are talking out of ignorance. I think some of these civil servants should be brought to book. We should have them disciplined. Otherwise, we do not interfere with their profession and so, they should know when to respond.

Madam Speaker, I would like to welcome you from Kitayunjwa; my constituency. You saw the cries of the sugarcane farmers. The other day, when you were saying Government could be having a calculated move to make my people poor people said I was talking ill. Sincerely, arresting someone who owns a jaggery – when the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA) cannot give people identity cards – Students and children are seated at home; they cannot go to school because of NIRA refusal to give them identity cards.

Madam Speaker, we told you that sugarcane factories in our area are owned by one or two people. They have bought those that were remaining so that they continue making my people very poor. They have even arrested people that were establishing jaggaries.  Otherwise, we grew up when these jaggery existed. These people do not have a lot of money to establish these big factors and they have tried to establish these small factories but Government has gone ahead to arrest them. I think we must find out what is happening. I would like to therefore request the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, who is inside here, to tell us the motive of arresting our people who are looking for something to take their children to school. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, they go with the police to harass our farmers.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Trade, would you like to say something?

MR WERIKHE: I can come in later, Madam Speaker. 

3.07
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for your communication and concern on coronavirus and I appreciate all the effort by this Government.

Much as we have considered all the border entries seriously, we still have one area, which is not tackled that is the entries on the lake. Fishermen from Kenya, Tanzania just cross. I appeal that the police marines should get interested and control entry through the lakes.

When you go to Busia border, there is strictness, the same at Katuna; but there is still a gap on water that can bring a problem to our country.

MS ANYAKUN: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The countries that have coronavirus like Kenya have restricted people from using money in form of notes. Most countries right now are using mobile payments.

Uganda could do this by removing taxes for this particular period of coronavirus so that Ugandans can be able to transact on mobile money without taxing it; that will reduce the spread of the virus. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The minister of finance said that we are going to discuss the impact on the economy. We can build on that on Thursday when they bring a statement on the impact of coronavirus on the economy.

30.9
MR NATHAN TWESIGYE (NRM, Kashari South County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a Member of the Committee on Education. This morning I took some time off to visit some schools. 

I visited a kindergarten called Kiswa International at Bugolobi, to see how ready they are to fight against the virus. I found that they were using Jik to wash their hands, at Greenhill they were using soap and I am happy that the Minister of Education is here.

There are so many theories about hand washing; I have heard that when you use garlic you can do away without washing hands-

THE SPEAKER: Use what garlic?

MR TWESIGYE: There are so many theories from garlic, ginger, spices and because of these theories - also different types of soaps. Some are herbal others are medical. However, there are some children or people who are allergic that when they use these soaps for hand washing they develop some skin conditions.

I have also heard theories that people are using alcohol as a measure. I would like us to get clarification from the minister on what the schools should do –(Interruption)

MS LUCY AKELLO: Yesterday I also visited two schools one primary and another secondary. They were worried and they asked me what the ministry has in plan to train the teachers and prepare to help in preventing the virus. They have sanitisers but they want more preparedness and are asking for help. That is the information I had.

MR TWESIGYE: Thank you, my colleague. As I conclude, I would like to request the minister to guide us especially the schools and institutions. Looking at the financial angle, what can they use: liquid soap, jik?

THE SPEAKER: In my communication I had informed you that the President is going to speak on the issue of the coronavirus management in the country tomorrow that is why the Minister of Health will not speak today.

Let us wait for the Head of State to speak and then we can evaluate and plan based on what he is going to say. Do not raise the issues of coronavirus now because either tomorrow - what time is he speaking to the country?

3.33
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Yesterday we spent many hours discussing this very issue and he did not indicate the time. He said that he is consulting today and would address us tomorrow, but I can step out and ask for the specific time so that I can inform Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: We also talked with him and he said that he is speaking tomorrow, but I forgot to ask for the time. We would like to know whether it is in the morning so that we sit and listen and if it is in the afternoon, so that we do no sit or tune in. Let us wait for what the Government is going to tell us to do on the virus.

3.15
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I do not want to talk about locusts or the virus. I would like to thank you for your communication. I have only two points that are disturbing. 

In Uganda, when you are doing a good thing, people normally concentrate on the bad. Those who do good are kind of ignored but I would like to thank you because having those two factories here in Uganda is a very big milestone that we as Parliament should support, because I am sure that so many people are going to be saved as a result of the existence of those factories.

Many times, we have passed innovation funds here; but we are not seeing any innovation in this country. However, somebody came and put up a factory here, to manufacture medicine that is going to serve the interests of this country and we will be saved as a result.

However, some people who seem to be benefiting in some form, like those doctors - some people send money through them to fight and stifle any kind of innovation in this country. 

In my opinion, we must condemn such behaviour as a country. Parliament should not support that type of behaviour and they should concentrate on the jobs that Government has given them but not to come out to attack the people who are willing to support this country. There is some small information – (Interruption)

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted to give the information that Ugandans are forgetting the slogan “Buy Uganda Build Uganda”. What are we going to buy if we do not encourage such ventures? I think we need to support it.

When they say “local content”, what is it that we are supporting when we cannot even support our own to put up such an industry? Naturally, human beings are pessimistic about something they are not sure of until they see the results. Why don’t we give a chance to this venture and we find out the results?

One point I would like to emphasise is that before emancipation of women, people did not trust women. They would even say, “She cannot manage; that one will not manage.” Women have risen to the ranks of even –(Interjection)– No, the President of all Speakers in Africa and the world.

So, until they see results, they are always pessimistic but I am very optimistic that we are going to get something good. I thank you for your communication about that industry. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Please close, hon. Abala.

MR ABALA: I would like to thank my former chairperson for the information she has given me. One thing I would like to emphasise is that we must actually innovate. We must always innovate. Short of innovation in this country, we shall be suffering from all forms of diseases. However, when we support this innovative idea, I am sure somebody will be out of danger.

The final one, Madam Speaker, is that it appears that some people want to enjoy life. As you know, these people are getting their salaries but Ugandans are the ones who are going to die because of the Coronavirus; it is not these three doctors. They will not be the ones; they will not die. They are going to avoid because they know what to do but Ugandans are going to die because they will be the ones who are going to be exposed.

That is why I condemn their activities, attitudes and their way of doing things, which is against humanity. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker.
 
As far as I am concerned, I would even propose that when the Government of Uganda is giving out medals next time, those people should actually be given medals as champions and heroes of Uganda. I thank you very much. 

3.20
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of promoting local investors can never be underestimated. If a Ugandan comes up to establish any project, we are duty bound to support him or her. If we can support foreigners and protect them, how about indigenous Ugandans!

Remember, when the Government came up with the Lubowa Hospital, we do not even know the owners but we supported and indeed, against all odds we said, “Let us support, as Parliament,” in anticipation that it is going to benefit Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, I would like you to be very firm when it comes to promoting Ugandans against all odds. You know that many Ugandans outside there can team up with other foreigners and establish factories and industries that can benefit our nationals. So, anyone who comes up to attack you is not only attacking you as a Speaker but is attacking all progressive Ugandans who want to ensure that Ugandans are boosted and supported in all their initiatives. Madam Speaker, we support you and please, be firm.

3.22
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to address myself to your communication, in respect to a gentleman who is putting up various factories. We have a problem in Uganda; the mindset. When something is being done by a Ugandan, very many people will come up to talk about it negatively. I think we need to change that mindset.

If this factory was for another person or a foreigner, Ugandans would be happy. They would be praising him and supporting him but now because it is a Ugandan, they will start bringing a lot of stories about the person.

I know the gentleman who is promoting this business very well. I have dealt with him. He is a Ugandan, a well-to-do person whom I think we should stand to support. He is creating employment. He is producing something. He is actually substituting the drugs we are supposed to be importing.

So, right thinking Ugandans should be able to come up and support this gentleman. I overwhelmingly support you, Madam Speaker, when you come out openly to support – despite whatever – whoever is trying to support the development of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. This gentleman is –(Interruption)

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Michael Mawanda for giving me this opportunity to submit some information to him. Hon. Mawanda, in some developed economies and especially in a situation which is similar to this one in Uganda today, it would not only be a matter of buying the patent rights. Government would even go ahead to partner with such an investor in what we commonly call “public-private partnerships”.

As we speak now, the demand for these sanitizers is very high, not only in Uganda and the region but almost world over. So, what capacity does a private investor have to supply the entire globe? This is the point where Government would come in, not only to buy the patent rights – like our Government has done – but also to partner and make sure that there is a robust production of what is urgently required world over. So, this is the information I would like to give you, my brother.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you very much for that information. Finally, Madam Speaker; again, raising money to put up a factory is not easy. Somebody works day and night to look for financing. He pledges his property to set up something for the good of this country. Instead of people appreciating, they come up to condemn that person. If there is a mistake, it can be a mistake everywhere for both Ugandans and non-Ugandans.

I do not think the Rt Hon. Speaker has said that his products have a problem; I am not very sure. He has gone through all the certifying bodies, both nationally and internationally. His products are certified. So, I think we should support him, so that Uganda can also be self-sufficient. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: The person whom they are vilifying – the Professor – is the one who certifies the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of America. Prof. Niazi is the one who certifies American drugs and these small people here are busy making noise.

3.26
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue why I rose up is to applaud you. Of course, the reporting might have had some misinformation of people saying that certainly a cure has been discovered but even then, what would be wrong with Uganda pioneering such an innovation?

Madam Speaker, the world today is grappling in a race of who discovers the vaccine first. There is a huge debate at the moment and all of you that have accessed international media, will notice that there is a huge debate between Germany and the USA for tapping of innovators. It has been allegedly reported that the United States of America has been trying to engage a Germany Company called CureVac to produce the vaccine exclusively for America.

Would there be any harm if the vaccine had been discovered in Uganda? Therefore, instead of condemning the efforts of Ugandans partnering with those that have the experience to come up with the vaccine, in such a period where it is desired globally, we should be applauding them for the innovation.

If there is miscommunication, it should not be a vote of no confidence in our leadership. Our leadership has tried to say, “Listen, even in Uganda we have people with brains that think for the entire world and not only for Ugandans.” Even if you had said they were innovating sanitizers, it wouldn’t be an issue because countries are running out of sanitizers, including our neighbouring countries in East Africa that would supply us with them; what would be wrong with that? 

You have seen shelves in countries like Italy and United States of America where people are running out of mere toilet paper/ tissue to use; let us take this with a progressive mind. If someone says they are here to try, yes there is opportunity to start with the Coronaviruses, that is fine because who knows how many other viruses are yet to come.  Very many infections might emerge, bacterial or other viruses; let us give them chance to lead the way to innovation.

The only thing I can say and plead with you, Madam Speaker and Government, is to ask for the same support for other Ugandans that might come up with similar innovations, in medicine, technology and any other innovations; they should be given similar support like these other persons. In so doing, Ugandans will hold themselves together in a patriotic way to support all innovations that come up.

I remember when, Dr Ssali came up with some amazing innovations; he was terribly crushed. It is alleged that there is a racket of people who want to glorify only medicine that comes from outside this country. The reason is that it is part of the benefit. For as long as they continue with that supply chain, they can continue procuring medicine from outside.

Therefore, my plea to the members and all country men is that if someone has come up with such similar innovation let us give it time and support. If we think it is wrong, time will tell. Otherwise, if we think they have come up with a progressive innovation, let us applaud by giving all the necessary support required, whether financial or otherwise; it could be a promotion for such people. In so doing, we shall promote Uganda, East Africa, Africa and the black race in this world. Thank you very much.

3.31
MR ALLAN SEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to respond to some of the issues from your communication. It is about the perceived cure of Coronavirus, which you had communicated earlier in this Parliament. The public is deeply concerned about this cure because we all know that none of us here in Uganda would want to die of this disease.

I would not do so much about the press release issued by the medical doctors because they are equally worried as we are. The whole country and the world at large, ever since three months ago, have been looking for the cure to this disease. So, when there comes information that there is someone in Uganda who has discovered what can prevent it, we should be very grateful to such a person.

However, also the concerns for these Ugandans are about how a doctor from USA, which has had like 368 deaths due to Coronavirus, would jump to Uganda where there has been no single case of Coronavirus -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, he did not come here to treat that disease. He came here to assist Mathias Magoola to set up the pharmaceutical industry. He came to advice on how it should be set up. He did not come here to treat Coronavirus.

MR SEWANYANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Maybe the communication was not very clear to the whole world because many thought that he had come to Uganda to set up something to produce what can cure -

THE SPEAKER: Do not make excuses for them. No, if they had brains as I said, they should have said, “Let us go to the Speaker and find out what this story is, instead of addressing a press conference.” Do not make excuses for them, no way.

MR SEWANYANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. That was my point.

3.33
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja):  Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for the statement and I would like to applaud all Ugandans who have come up with innovations to add value on our country.

Madam Speaker, it is quite disappointing that some people come out to negatively criticise you yet you are a leader in this country. Anyhow, it is good you cleared the air on that noble cause. 

There is a scripture in the Bible where somebody asked a question thus: “Can anything of good come from Nazareth?” And I am sure the scripture has come to pass; that some people think there cannot be anything good in Uganda.

I would like to thank Parliament for supporting science and innovations. Parliament has always appropriated money for science and innovations. I also would like to thank the President; he has come out openly to support science students with their innovations.

When a Ugandan comes up, after qualifying in medicine and technology, to help other Ugandans to start a pharmaceutical company, what is wrong with that? 

I would like to thank those who have supported this doctor for coming up with this innovation. I am sure those who have been taking advantage of Uganda as a dumping ground, will read about this and know that we have gone to a level where we can manufacture our own things.

Therefore, as Ugandans, let us come out and support our own. I know we shall move to another level. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

MR LOKWANG: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mine is a procedural point. I can see members from this side seated in a congested way. I would like to seek your permission to allow this House to sit freely to decongest this side because most members have already gone behind the other side due to congestion.

How I wish you could permit us to sit with our colleagues because there are so many free seats there. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I see many empty seats in the last and second rows.

3.35
MR STEPHEN KANGWAGYE (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro):  Madam Speaker, I beg to be protected. 

THE SPEAKER: Order, members. 

MR KANGWAGYE Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, you made a strong statement and you were so clear about that Ugandan, who strongly came out to be among those trying to find a solution - but you came out strongly and I thank the President for agreeing to support our own. Thank you for that spirit of patriotism. The spirit of being a very good leader and a leader who loves her people. I thank you.

Madam Speaker, the challenge we have in Uganda, I think it is what hon. Michael Mawanda talked about. The problem of mindset. Ugandans think there is nothing we can do or develop. We do not believe in ourselves. Why?

Now that there is a Ugandan; our own, who is trying to do something great for the good of our people and other people in different parts of the world, we need to support him strongly.

As a Member of Parliament, if I happen to see any Ugandan or any person coming from Africa with a very good strategy or programme, there is no way I would hesitate to support that person. 

My constituency is at the border of Uganda and Tanzania. Some areas of the border are porous; you cannot easily tell that you are in Uganda or Tanzania. We have people who come from Tanzania and enter Uganda and we do not know whether they are safe or not.

I am of the view that much as we are here, as a nation, trying to prevent the virus, we need to be serious. When I was coming to Parliament today, some of us tried to wash our hands purposely to prevent this virus. However, once you come here – I am very concerned about our security personnel; whether they are coronavirus proof. 

You have washed your hands and maybe he has also washed his hands but he uses his hands to check you. I even asked one of them, “You people, do you trust us? We are saying that we should not shake hands or hug but you are squeezing me by way of checking. How can I trust that you are coronavirus free? How can you trust that I am coronavirus free?” Are they coronavirus proof? What tools are they using to protect themselves and others? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter is something that happened without planning so no one was ready for it. I have already said that I am going to call an emergency meeting of the Commission so that we can discuss how to manage beyond this situation.

3.39
The Minister of State for Trade, Industry and Cooperatives (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, as I was coming in, I heard a number of submissions regarding the arrest of jaggery operators. 

First of all, Government regrets to learn that jaggery operators are being arrested. As a ministry, we also picked this yesterday. The immediate response is that we should go to the locus and understand why this is happening. This is because jaggery owners are licensed by the local authorities, according to the Enguli Act - a very old law.

However, the new Bill that came to the House provides for the licensing of jaggery operators. They are protected now by the law, if we pass the Sugar Bill that is before the House.

Nevertheless, as a ministry, we are going to the locus, as I said, and we will be able to bring a report to the House. We have also written to the local authorities to understand why. This should stop because these people were licensed by them anyway. I do not understand why they are being arrested.

We regret, as a Government, but we will provide a full report to the House when we come back from the locus.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, my difficulty is that I raised this matter on 22nd January, on behalf of the sugarcane farmers. Your minister came with something unrelated to what we asked for and we told her to go back. The arrests and threats continue.

We have asked, is the manufacturing of jaggery prohibited? Is it for licensing? Do you have licensing boards? Are they operational? Those are the questions we asked you. No one has answered since January. Now we are ending March. That is the difficulty we have, honourable minister.

Mr werikhe: Madam Speaker, allow me to come back next week with a report. 

THE SPEAKER: No, tomorrow. We asked you on 22nd January so you should come tomorrow.

Mr werikhe: Okay, much obliged.

3.42
Mr fred Tumuheirwe (FDC, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for alluding to the Sugar Bill, which we have in this House. 

All the questions that have been asked about jaggeries, investments in the sugar industry, addressing farmers’ concerns and harvesting permits are all contained in the law, which we passed here. Right now, the Bill is a property of the House; I do not think the ministry still has anything to do with it. It was reconsidered and passed.

They were arguing that the President wanted to go for consultation. We understand he has finished his consultations. Why don’t we return the Bill to the President so that if he has any concerns, he will address them back to the House? 

Otherwise, the House passed the Bill and I think it is incumbent upon the House to send it back to the President for assent so that we can solve all these problems concerning farmers, investors and jaggery dealers. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the return must be a formal act of this House. We must read the Bill on the Floor, take a vote and then make a resolution to return it. You cannot just send it back by post, it is a process. That is why I have put the matter on the Order Paper. 

I warned the minister last week that this week, we must complete the Sugar Bill. Therefore, it will be back on the Order Paper for completion.

Mr kasule: Madam Speaker, the matter of the Sugar Bill is an urgent one because it has overstayed with Parliament. If the ministers are ready and have any report from the President, they better bring it.

As you said last week, let us consider it this week and it gets out of our way. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Definitely, during this week, we must get it done. It is on the Order Paper, it is coming up. Let us go to the matters of national concern quickly.

3.44
Mr PAULSON semakula luttamaguzi (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding impassable roads in Nakaseke. 

As a member of the roads committee in my constituency, I am deeply concerned by the works of Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) in my area, especially on Kalule-Nakaseke-Kiwoko Road and Kisule-Kapeeka Road. Most of these roads are totally impassable and we are all aware that the rainy season has started. The problem with UNRA is that they sub-contract some companies to work on these roads but instead of finishing their work as per the contract, they do it once and disappear.

My prayer is, I ask the Minister of Works and Transport to come with a comprehensive report about these roads in Nakaseke. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Works and Transport should come and give us an update next week.

3.45
Ms rehema watongola (NRM, Kamuli Municipality, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week on Thursday, 12 March 2020, there was a fire outbreak in Kamuli Municipality where a commercial building/residential caught fire. The owner of the building, hon. Malevu Kuremu Edward, shifted from Bugisu because of landslides. He settled in Kamuli and his building caught fire; the fire is still being investigated by the police. 

Madam Speaker, I was here in Kampala and I tried to contact the police in Jinja and in Kamuli to assist the community with the fire brigade. The first answer was that the vehicle was not in good mechanical condition; so, we had to look here and there, go to the district and get a vehicle that could help bring the fire down. Nevertheless, all the property and the entire building were burnt. Unfortunately, the vehicle arrived after three hours. 

Madam Speaker, this is my second time to raise the issue of fire brigade vehicles in the country. My prayer is that Government avails us with fire brigade vehicles in every region –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Complete your prayers.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the woman Member of Parliament for Kamuli Municipality, has on two occasions raised the issue of the fire brigade. Kamuli is now a region and under the police, it is called the North Busoga Region; it has a regional head quarter at the head office. 

Madam Speaker, this vehicle that was supposed to extinguish fire set off and midway, they realised that it had no tyres. That is why they had to look for a vehicle for the Ministry of Works and Transport. The vehicle they used to help extinguish that fire was a water truck under the Ministry of Works and Transport. They did not use a fire truck.

On several occasions, we have requested for police to come to the rescue of people. The information I wanted to –(Member timed out.) 

MS WATONGOLA: My prayers are:
 
    1. That every district be availed with fire brigade equipment, at least at regional level. 
    2. I request the Office of the Prime Minister to assist the two families with relief items since they now reside outside in a rented tent. 

I beg to move, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not remember whether that question was answered. It is true that a question was asked about the availability of fire brigade trucks in the country but I do not know whether it was really answered. Clerk, do you know whether the minister answered the question? It was not. 

Members, the issue of fires in the country is a serious one so we want the Minister of Internal Affairs to come and update this House on the plans to supply adequate fighting equipment to different areas of the country in order to prevent the kind of damage that has happened. He should come back to us next Tuesday. 

Then, the Minister for Disaster Preparedness should support those families that suffered and are now in the cold. 

3.51
MR SAMSON LOKERIS (NRM, Dodoth East County, Kaabong): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance related to health.

I think, today, you and the Members have been discussing the safety of Ugandans in terms of health and their own security. However, Karamoja, particularly, is an area that I want to talk about this afternoon. 

The Parliament of Uganda has been borrowing money to facilitate programmes in sectors. We had a loan that the Government of Uganda, I think, negotiated with the Italian Government of €10 million from 2010 to date and we have always tried to ask Government how far this loan has gone. 

We have met the Prime Minister, the Minister for Karamoja Affairs, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and they have always told us the loan will be brought to Parliament. The €10 million is to improve infrastructure in health, upgrading Health Centre IIs and IIIs and provisional training of technical people. 

In April 2019, we, members of Parliament and the local stakeholders were invited by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to go to Karamoja to discuss this loan but to date, this loan has not been brought to Parliament. 

In 2010, the Government of Uganda got a loan from the World Bank of US$ 130 million that was meant to finance health systems strengthening for the rest of Uganda, apart from Karamoja.  They said that Karamoja would have the €10 million. 

Madam Speaker, this loan has never come. We have passed several loans - even the one of the airborne survey in Karamoja to look at our minerals - but they do not care about the health of the people. 

My prayer is that Government tells us whether this loan has been cancelled so that we engage them to look for more money because this is a free loan, which matures after 25 years. Nonetheless, we are getting loans that mature in five years and we pay them after a short period. We would like to ask Government what the position of Karamoja is in terms of this €10 million. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Finance, this is a very serious matter. Can you explain to us and to the people of Karamoja what has happened to this support to their health sector? 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the good news is that yesterday, Cabinet considered this loan and passed it. Therefore, we shall bring it here tomorrow to lay it on Table. I do not know how my honourable colleague peeped into Cabinet to see where we are going but this is very good news for him and the people of Karamoja. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: This is now a Government assurance that the request will be presented here tomorrow without fail. Thank you. 

3.55
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the harassment and eviction of the people in Kalombe and Nsowe Forest in Gomba West. The villages most affected are Kabaare–Kamugole and Kigayaza. The residents are being displaced by some privileged outsiders and there is no chance given to locals to continue in occupation and plant trees. Instead, outsiders have been preferred. 

The National Forestry Authority (NFA) officials are practising theft of crop harvest when conducting that exercise. They even steal the essentials in the House like sugar and salt. They carry out these evictions in an unfair manner. There is extortion of money from old occupants and creation of fear in the population because of the existence of the army in uniform.

There is an existing primary school - Kigayaza Primary School, and a church, which the locals are now afraid to use. There was rejection of registration in the Yellow Book owing to that harassment that they were getting.

My prayer is that violence, eviction and extortion should stop immediately and that there should be an investigation of the actions of the National Forestry Authority, especially somebody called Mr Mugisha because every local talks about him and how he swears that nobody apart from the President can stop him.

I would like the Minister for Water and Environment to investigate this matter immediately. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Rwakoojo. The Minister of Environment is directed to examine the situation in Nsowe and Kalombe Forest in Gomba and give us an update by Thursday next week. Hon. Ayepa, two minutes.

3.57
MR MICHEAL AYEPA (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national concern. Insecurity in Abim District is going out of hand. The Jie warriors of Kotido are killing our people on a daily basis.

On 10th March 2020, an LCII chairperson called David Ocan okema was arrested by the warriors, tied on a tree and then they started shooting him. Some were shooting the eyes, arms and everywhere. The man died and we buried him.

On 14th an LDU - Alfred Otim - was also shot and killed. We buried him on 15th. On 16th yesterday, a woman called Mary Abura was also shot several times and is now battling for her life in Abim Hospital. Yesterday, 16th March, a prison warden who was supervising prisoners in Amita Prison was shot several times and the gun taken. He died today.

Madam Speaker, I have reported the killings of our people by the Jie in this Parliament several times but the Government takes no action. I called my Resident District Commissioner (RDC) today and he told me that the problem is that the forces on the ground are very thin and that they do not even have transport.

We have a battalion called the Oscar Battalion in Abim but they do not have vehicles to move. My RDC uses a motorcycle to follow up cases. Even the police do not have vehicles.

Madam Speaker, there was a time when we had 302 LDUs. These boys where helping us to fight these warriors but they were laid off. My prayer is that we recall those boys; and they are ready to work to defend their people without pay.

Madam Speaker, we used to have home guards. They would guard our homes and parishes but today, they are not there. They were also laid off. I wonder how many more must die in Abim before the Government comes to our rescue? The RDC also told me that the forces on the ground - (Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, hon. Ayepa, for allowing me to give information. Madam Speaker, two weeks ago, the Committee of Government Assurances was in Abim. When we addressed people - it is unfortunate that Brig. Flavia Byekwaso is not here; she would equally give testimony.

Originally, those people had refused us to address them because we entered when a night before, they had been invaded and two people had been killed. They took us to hospital to see a man who was admitted after they had removed an arrow out of him. He was in a lot of pain. Eventually, they allowed us to address them.

They wonder what more we wish them to do –(Member timed out.)

MR AYEPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MAJ. (RTD) GUMISIRIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been talking to hon. Michael Ayepa and hon. Janet Okiri-Moe outside, individually. It seems to me that Karamoja is under serious threat as far as security is concerned.

The Turkana, Pokot and others in Kenya come and sell arms. Although the UPDF disarmed cattle rustlers in that sub region, it looks like that in many manyatas, there are guns. 
Wouldn’t it be correct procedure for hon. Gen. Pecos Kutesa or other military officers representing the Army in this House to assist these members of Parliament from the region to link up with the Chief of Defence Forces or the Minister of Defence himself to come here with a serious statement to tell us and assure these colleagues?

I talked to them especially him and Samson Lokeris. They say, “Guma, you are a soldier who abandoned the army and now we are again getting in problems.” Can’t Hon. Adolf Mwesige the Minister of Defence or the officers here representing the UPDF assist our colleagues to meet the CDF to assure them what plan is in place to contain the situation?

MR AYEPA: Madam Speaker, as I said, we requesting that the 302 LDUs who were laid off be recalled and redeployed to help our people. We need the home guards and transport for the soldiers, the RDC and the Police. 

Madam Speaker, as we speak, today, just an hour ago, mothers were running; they had attacked some people in the gardens. Our people need an explanation from the Minister of Security and we need immediate action to combat these Jie warriors. We are safe with the rest of the warriors in Karamoja but the problem is the Jie, who are very notorious.

We asked the Government for help but they are doing nothing about it. Our people are contemplating to have a demonstration tomorrow.

Madam Speaker, as members of Parliament and leaders representing these people, we are tired. We are being abused all the time, left and right. If you saw the words they use to abuse us in our phones, you would think we have not brought this information to Government. We bring the information to Government but it is doing nothing. As I talk, even the Minister of Security is not on the front bench. Madam Speaker, how is this Parliament going to help the people of Abim District? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, of course there are things we can do but because of the seriousness, I want to ask the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to summon the Chief of Defence Forces here this week so that the Members can present their issue directly.

On Thursday, please summon the Minister and the CDF. If they fail, bring them back to me. This must be done this week. Thank you.

4.05
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national concern, which pertains to the brutality that has been done on my people by a certain group purportedly working on pacification of the lake.

Madam Speaker, although this group claims that they are working on the lake, they have attacked people in their homes, in trading centres and in places far off from the lake. They have beaten and battered these people seriously and they have left several of them paralysed and unable to walk.

Madam Speaker, I would like to mention particular names of people who have been left struggling for their lives. One of them is Hawali Kapere of Saka, Bulamogi County, Kaliro District; David Malagala from Kisenda, Kaliro District; Betty Wako from Bujeje - Burumba, Kaliro District and eight others. These people have been battered more than you can imagine – as though somebody was battering a serpent.

This is inhumane, it is degrading, it is unconstitutional and it is unacceptable in Uganda; even the Courts have made pronouncements that even with a sentence, somebody cannot be battered to that extent. However, these people have been beaten and left struggling for their lives and paralysed.

Madam Speaker –
 
THE SPEAKER: Who are the people doing the beating? 

MR LUBOGO: Madam Speaker, I gave some names and I named particular people like Kapere Hawali from Saka, Kaliro District Bulamogi County; David Malagala from Kisenda Sub-county and Betty Wako from Bujenje, Budomero Sub-county, Kaliro District and eight others whose names I could not get immediately. These people have been left paralysed and struggling for their lives and they cannot walk. 

It is my contention that this is unconstitutional –(Interruption)

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam, Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Lubogo, for giving me the opportunity to provide this information. This august House passed a resolution suspending the operations of the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) in all the water bodies in this country.

I would like to inform you that on 28th January, while making a ministerial statement on the status of implementation of a parliamentary resolution to suspend all operations of the UPDF of the Fisheries Protection Unit on major water bodies in Uganda, the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs, hon. Adolf Mwesige, said that Cabinet had considered a resolution that was passed by this august House and had set up a committee to investigate the resolution.

The issue of the young girl who was raped by a UPDF soldier in Amolatar was said to have been referred to this committee. I have it on authority - this is the Hansard - the minister then said that he was guided by the Leader of Government Business that the report would be presented to this House three weeks from 28 January.

Today is 17 March 2020; we have taken one month and three weeks without any report of this nature coming. This shows you the extent to which Cabinet is not willing to abide by the resolution of this august House.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you. Madam Speaker, this is, therefore, my prayer:

    1. We want Government to clarify here before the whole nation whether they take responsibility for the activities going on in Kaliro, where people are being brutalised in a very savage way.
    2. The people who have been left struggling for their lives should be supported and given treatment.
    3. We need an apology. We feel Government owes our people an apology for the heinous acts that have been visited on them.
    4.  We need a statement to clarify because they have now restricted the lake; it is inaccessible. We want to know for how long because there are people who do not have gardens and the lake is their “garden”. They do not grow food; they only fish and buy the food. For how long will this go on? 

I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, who is standing in for the Prime Minister on the issues raised by the Members - the failure by Government to report on the outcome of our resolution stopping the soldiers from operating on the lake? 

Honourable members, in the past, there were some rumours that the lake had been sold and I thought that it was a joke. Apparently, it is true. 

4.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, if you give us permission, the Prime Minister will come and make a statement to that effect on Thursday.

THE SPEAKER: The statement is long overdue. This is an issue of violation of human rights and it is the State, which is violating the rights of the people of Uganda. Therefore, we must have answers.

4.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Hellen Adoa): Madam Speaker, the President directed three of us to investigate this. Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama is our chairman. We have started with the investigations and we are asking for time in order for us to put facts together and complete the investigation.

THE SPEAKER: Which ones are you investigating; the old ones which took place last year or the ones which have just taken place?

MS ADOA: Both the old and new ones. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I moved a motion here on the conduct of the UPDF and you had promised to give some guidance on how the same should be handled. So, I would like to seek your indulgence on this because it involved a lot of human rights violations. The motion was to the effect that the committee of Parliament investigates the human rights violation by the UPDF on the water bodies. 

The motion was debated, it carried the day and you had promised to give guidance on how we should proceed on the same. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us check with the Hansard and see where we stopped and then I will advise the House.

4.14
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter of national concern is about the Dairy Corporation of Uganda that was given a lease of 20 years and that lease was later given to Sameera Company in 2008. In the period before the 20 years elapsed, Sameera later subleased to Brookside Company of Kenya and the lease expired in 2018.

As we speak, those people are operating illegally because the lease elapsed. In the areas where they are selling milk, these people are just buying it at any price. They can buy from one person at Shs 500 a litre or Shs 800 a litre and the farmers are in a bad situation and they do not know what to do. They are asking this Parliament to intervene immediately and see that they either get a new company where they can refer their cases and even have time to discuss about –(Interruption) 
   
MR KANGWAGYE: Thank you, my colleague. Madam Speaker, it is not the first time that this matter has been brought to this august House. The price of milk in Isingiro is not the same as in Kiruhura or Ssembabule. We were asking ourselves; what could be the solution? Who are those that sit somewhere and determine the price of milk without consulting the farmers? That was our query. 

The information I would like to give my brother is that it is bad on the ground. When you go to Isingiro – even some other sub counties - for instance, the prices in Ndinzi are totally different from those in Kashumba and Mbale. 

We always ask ourselves who those people are that determine the price of milk. 

MR MUYANJA SSENYONGA: My prayer is that the Committee on Trade – normally when we ask the minister to come up with a statement, he comes up with a statement that does not give us an exact picture of what is happening – interventions and investigations into the matter and report to the Parliament. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Muyanja has raised a very serious matter. If the lease expired two years ago and things are happening and no one is concerned, this is a matter which the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry should investigate and come back to us within three weeks. 

4.17
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise on a matter of national importance. 

Last week on Wednesday, I went to the Directorate of International Police – Interpol. I found over 700 Ugandans waiting for Certificates of Good Conduct. I had also gone for the same. 

It costs Shs 76,000 per person to get that certificate. There are only four computers serving on average 500-700 Ugandans per day. When I computed this money, I realised the total collection was up to the tune of Shs 50 million that the Directorate, on behalf of the Government of Uganda, collects per day. That is over US$ 12,000. 

Under Article 79, we make laws for the good of the people of Uganda. The guidelines that were issued by the Ministry of Internal Affairs - only the four computers in that place with people travelling from Arua, Mbale and other parts of the country for certificates of good conduct - they queue up for three to five days. 

As a Member of Parliament, they wanted to give me special attention but I declined because I wanted to be in the queue so I get to know how long it takes; it took me three days to get the certificate. What is it that we cannot do? 

My prayer is that the Ministry of Internal Affairs reviews their guidelines. They have a lot of money being collected from that office per day. Let them open up centres. We can have about four centres in Kampala if they cannot – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Internal Affairs is required to come and advise the country on his plans to decentralise the issuance of certificates of good conduct from the headquarters to other parts of the country, taking into account the numbers of people and the few pieces of equipment that are available. Let him give us a report next week on Thursday. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE BREACH OF SECTION 13(13) OF THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT ACT, 2015

4.21
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, Section 13(13) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 provides for the ministerial policy statements to be submitted to Parliament by 15 March, annually. 

The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs was not able to present its ministerial policy statement by the set deadline because of the following reasons:

    1. The ministerial policy statement of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs hitherto included Vote 101 for the Judiciary. However, following the constitutional court judgment in the Constitutional Petition No. 52 of 2017, it was held inter alia, and I quote, “…the involvement of the minister responsible for justice in the budgeting process of the Judiciary is inconsistent with and in contravention of Article 128(1), (3) and (6) and Article 155(2) and (3) of the 1995 Constitution.”

	We, therefore, had to harmonise with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on how to proceed in light of this judgment.
 
    2. The support to the Electoral Commission projects had not been applauded on the programme-based budgeting system yet it is a component meant to facilitate procurement of some of the equipment for 2021 general elections. This was only rectified yesterday, 16 March 2020.

Consequently, Madam Speaker, the delay was occasioned by the above reasons that were beyond our control. The delay is regrettable. 

I beg that you favourably consider the above reasons for the late submission of the ministerial policy statement of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Thank you.

4.24
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, from the Government on your left, we sympathise with the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. There are many reasons to account for the delay in addition to what the minister has stated. 

Partly, you would attribute it to lack of competence in IT because these are matters of the computer. When you receive a judgment, you think it impacts on your presentation of the ministerial policy statement, you just go to your computer, remove what you are not supposed to present and submit. 

The second reason in respect to the Electoral Commission is the lack of adequate and timely planning. These are things they saw coming. 

The third reason is impunity because the judgment was not delivered on the date the petition was filed. A petition is filed, you see the trend – that is if you are a trained lawyer – and you are able to foretell and therefore, forestall some of these consequences. 

The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs has been trained in such a manner that even for obvious cases, they cannot settle in a timely manner. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, I would have expected that while the minister apologises for the late submission, he would either lay the policy statement now or undertake in terms of timelines or request for leave of the House. All he said is, “please, consider those reasons”.

I am raising this because it impacts on our response because ours is an alternative, after reviewing theirs. Therefore, I invite Parliament to urge the ministry – I appreciate that they have a new minister – to be conscious of the time constraints we have as a country.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the statement made by the minister was under Section 78 of the Public Finance Management Act because he is required to report on why he has not responded to the demand of the Act. Under Item 4, we have provided for him to lay the papers, if they are available.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, ordinarily, we would not have raised issues but for the Inspectorate of Government –

THE SPEAKER: No, we are waiting for the minister. Are you speaking for the inspectorate?

MR SSEKIKUBO: No. I am talking about those who missed the deadline. If there is a judgment that has fundamentally changed the structure or the ministerial policy statement, the only prudent action you take is to appeal as you work in-house. For you to just surrender and come and lament, yet that was a Constitutional Court and there was still the Supreme Court to which you should have run for redress and time is a matter that cannot go unchallenged.

Madam Speaker, we know we work on timelines. It should have been another department or ministry but for the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to slumber on their job is a matter that cannot be accepted. May be it can, with your indulgence. Ordinarily, hon. Kamuntu should have proposed to this House what measures they are taking so that such does not recur. 

We are not convinced. Can we also move that probably now they forego their ministerial policy statement and try to merge with those other entities’ that have managed to submit theirs within the deadline? The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should be the last one to lead us down this road of apologising and pleading with the Speaker. We are not convinced with their proposal, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, they were not making any proposal. They were explaining under Section 78.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE BREACH OF SECTION 13(13) OF THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT ACT, 2015

4.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (ETHICS AND INTEGRITY) (Fr Simon Lokodo): Madam Speaker, I did not prepare to come and answer for the Minister of the Presidency. I was coming to answer for the Inspectorate of Government.

THE SPEAKER: May be the Clerk made an error. What is the report from the Inspectorate of Government?

FR LOKODO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Inspectorate of Government was not able to lay the ministerial policy statement as per the schedule because of the following reasons;

The Inspectorate of Government is implementing two major projects, namely; the construction of the Inspectorate of Government head office building and support to Inspectorate of Government –(Laughter)- a retooling project initiated under the National Development Plan II –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, the honourable minister has risen to seek the indulgence of this House and in my assessment, he has begun on a very faulty ground of citing the construction as if the Inspectorate of Government is actually the contractor. Would it not be procedurally right that the minister expunges that part and gives more valid reasons to avoid insulting the intelligence of this institution?

THE SPEAKER: Of course, the minister had not completed but, really, if those are the reasons that caused the delay, do you mean the whole inspectorate is seated at the site to monitor the construction? (Laughter) Notice was given from this House. Anyway, tell us your reasons.

FR LOKODO: Madam Speaker, it is true the construction work could not be directly responsible for the delay to lay the ministerial policy statement on time. However, as I was moving on, I was going to tell you that because of related activities as required by the Act, it was not easy for us to put everything together. 

It is the intention of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that with effect from Financial Year 2020-2021, the Government of Uganda will commence the National Development Plan (NDP III). This necessitates that the two projects above should be rolled over into the NDP III and it was important that they be included in the Inspectorate of Government’s policy statement and budget estimates.

Madam Speaker, it is also a fact that these projects would be rolled over into the NDP III and captured under the programme budgeting system. They required new project codes, which are issued by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the office of the Accountant-General. 

The Inspectorate of Government made a request for the issuance of the code but this was only supplied on Friday, 13 March 2020 giving us only now as the opportune moment to present this policy statement.

Madam Speaker, I appeal that these reasons be considered justifiable for us to lay this policy statement now. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, last week, when the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development was asking for more time, he was very clear about what role he had played. He said he asked his colleagues and they had assured him that by Monday, the statements would be here. 

Is it procedurally right for the minister to come here and say that they were an exception – that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development only gave them the code on the 13th – yet the minister was very categorical here?

THE SPEAKER: I hope the minister can clarify. However, coming back to the Inspectorate of Government, the NDP III was passed in this House on the 30th of January. Therefore, the whole of February was there plus two weeks of March. Honourable minister, your reasons are not convincing.

4.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)	(Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, the Minister of Ethics and Integrity said he received the project code on Friday –(Interjections)-

THE SPEAKER: Allow the minister who issues the codes to inform us. 

MR BAHATI: The Ministry of Education and Sports received the code on Saturday but was able to submit the ministerial policy statement.  (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, your reasons are not convincing at all. 

FR LOKODO:  Madam Speaker, I sincerely want to apologise for the inadequacy of the excuses given for the delayed submission of the Ministerial Policy Statement. I beg to be considered.

THE SPEAKER: Noted. However, honourable minister, the reason we are putting you under pressure is that last financial year, it took two months for the ministerial policy statements to come here. They were coming in piecemeal and committees had to wait. It was really terrible. That is why we request you to follow the law and operate within the guidelines. We have noted your explanation. 

Honourable members, as I said, Item 3(ii) will not take place today. We are waiting for the Head of State to address the country on the countrywide management of coronavirus. Can we go to Item 3(iii)? Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, you said you are coming to explain what you are going to do with votes that did not meet the requirements of the Certificate of Compliance.

4.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)	(Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, on this matter, we still want your guidance because the Public Finance Management Act requires all institutions that receive money from Government to fulfil the requirements of the Act. Where they have failed, they should come and explain to the House. 

I would like to, therefore, suggest that with your permission, the institutions, which failed to satisfy the Equal Opportunities Commission in terms of fulfilling the requirements of the certificate should explain like the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Office of the Auditor-General did so that the House gets the explanation from these accounting officers directly. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable minister, it is a good proposal. The Clerk will reflect the agencies that failed to reach the bar so that each sector can explain why they failed to comply with the Public Finance Management Act. Item 3(iv). It will come on the Order Paper. We shall ask the Clerk to itemise them and then we shall call the ministers.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON HARMONISING WITH THE ELECTORAL COMMISSION TO RE-OPEN THE UPDATE OF A NATIONAL VOTERS’ REGISTER TO ALLOW UGANDA CITIZENS WHO WILL BE TURNING 18 YEARS OF AGE TO REGISTER AS VOTERS FOR THE FORTHCOMING GENERAL ELECTIONS

4.39
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, this statement is made in respect of the concerns raised by some sections of the public and Parliament for the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to harmonise with the Electoral Commission, to re-open the update of the National Voters’ Register to allow Ugandan citizens who will be turning 18 years of age, to register as voters for the forthcoming general elections.

Madam Speaker, Article 67(l) of the Constitution as amended by the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2018 provides that “The Electoral Commission shall ensure that elections are held at times fixed and notified in advance to the public.” 

Further, Article 6l (2) of the Constitution states that “The Electoral Commission shall hold presidential, general parliamentary and local government council elections within the first thirty days, of the last one hundred and twenty two days, before the expiration of the term of Office of the President, Parliament or Local Government Council, as the case may be.”

Under Article 105(1) of the Constitution as amended by the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2018, the current term of office of the President expires on 12th May 2021, as well as that of Parliament and Local Government Councils, which expire on the same date as provided under articles 289 and 181(4) of the Constitution respectively.

With the above provisions of the Constitution in mind, the Electoral Commission has to set the polling days for the Presidential, Parliamentary and Local Council Elections between 10th January 2021 and 8th February 2021, which is the period constituting the first 30 days of the last one hundred and twenty-two days. The nomination dates for Presidential and Parliamentary candidates are set for 1st and 2nd October 2020 and 7th-8th October 2020 respectively.

Madam Speaker, before the general elections take place, Article 61(1)(e) of the Constitution, enjoins the Electoral Commission to compile, maintain, revise and update the voters' register. It is important to note that the Electoral Commission fulfills this mandate in accordance with Article 59 of the Constitution, which provides in clauses (1) and (2) as follows-
“(l) Every citizen of Uganda of 18 years of age or above has a right to vote.
 (2) It is the duty of every citizen of Uganda of 18 years and above to register as a voter for public elections and referenda.”

Madam Speaker, the above provisions of the Constitution are operationalised by the Electoral Commission Act Cap. 140, which gives the sequence of activities or events, which must happen before the actual polling takes place. Specifically, the Electoral Commission provided deadlines for update of the National Voters' Register in accordance with section 19(7) of the Electoral Commission Act, which provides as follows;
”When updating the voters register, the Commission shall update it to a date appointed by statutory instrument in accordance with subsection (8) as the date when the updating shall end.”

Subsection (8)(a) of section 19 of the Act provides that:
"Where elections are to be held by the Commission, the statutory instrument referred to in subsection 7 appointing the date on which updating shall end shall be made, in the case of all general elections, by the Commission."

The required statutory instrument was issued by the Electoral Commission on 16th December 2019 appointing the date for the end of updating the National Voters' Register as 23rd December, 2019.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the statutory instrument referred to in this statement. The law requires that only persons who have attained the age of 18 can apply to be registered as voters at the time of updating the National Voters' Register; only registered voters are thereafter eligible to vote.

This is not disfranchisement as it only applies to a person eligible to vote as at cut-off dates in order to ensure that elections are conducted in compliance with Articles 61(2), 105(1) and 181(4) and 289 of the Constitution.

The Commission has designed a roadmap to harmonise the activities leading to the 2021 general elections. The Electoral Commission is conducting the electoral processes in accordance with the roadmap for the 2021 general elections, which must be strictly adhered to in order not to affect the electoral circle.

I bring it to the attention of this House, that in accordance with the roadmap for the 2021 General Elections, the Electoral Commission completed displaying the voters' register for 2l days from 19 February 2020 to 10 March 2020 in accordance with section 25 of the Electoral Commission’s Act.

Why isn’t it possible and reasonable for the Electoral Commission to re-open the update of the voters' register? From the above-cited provisions of the law, it is evident that the electoral process moves in a sequential manner to ensure that no activity is done concurrently to ensure that one activity must not overlap with another; from update of the voters' register to display of the voters' register, to nominations, campaigns and ending with polling; each of which must have adequate timelines in accordance with the law and administrative operations for organising credible elections. As such, voters cannot be updated endlessly without a deadline. 

Madam Speaker, according to the elections roadmap already published by the Electoral Commission, nominations for the special interest groups, which include the youth, Persons With Disabilities and older persons are set to commence on 6th April, 2020 for village level and to progress up to national level.

Ending with the elections for the National Youth Committee on 16th July 2020, this shall be followed by nominations for Local Government Councils from 20th - 28th July 2020.

These nominations and processes must use the same national voters' register that shall be used for nominations and voting for the general elections of 2021.

Based on the elections roadmap, the Electoral Commission gave a cut-off-date for updating the national voters' register to three months, which is appropriate for commencing the electoral processes of nominations of youth, People With Disabilities and the older persons and not one year, as it is being claimed.

In conclusion, considering the enormous and complex operational requirements for the conduct of the 2020/2021 general elections and with polling days falling between 10th January 2021 and 8th February 2021 for the three categories of elections, the Commission is not able to re-open the update of the national voters’ register as had been requested by some Members in this House.

Under these circumstances, the Commission was able to adjust the timelines for nomination of candidates for Presidential and Parliamentary Elections and it was ably debated in the legal and Parliamentary Committee, but not for Local Government Councils Elections.

I wish to emphasise that providing deadlines for updating of the national voters’ register is in line with the Constitution and electoral laws. I beg to move and emphasise that this was within the commands of the law. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: What rule are you addressing?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I am rising on the matter of the Constitution and for the fact that what the honourable minister answered was not on the Order Paper.

The Order Paper had “the harmonisation with the Electoral Commission to re-open the update of the national voters’ register” but he attempted to lead the House into the Electoral Commission roadmap, which is at variance and needed to be put into perspective.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is the minister who speaks for the Electoral Commission in this House; they cannot come here.

MR SSEKIKUBO: That is why I think that probably the minister started from a position of fortifying and justifying why the reopening cannot be done and I thought that in the spirit of this House, we were going to look at what can be done for the one million voters, bearing in mind that recently, the Electoral Commission adjusted the nomination dates. Can’t we have a balanced -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before you delve into this issue, I was also of the same view until I sat down and studied the requirements under the law. You must be 18 in order to register as a voter. You cannot register when you are 17 and a half. There was a time for registration; it ended in December. So, anyone who did not register at that time cannot now qualify to vote. When I understood that, I also agreed.

MR SSEGGONA: Except, Madam Speaker, as elaborated by the minister, under Article 61(1)(e), the duty is to compile, maintain, revise and update a voters’ register. There are those Ugandans who turn 18 years in March 2020. You are locking them out.

The explanation given by the Electoral Commission – as the minister pointed out to the committee and the reflection went to me and I agree and actually spoke so much for the Electoral Commission – was that there is need for orderliness. There is need for planning. We must print ballot papers. However, the problem is how about those that will turn 18 in May or even today? What we need is to strike a balance between the right of those individuals that turn 18 along the way and the need for orderliness.

Whereas the process for nomination of some categories of leaders may commence earlier than others - you are talking about electoral colleges. If you are going to conduct an election in April and I am not 18, I have no right to vote. However, when I turn 18 in May, I should be entitled to apply to vote in February because the duty is to maintain this register, revise and update it continuously.

The trouble is our Electoral Commission chooses to update only in relation to a particular election. So, what we are telling the Electoral Commission was to strike a reasonable balance because the roadmap is not cast in stone. The roadmap is administrative. It is not statutory. It is not constitutional; so, it should be a –(Interjections) – Yes, I think he is a member –(Interruption)

MR AGABA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the point being made by hon. Sseggona; during that debate here, we were informed by the Attorney-General that the cut-off for registration of voters was because of the first election that was coming, which was for the PWDs because you cannot continue updating for those who will vote for the President even when they do not vote for PWDs, you must update up to a certain cut-off point, such that you have a register to be used by all. 

We advised the Attorney-General who was here. The best was to adjust the election for the PWDs because it was coming first. Because it was coming first, it was bringing the close-off date for registration and update by the Electoral Commission.

The advice we gave them was to pull forward – may be, by a month or two, the nomination dates for PWDs to allow for more people who will even vote in other elections, not necessarily only PWDs; which I think the minister has really avoided as much as possible.

Our contention was not on the law or the need for orderliness because the law is clear. They are within the law and there is orderliness but to understandingly adjust the roadmap to push forward the election for the PWDs, such that there is more time for update of the register. Thank you.

MR SSEGGONA: I would like to thank my colleague for the information. It is obviously useful. Finally, Madam Speaker, as a result of rigidity on the part of the Electoral Commission, you are going to have millions of Ugandans for the next five years who are going to be ruled without their consent.

The same way they are able to make adjustments, for example, in the nomination dates for the Presidency – which we had told them by the way – we also advised; if you can have nominations for local councils in July, also bring closer the nomination for the Presidency for people to be able to cover the entire country. If you leave 90 days, for example, for somebody to traverse this country, the presidential candidates will not reach certain districts.

I do not perceive this decision of the Electoral Commission to be made in good faith. It is a discretion abused. I had expected their minister, who is my colleague in this House, in a bid to harmonise, to look at the position of Parliament and that of the Electoral Commission and strike a reasonable balance. 

Nobody is interfering with their administrative exercise of discretion. We are only saying you also need us. When we guide you, listen. So, how do you expect us to be helpful in future, especially where you do not have a statutory right but cannot listen to us? Thank you very much.

MS MUTONYI: Madam Speaker, when the Electoral Commission or the minister insists that they cannot adjust elections for the PWDs, there is a problem. In the villages, people are saying that members of Parliament cared for themselves and they only adjusted the timetable for themselves and left the other categories. How do we answer for that, honourable minister? Thank you. 

5.02
MS MARGARET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We all know that much as we want to overstretch the Electoral Commission, it must have timelines for everything. They cannot keep registering until the election eve. They have to prepare the register. They have to display. They have to do all those procedures as stipulated in the Constitution. I think honourable colleagues must accept. 

The moment the Electoral Commission registers and then it ends its registration before you clock 18, you wait for another election. You cannot keep them. They have to prepare the register. (Interjections) No but for how long? No –(Interjections) Protect me, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, allow her to speak.

MS KOMUHANGI: Madam Speaker, allow me to submit and I have not been talking all along. There are people who will turn 18 on the eve of voting. Will you register them? Will you display them? Will Electoral Commission have the money or budget to do all that? Let us be reasonable. 

I support the position of the Speaker and of the minister.

5.04
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The right to vote is core in the electoral process. In 2016, we had 15 million voters. In 2021, we are looking at a projection of 17 million voters. Our concern is the 2.5 million voters.

I also looked critically and read Article 59 and I saw that it ties our arms as far as the registration process is concerned. I propose that in future, we should look at amending Article 59 (3) to state as follows and to accommodate those who shall have made 18 years prior to an election. We would may have it amended to read as follows:

“The State shall take all necessary steps to ensure that all citizens who will have attained 18 years, prior to a national election, register and exercise their right to vote.”

That is my proposal for that so that we have the under 18, people who will have attained 18 years prior. Since we are still registering Ugandans and we have all these statistics, it will be better to disaggregate those who will have attained 18 years at the time national elections will be held. That will be easy and we can work out a formula. Otherwise, as far as we are concerned now, the Constitution ties our hands. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, like I said, I was very much in that position but I eventually realised that in order to become a voter, you must register. Therefore, no one can assume that “person so and so might want to vote, let me put them on the register.” One must go and register because it is important.

5.05
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Whereas the atmosphere in the room is that we should re-open registration and update of voters register, election is a process. It follows a sequence of events that are well programmed. 

It may not be possible, as Members are arguing that as soon as somebody clocks 18 years, they must be brought on board. If this person clocks 18 years when the sequence of events has already passed, must we disorganise that sequence of events? At some stage, we should accept some of these things. If they miss this election; this is not the last election, they will participate in another.

Therefore, for purposes of being organised and following our sequence of activities, those who have missed this time, should surely be left out. Otherwise, to think that every time some people clock 18 years, they should be registered to update the register and –(Interjections)– please, let me make my point because you have already made yours. How many times shall we carry out that same activity? 

My humble appeal is that for the sake of moving with these elections in an organised and systematic way, let us at least allow the Electoral Commission to proceed as it is doing. Those who will turn 18 years after the process can be brought on board next time. (Member timed out.)
 
5.08
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the minister’s statement but I must also say that it is a responsibility of any actor to protect the Constitution, it being the supreme law of the country.

I would like to draw the attention of colleagues to Article 59(3), which reads thus: “The State shall take all necessary steps to ensure that all citizens qualified to vote, register and exercise the right to vote.”

The right to vote is enshrined in clause (1), which says: “Every citizen of Uganda of eighteen years of age or above has a right to vote.” It means if voting takes place when one is 18 years, the Constitution guarantees their right to vote.

The Constitution provides that the State should ensure that a person qualified to vote by virtue of being 18 years at the time an election takes place, must be facilitated to participate in that election.

Madam Speaker, clause (2) is all about my duty to vote. Once I am 18 years, it is my duty to ensure that I register but my right is also enshrined in clause (1) and so, I must be guided and assisted. My only argument here would be that the - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Othieno, if you turn 18 years and you sit in your home in West Budama and take no action to register, you are sitting in your house happily counting 18 years;  you say that the Government should have come to West Budama, collected and taken you to register to vote?

MR OTHIENO OKOTH: Madam Speaker, the case is different here. In this case, people have gone to register at the Electoral Commission. They have also told the Electoral Commission that they will be turning 18 years in December and elections are in January 2021. It is the Electoral Commission that is not doing its work. 

The citizens have gone there and they have told the Electoral Commission that in December, July or August, they will be 18 years. The law compels Electoral Commission to take necessary steps to ensure whoever will be 18 years by December is put on the register to vote; that is a compelling situation.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, so, in January, you want us to have different numbers on the register, then in February and March, new numbers and by the time we vote, we have 15 - no you guys.

5.11
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of having eligible voters participate in the coming elections is a big concern. To begin with, as they were registering - the other time we registered a complaint on the machines that were on and off.

The boys and girls who are between 17 to 18 years are very interested in participating in the coming elections for the first time. Most of these people may have turned 18 years today and others tomorrow. 

The youth register catered for youth that will turn 30 by the end of this year because they did registration with NIRA in schools and they have that data.

Madam Speaker, the Electoral Commission is equipped. The NRM party register is now in the villages, yet, voting for the flag-bearers will be held either in June or July; voting in the general elections is in January next year. How come the NRM has not closed registration yet Electoral Commission has?

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the Electoral Commission is more equipped than the NRM party. What we are requesting for is not for Electoral Commission to continue registering until December; no. Our request is: let the Electoral Commission continue doing this up to when we have eight months to voting. They can close in July. Anybody who will not have attained 18 years by June or July, that will be understandable. Otherwise, to close registration at people who only turned 18 in December of last year will not help these youths. If we are here to make laws that favour every one and in the interest of all Ugandans, let us strike a compromise and ask for the re-opening of voter registration till close of either May or June and whoever will have not attained 18 years by that time, we will be sorry. Everybody will understand it. 

5.14
MS VERONICA ERAGU (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank those who are submitting on the inclusion of people who have turned 18 years. I am aware of the contents of Articles 59(3), 61(e) and I respect the provisions therein.

The problem here is that we have people who will be left out if we do not act. And for practical purposes, I totally agree that there must be a cut-off date, which should be reasonable enough for many of these young voters to be accommodated. 

We are not in those old days when we did not have the technology. Using technology, we should narrow this period as near as possible to the polling date so that we can accommodate people.

The Electoral Commission can still have a cut-off date but let it be a reasonable one. They have to work with realistic figures but how realistic is it by cutting off people a year before? Let the cut-off date be reasonable, practical and real for the citizens of Uganda to benefit. Thank you.

5.16
Mr david abala (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am in agreement with the Members who are saying the date of 23 December 2019 as a cut-off point is unfair. A good man says we should have a compromise.

We passed a law here recently that if you want to contest as a Member of Parliament, you must be 18 years and above. At the same time, the nomination is going to be in October. By that time, somebody should be 18 years but not December 2019. It is 01 October 2020.

If we want to be fair to those Ugandans, we should be able to think properly to see that this country is for all of us. There could be those who want to contest as Presidents and they are going to turn 18 in September 2020. Nominations could be somewhere. When we say they should not be included, it becomes unfair and unconstitutional at the same time. I am sorry for using those words.

Secondly, even here when you read Clause (3), it is not telling us that the deadline for registration for one to vote is on 23 December 2019. We must create an environment that is inclusive and that is going to cater for every person who has the interest. 
Sometimes, we want some people to vote. There are also people who want to be voted in. For us to deny them, it becomes a big problem.

I am for that idea of opening so that we allow people to register and vote. In my opinion, it should go up to the September. Thank you.

5.19
Mr Stephen mukitale (Independence, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our Electoral Commission is already encumbered and overstretched to almost becoming a punching bag because the Attorney-General and the predecessor of Prof. Kamuntu, the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs, abdicated their responsibility when the Ninth Parliament ordered them to start with the much awaited comprehensive Constitutional Review Commission and the national dialogue. We are now dealing with symptoms. 

This is my third term in Parliament. Every eight months to elections, we are doing this fire-fighting. I am disappointed as a citizen that after seven years of spending money in the national identitification – last week, we had a debate here. Why should Electoral Commission have a register, which is not derived from a national identification?

We are not patriotic. We do not love this country. We are just doing our games. How do we get value for money for the project we expended so much seven years ago and put too much time here that we must find money for national identification and the Electoral Commission will be derived from there and these other things? 

I see that in every election, we are discussing the same thing. How can we do the same thing all the time and expecting different results unless we are mad? I would like to request that we know the constitutional commands. We cannot make the law to be superior. We do not want litigation. What if this over one million young people went to the Constitutional Court for having been left out and we waste taxpayers’ money again? 

Can we for once love this country –(Interruption)  

Mr kahonda: Thank you, my colleague. The information I would like to give my colleague is that as a Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, in this budget, we provided the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA) to a tune of Shs 13 billion to facilitate electoral processes. 

Therefore, the money we provided should have helped in working in relation with the Electoral Commission. 

Not only that they are denying Ugandans the right to vote but also the sub-counties and town councils that were newly created were not captured. They are nowhere.

Mr mukitale: The way forward is that the intention of a national identification process is to give us a national register. The register is owned by Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS), which should be the primary source of data in this country. If we have that data, the Electoral Commission is only expected to forecast and project who will be 18 in the national register informed by the National Identification Number. 

The three agencies are not working together. Everybody has his own budget and programme and they are not collaborating. As Parliament who are responsible for appropriation, it is our responsibility to make sure these agencies start working together; the Constitution and national register first and then the Electoral Commission should not be blamed for mistakes caused elsewhere. 

Right now, they are just at the receiving end. We are blaming them when the problem is elsewhere. Can we do what is commanded by the Constitution? We project and forecast those who will be 18 and automatically they must vote as a Constitutional right. (Member timed out.)

The Speaker: Honourable members, the issue that hon. Mukitale has raised is what I asked when we had the debate last time. I asked, “why are these people holding information.” All this is Government property but NIRA and UBOS are under their arm.

5.24
Mr silas aogon (Independence, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I would like to start from where one of my colleagues ended. We simply need to open so that we allow the exercise to go on and we achieve what we are craving for.

I would like to salute the colleagues who have shown that maturity of debate. They have shown that this country has people who are willing to protect the Constitution.

Article 61(b) states the functions of the Electoral Commission:  
“To organise, to conduct and supervise elections and referenda in accordance with the Constitution.”

Under Article 59(1), the Constitution is very clear and it states that: 
“Every citizen of Uganda of eighteen years of age or above has a right to vote.”

Article 59(3) states: 
“The State shall take all necessary steps to ensure that citizens qualified to vote register and exercise the right to vote.”

Who are we to say no? This is a constitutional demand. It is a command; an instruction. We cannot disobey it. Who are we to disobey when it is already written?

Madam Speaker, this morning, you saw what we did. We had three members of Cabinet staggering and failing to find words to defend themselves for failing to adhere to a deadline. We opened for them. Who are you now to close when we opened for you to submit policy statements? Who are you? 

We should maintain the right of Ugandans to participate in these elections because they are legally provided for in the law. 

Honourable colleagues, we shall only maintain sanity amongst our citizens if we stand by the Constitution. Let us not be people who keep on amending section to section trying to find ways for our protection. Let us not search for convenience. Let us be convicted to do the right thing. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. 

5.26
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The debate to call for an independent audit of the National Voter Register and an independent audit is premised on the importance of an electoral register. An election register is the cornerstone of a free and fair election. 

Therefore, in order for us to raise public confidence and instil trust in this process, given what is happening, I will call for an independent audit premised on the following; 

First, it is not true that every Ugandan who was on the register actually went to the Electoral Commission. Colleagues, you will remember that in the Ninth Parliament, when we enacted the Registration of Persons Act, the Electoral Commission requested for data from NIRA. Whoever was registered by NIRA became the foundation of a national voter register. That is why whoever had not registered with NIRA was deregistered. That was the reason as to why hon. Mao was not a voter. He was in the old register and we asked for the law under which the Electoral Commission retired the old register but it was not there. 

NIRA’s machine is configured in a way that it can provide you information of people that will be 18 at a particular date. We are not talking about adjusting the roadmap of the Electoral Commission. If the Electoral Commission chose to display a register with those people who will be 18 at that time, they would have done so. 

Madam Speaker, every election has its own independent register. That is why you realise that the register of people with disabilities is not the same as that one used in the general election. The Commission prints a register two weeks to the time of voting. 

Why do I call for an independent audit? UBOS predicted that there would be an increment of five million voters from 2016 to 2021. When the Electoral Commission appeared before Parliament, we asked them about it and the chairperson said there was an increment of only two million voters. Therefore, we inquired what the problem was. The chairperson came up with a statement to show that they projected 19.4 million voters but they only got 17. He disclosed that people did not indicate where they would vote from on those forms, which is a lie. 

I have interfaced with people who registered with NIRA. The Commission did not co-operate with NIRA to avail them information of those who had registered from 2016 to the time it takes to start compiling the register. They proceeded under the Constitution to do their mandate, as the Electoral Commission.

Madam Speaker, it is scientifically unexplainable that there can be a variance of over two million people, who are not of the register, as per UBOS. It is on the basis of that, that I would call for an independent audit of the National Voter Register so that we create public trust and confidence in the electoral process. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: When we were sending out the minister, I think I was clear. I said the ministers of Internal Affairs, Justice and Constitutional Affairs and Electoral Commission should all come together and work on this issue.

5.30 
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A child of 16 years old with a telephone and registered phone number is given a birthday message, as long as he gets that date, when he was born. 

Just by use of registration of telephone numbers, you can get any information you want. However, what is happening in this country, is that people have created their own empires. You see ministers and commissioners driving with lead cars hooting along the road to clear the way for them. They have built their own empires. There is no more respect for this Parliament. 

I feel pain when a minister, for example, Prof. Kamuntu, comes to this Floor of Parliament to explain how the Electoral Commission refused to adhere to his instructions, yet, he is the minister in charge. That is very painful. That is not what he used to do during Obote’s regime. He must be the first one, before he even comes to Parliament, to insist on this.

The only statutory bar of registration of voting of these people would be during the time of nomination, when they are not 18 years. The purpose of NIRA, as everybody stated, was to be a filter and feeder of information to the Electoral Commission. That is what is happening in Rwanda and Kenya but because of empires being built by different people, they do not feel that we have authority here. That hurts me to the root of my heart because these young people you are stopping are going to beat you. Dare go for elections without their names in the register; they will steal the ballot boxes. 

Madam Speaker, they are fighting for their rights. Who are you? You want money from Parliament; you come to this House and you want additional funds and supplementary budgets. Then, we are saying let us register these people and you say they have refused, yet when you are appointed by the President, still you come to the committee of Parliament. Where is our respect? 

Some people look at us and think we are just small people. I am presidential material as well and I am not somebody small. (Laughter) The Speaker is seated here and she made a directive. The committee of Parliament also sat and ruled on the same matter but then we come back to Parliament and they say they have refused. Who are you? This goes to you, honourable members and now it is across the board. This is bipartisan. We must take this matter serious. 

There is no instrument you are going to use to determine that youth A or B is going to vote DP or NRM. You do not have that tool. 

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, let us re-visit ourselves. Let us use our authority. I am not representing one person somewhere. I am representing over 70,000 people including those young people. (Interjection) Can I take the information? 

THE SPEAKER: No, your time was up already. 

5.33
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You will recall that we passed a law in the last few days ago. We said that for those administrative units, which have been created and gazetted before the general election, it would be fair and befitting to conduct elections there, if they are coming before the general elections. 

Madam Speaker, Article 61 mandates the Electoral Commission to demarcate constituencies. Article 61 (3): “Except where it is impracticable to do so, the Electoral Commission shall hold Presidential, general Parliamentary and local Government council elections on the same day.”

I just went to ask the minister whether this has ever happened where three elections are conducted on the same day and yet, it is a constitutional matter. It goes on to say in (4) that “Subject to this Constitution, the Electoral Commission shall, in accordance with the law, determine the dates for holding the elections referred to in clause (2)”.

Madam Speaker, this means that the Electoral Commission can adjust. Therefore, like for local council nominations, which are supposed to be in July, the practice has been that we shall have local council elections after the Parliamentary and Presidential elections. It means they still have time to be nominated because they will be conducting their elections after the presidential and parliamentary elections.

In that spirit, Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be fair for Parliament, the minister and your office to direct that we build a consensus and possibly have the cut-off point as June of this year so that we can know that nominations for local councils can be pushed to September and then, we can have elections of these local councils after the Presidential and Parliamentary elections. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

5.37
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we start handling these issues, I become the happiest person. In 2005, I brought a proposal to Government to set up a national identification project.

I was privileged to travel with the committee that was set up; the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, UBOS, Internal Affairs and Ministry of Security. We went to Ghana, Nigeria and South Africa. We went to these places to benchmark the best practices. The sole reason we were setting up this national identification project was to set up a national register to be housed in UBOS. In fact, we went with officials of UBOS. When the project gained momentum, it was hijacked.

At first, some officials from finance said this thing can never work but we showed them that it could work. We came up with an idea that you can store all information you want on a national identity card.

The issue of the age or somebody turning 18 was supposed to be automatic. Bring the exact technology, the moment you turn 16 for election that very day, you are notified. If they want you to benefit from a certain service, all that information would be there and you would be informed.

This project was supposed to be housed at sub counties such that people can always go there and update. It would even tell you - census would be procedural. They would be registering births and deaths so that they keep the register updated and automatically. There would not have been a reason that these are one million people turning 18 and they cannot vote.

As honourable members have said, there is no way you can lockout 2.7 million people unless you want to cause trouble. As I said, the other time, if you see the amount of money we have spent, it is painful. I think this country is gifted. It is one of the richest countries that you can spend money on identity cards, passports and Electoral Commission. All this should have been done by one project housed in UBOS.

Madam Speaker, my neighbour and my former Member of Parliament, hon. Kamuntu, deep in your heart, rethink about the 2.7 million people who have turned 18 and they want to vote. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.41
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the statement by the honourable minister. The credibility of any election depends on the register. The register is a process. It is a step-by-step registration, display then back to the headquarters and the process goes on. Article 61(1), talks about the functions of the Electoral Commission.

Article 61(1) (a) reads; “to ensure that regular, free and fair elections are held.” If we are to ensure that regular free and fair elections are held, the register is the backbone of this process, if we are to fulfil the demand of the Constitution.

Madam Speaker, Article 62 talks about the independence of the Electoral Commission. It states that “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the commission shall be independent and shall, in the performance of its functions, not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority.”

I now come back to the -(Interjections)- please, you will get your time.

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members. Please, allow her to speak.

MS ALUM: Madam Speaker, if the register is a process where they start with display, the minister, in his presentation, told us that in April, we shall be having the elections of interest groups beginning in the villages and parishes. The youth and the disabled form part of the district council and they are part of the district council election. If we say that we are going to push, that means that by the time we go for local government elections, this one must have been completed because it is vital.

There is an issue of locking out two million Ugandans. Election is a free activity. Even if NIRA was to be good enough and gave us information concerning all these youth, it does not qualify them to be voters. They have to be willing voters by going to register.

It is true that we have problems with NIRA. Madam Speaker, if we can go back to the Hansard, all – (Mr Aogon rose_)

THE SPEAKER: What is your problem?

MR AOGON: Point of Order, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: What rule?

MR AOGON: Rules of Procedure of the Tenth Parliament as amended -

THE SPEAKER: No.

5.44
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We would not have reached this level of the debate if the honourable minister responsible had listened to you in November last year. I remember that is when you raised the matter in this House that Electoral Commission was going to close registration on 23 December 2019 but there are young people who are going to be clocking 18 years. If they had listened, we would not have reached this level. At that time, they would have been able to plan, adjust and say, “we shall close when it is seven or eight months to the general elections” and that would be understood. 

They were buying time to bring us to this level such that we are stampeded, which is very unfortunate. Colleagues have given reasons here that you need time to prepare like hon. Santa Alum said. United Kingdom was able to have the register within one month because they have an integrated system. When people are born, they register, when people die, they know how to exit them. I thought we would have borrowed such a technology, which automatically rolls to another level. Possibly, because of the way we handle things, that is why we end up like that. We have been told about the issue of the coronavirus and we are being told here that on 6 April 2020, we are going to start having elections. Our neighbours have made pronouncements and tomorrow, His Excellency, the President of this country, is going to make pronouncements regarding how to control this coronavirus. 

In two weeks’ time, I do not think we shall be any better. I do not want to be a prophet of doom but what the Professor is saying that no, there is a roadmap, I can bet here that tomorrow, after the pronouncements, you will see all these roadmaps of yours changing. It is not cast in stone because elections are about gathering. Yesterday, the President of Ghana said that if burials are to take place, it should not be more than 25 people. If you are found more than 25 people, you will be dispersed. 

In Kenya here, they have talked of 10 people. This morning, the President of the United States said that a gathering should not exceed more than 10 people. If you are found gathered more than 10 people, you will be dispersed. We are going to have elections on 6 April 2020; is this really practicable, given what we are going through? Possibly, the minister would have brought this statement after tomorrow’s press conference or declaration of the President.

Given the challenges regarding health hazards, life is life. You can hold elections anytime. However, life is very important for us to continue and say, we are going to hold elections because you say you have roadmaps but I do not see it working. 

Madam Speaker, we must learn to listen when Parliament advises. There is no way you are going to cut off people one year to elections and you are saying that you should not be stampeded. Technology is there; we can handle elections within one month. 

I would like to agree with the Members who are saying that we open up. We all like open things. Let us open it up to July and these things can be adjusted. Even if the Constitution is there, there are grounds for us to extend this because of the health challenges. Therefore, no one can take you to court because there are grounds on which to base.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister talked about the special interest groups that they will be part of the district councils but even when we are elected, the councils do not convene immediately - there is time. When we are elected in February, the new House convenes in May. Similarly for the local Governments, I think that they do not also immediately constitute the House. So, the interest groups will also move so that this pressure of April – I do not know whether it will actually happen. In view of what might happen, you may not be able to conduct those elections. 

Honourable minister, is the issue of the special interest groups cast in stone? Can’t they be elected after the general elections so that they can join the council in May?

5.49
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, if you can protect me from hon. Ssekikubo.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, please, go back to your seat.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, you may know that this matter was discussed extensively in the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. In that discussion, I wish hon. Sseggona was here as well and hon. Mwiru. A compromise was reached because at that time, the nomination period for members of Parliament and President, was in August just to show you how compromises can be reached very easily. In that discussion, it became evident that:

Starting with 2 April 2020, delivery of elections materials for special interest groups will be done. (Interjections) I will come to coronavirus as well. This activity tabulation, which was presented to the committee starting with delivery of election materials to special interest groups, going all the way to nomination of candidates in polling periods for local governments, which is coming into May - We are using the same voters’ register. Consequently, if you are going to have a voters’ register applied to special interest groups starting in April all the way to May, you need to have that voters’ register prepared and that was an argument. 

It was also realised that electoral activities cannot be done concurrently. They have to be in sequence. Activity follows another activity and there is no overlap. As a result, you have to follow that order and that order requires time. 

Most importantly, Madam Speaker, what was evident was that the question of having a credible voters’ register with a cut-off point for registration did not violate the Constitution as some Members are arguing. It only meant that in accordance with the law because you are operationalising Article 59 of the Constitution. In doing so, you want this provision to work and the Electoral Commission makes provision that there must be adequate timelines. 

Honourable colleagues, think for a moment; everyday people are making 18 years up to the polling day. If everybody who becomes 18 years was to vote, even on the polling day, you would have people qualifying to vote. Where would you have got a voters’ register, where will you have got a polling station, where would you have campaigned and where would you have displayed the voters’ register? All these sequencing activities make it practically impossible to register everybody who becomes 18 on the polling day. 

As a result of these arguments, the compromise was made, the campaign period was reduced for the Presidential and Parliamentary committee but because of the special interest groups, which commenced on 6 April 2020, using the same voters’ register, this voters’ register must be prepared in time and that is why these dates are set. Otherwise –  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, suppose we direct Uganda Bureau of Statistics to give us the number of people who would have turned 18 years by particular dates and we present them to you and the Electoral Commission because they have them?

In fact, I do not know why you did not meet with NIRA as I directed you on this issue. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: We have discussed this matter. Conceptually, it is possible and electronically, we tried to work with NIRA. Clearly NIRA’s state of operation could not provide the answer to these questions. (Interjections) This is true. 

Similarly, there is nobody in this House who would want to disenfranchise Ugandans from voting. It is simply the practicalities of having a voters’ register with a sequencing of these activities up to polling, which makes it absolutely necessary for that cut-off date to be done. Otherwise, what voters’ register are you going to use in April? 

Finally, on –(Interruptions)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of order in regard to Rule 78, which provides thus: “If a Member persists in irrelevancies or tedious repetitions or uses objectionable words and on being called to order, fails to retract or explain the word and offer an apology to the satisfaction…” 

Madam Speaker, the gist of the statement was harmonization with the Electoral Commission to re-open the update of the national voters’ register to allow Ugandan citizens who will be turning 18 years register as voters for the forthcoming general elections. 

The spirit of the House was: can we find a harmonised position; a win-win position? The minister is on a fixed position. He is not allowing your guidance. He is not listening to the position given by ministers. He is proceeding and talking to himself. 

Is he, therefore, in order to continue defending the indefensible with the clear position of the House that we want the 2.7 million registered eligible Ugandans to be allowed to participate? Is he in order to continue persisting on the irrelevancies against your clear guidance and the guidance of the House? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, under Rule 78, it is really not a point of order. It should be a motion; not a point of order. 

However, honourable minister, you have heard the sentiments of the House. When we sent you out last time, we said, NIRA under Ministry of Internal Affairs, you, the Electoral Commission and UBOS should sit together to work on this issue. It seems when you went, you did not. 

I want us to agree that we summon NIRA and the UBOS teams and your people under the leadership of the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs this week to find out if we cannot get a solution to this issue. (Applause) 

Each of them has got figures and we need them. They have a solution for this. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: I oblige, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: The Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs - hon. Veronica Eragu, I think you are sitting in for the Chairperson. Please, convene a meeting tomorrow or on Thursday. Invite NIRA and UBOS and let them come and we see how we can get a solution to that issue because they have the figures. 

We also have to abide with what will happen tomorrow because – I do not want to be a prophet of doom – I do not know whether these elections will take place on the 2nd in view of everything. So, your programme may be forced to change. 

We direct the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to convene that meeting urgently to deal with the figures concerning the people who are turning 18 years by December this year. (Applause)

LAYING OF PAPERS

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

6.00
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, in accordance with Section 13(13) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I wish to present to Parliament, the Ministerial Policy Statement for the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and its allied institutions for Financial Year 2020/2021 as follows:

Vote 007: Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs;
Vote 102: The Electoral Commission;
Vote 105: Uganda Law Reform Commission;
Vote 106: Uganda Human Rights Commission;
Vote 109: Law Development Centre;
Vote 119: Uganda Registration Service Bureau;
Vote 133: Directorate of Public Prosecutions; and
Vote 148: The Judicial Service Commission.
I beg to lay. 

In the same breath – (Interruption)

MR WALUSWAKA: The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is the custodian of the law. The law is very clear. Madam Speaker, you directed that we hold a special sitting yesterday basically to lay these papers. You were there. You left your voters. Is the minister proceeding well by breaking the law and not even apologising yet, he knows that it is by 15th? Is he in order? Are we proceeding well?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you look at your Order Paper, there is item three. The minister spoke to us under section 78 of the Public Finance Management Act, explaining the delay. That was under three and he has done it. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: I do not know whether the honourable member is in order to come late because this was answered. 

Madam Speaker, as I was saying, in the same breath, I beg to lay the Ministerial Policy Statements for 2020/2021. I have already outlined the votes. 

I would like to beg you in the same breath - because this is a separate policy statement for the Judiciary.

I would like, in the same breath, in accordance with section 13(13) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 to present to Parliament, the Judiciary Vote 010 – Policy Statement for Financial Year 2020/2021. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

6.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (ETHICS AND INTEGRITY) (Fr Simon Lokodo): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the policy statement for the Inspectorate of Government – Vote 103 for Financial Year 2020/2021. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Next item.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE PETITION AND OVERSIGHT VISITS ON OPERATIONS OF THE NATIONAL IDENTIFICATION AND REGISTRATION AUTHORITY (NIRA)

6.05
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Moses Nagwomu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know that a lot of issues have been discussed about NIRA. This report comes out of a petition, which was written to the Speaker. The Speaker instructed the committee to investigate the matter. Through that investigation, we also did our oversight role of looking into the operations of NIRA.

I beg to lay the report arising out of that petition and the minutes therein.

I am presenting this report by, first of all, giving the background to the subject. The NIRA was established by the Registration of Persons Act, 2015.

Its principal mandate and responsibility is to create, manage, maintain and operationalise the National Identification Register –(Interruption)

MR AGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am raising a procedural matter. From the foregoing discussion, we have asked NIRA and the other authorities to meet the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to deal with one of the issues that we had with NIRA. We need the report that the committee is presenting because after the debate and understanding the predicaments under NIRA, we decided that the committee should do this work for us.

The procedural issue I am raising is that the minister responsible for NIRA is not in the House. (Interjections) Yes, it may not have to affect the performance of the House but I am worried. The issues raised in the report definitely touch the basic performance of the minister and his supervisory roles over NIRA. Would it be procedurally right to proceed with the report without the minister responsible for NIRA being around? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the NIRA issue is a very troublesome one in this country. I think it is important that the minister is here to listen to the sentiments of the House. Therefore, let us defer it to tomorrow and make sure that the Minister of Internal Affairs comes. There are two of them and at least one of them should be here. The matter will be reflected on tomorrow’s Order Paper.

MR NAGWOMU: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, this time, we request that you instruct for the presence of the substantive minister. Whenever we have the minister of state here, he normally gives us those answers: “we shall consult. we shall consult”. We request that you use your office to summon the real minister –(Laughter)- who was appointed to be the Minister of Internal Affairs to be here.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, the Minister of Internal Affairs should appear in person to ensure that he listens to this very serious report from the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. 

Honourable members, we have done quite a bit of work. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.10 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 18 February 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)



