Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Friday, 29 March 2019

Parliament met at 10.06 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. You will recall that I had adjourned this House to Tuesday, next week at 2 O’clock. However, upon adjournment, my attention was drawn to the situation relating to the supplementary expenditure schedule, which has an item with a timeline of 30 March 2019. That date happens to be tomorrow. That is why I had to send notices to call you back so that we can see how to proceed with this matter. 

I was briefed that if this matter is not handled and subsequent payments made, the country would lose close to $30 million of what it has already deposited. I do not know the actual amount but the people responsible would be able to explain it to the House. That is why we have called this meeting. Again, I apologise on behalf of the people who should have alerted us in advance about this state of emergency after I had already adjourned Parliament up to next week.

There are two items on the agenda. I have already finished the first one and the substantial one is what we are going for now.
	
MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE NO. 2 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, brief the House and then we call the committee. Actually, this matter is no longer in the hands of the minister. Honourable members, you recall that this matter came and we had discussions on it. New documents were brought to the attention of the House, which made me direct the committee to look at them and come back to advise us. Therefore, this matter is no longer with the minister as of now. We had already referred it to the committee and this is the moment the committee will report to us. Thereafter, we will see how to proceed on this matter.

By the time we pushed this matter to the committee, six Members had already contributed and they include:

    1. Hon. Jonathan Odur
    2. Hon. Patrick Nsamba 
    3. Hon. James Waluswaka
    4. Hon. Abraham Byandala
    5. Hon. Wadri Kassiano 
    6. Hon. Alex Byarugaba

Therefore, let us receive the report from the committee and then we will see how to proceed.

10.11
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am presenting a report of the Committee on Budget on a request by the House to verify the Uganda National Airlines documents tabled by the Minister of Works and Transport on Wednesday, 27 March 2019.

Mr Speaker, on 26 March 2019, the committee presented its report on the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.2 for the financial year 2018/2019 with respect to vote 156, Uganda Land Commission, which had a request of Shs 12 billion for payment of rental arrears to the Kampala Archdiocese and vote 016, Ministry of Works and Transport, which had a request of Shs 280.046 billion for financing the cost of Uganda National Airlines Company Limited.

With regard to vote 016, the committee made recommendations and we had presented them then. They are listed from No.1 to No.4 under paragraph 1.1. However, before the House debated this issue -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, you may have to go through them so that we are all abreast again. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Should I do it now?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, please.

MR LUGOLOOBI: The recommendations are: 

1. 	The Uganda National Airlines Company Limited should allot all the shares to the two shareholders (the Minister of Works and Transport and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development) and at an appropriate time, may divest them to the public on the stock market.  

2. 	The company should match the current investment capital with the share capital of the company.

3. 	The directors should be clearly stated as persons acting in their official capacities, for example the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Secretary to the Treasury.

4. 	Government should expedite the process of appointing the full board of the company.

However, before the House debated the issue, the Ministry of Works and Transport presented to the House a special resolution of the company dated 26 March 2019, resolving as follows:

1. 	All shares of the company be allotted equally to the founding shareholders.
2. 	The shares are allotted as follows:
(a) 	The Ministry of Works and Transport – 1,000,000 ordinary shares;
(b) 	The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – 1,000,000 ordinary shares. 

The special resolution was signed by Capt. Gad Gasatura, allegedly the chairperson of the board of directors of the company, and Mr Bisereko Kyomuhendo, the secretary. 

The committee examined the return of allotment of shares (Company Form 10) filed with the registrar and makes the following observations:
1. 	The period of return is not clear; whereas it is indicated that the period commences on the 30th day of January 2018, it does not indicate the end date.

2. 	There is no evidence to show that this was registered with the Registrar of Companies in accordance with section 61(1) (a) of the Companies Act, 2012.

3. 	The names of the shareholders are indicated as Monica Ntege Azuba and Matia Kasaija, contrary to the memorandum and articles of association wherein the shareholders are indicated as the Minister of Works and Transport and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Presentation of a Second Return of Allotment of Shares 

The committee received communication from the Minister of Works and Transport withdrawing the document containing the special resolution of the company and return of allotment of shares, which she laid before the House on 27 March 2019. That is the one I just described. The minister came to the committee and communicated in writing that she was withdrawing the document. 

The committee was informed that there was an earlier allotment made on 7 July 2018, which she laid before the committee. In other words, she was saying they had actually filed the allotment some time back, on 7 July 2018, and somehow, they forgot that they had already done so.

Therefore, the committee makes the following observations:  

1. 	The names of the shareholders are indicated as Monica Ntege Azuba and Matia Kasaija, contrary to the memorandum and articles of association, wherein the shareholders are clearly stated as the Minister of Works and Transport and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. So, the form suffered a similar fate.

2. 	The allotment was signed by the Minister of Works and Transport, hon. Monica Ntege Azuba, one of the shareholders, which is irregular, especially where the company had hitherto appointed directors. It is the directors or secretary of the company that are mandated to sign that form. 

On account of the above observations, this allotment is not admissible and therefore cannot be sustained because it does not meet the requirements of allotting all the shares to Government.

The committee recommends that the ministers apologise to the House for these anomalies and formally withdraw the special resolution of the company and return of allotment tabled before the House on 27 March 2019.

Emerging Issues 

Ownership of the Company 

Ownership of the company has been a problem. We administered an oath for all the ministers and the technical team who accompanied them. Therefore, whatever information they gave us was under oath. 

Under oath, the ministers who are the shareholders apologised to the committee that they did not provide effective oversight and leadership. On the advice of the Registrar General of the Uganda Registration Services Bureau (URSB), the shareholders admitted that the allotments made on 11 July 20l8 and 26 March 2019 were irregular and cannot be sustained. In other words, the above two allotments have been declared null and void.

Upon the instruction of the committee, the minister subsequently tabled before the committee a new special resolution of the company and return of allotment of shares compatible with the requirements of Parliament, indicating the following - In other words, what we did was to suspend proceedings for some time and since we had all the stakeholders in the room - the board members, shareholders and the Registrar General of URSB - we actually sent them back to ensure that they give us a form that is acceptable to Parliament. That is the form I am referring to here as being compatible with the requirements of Parliament and indicating the following:

1. 	The company rectifies the allotment of shares filed with the Registrar of Companies on 1l July 2018 by filing a new one. 

2. 	That the shareholders should be named as – 
(a) 	Minister of Works and Transport (hon. Monica Azuba Ntege) (b) Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (hon. Matia Kasaija);

3. 	The appointment of the Chairman of the Board of Directors, Captain Gad K. Gasatura, be filed as Director with the Registrar of Companies. Gasatura, who is actually the board chairman, had not formalised his position in the company.

4. 	The resolution be filed with the Registrar of Companies that the allotment of shares is corrected as follows: 

a) 	Minister of Works and Transport - 1,000,000 ordinary shares b) Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - 1,000,000 ordinary shares.

Recommendations

Now that we have the revised structure and the allotment of shares form, which I will beg the minister to lay on the Table, we are recommending that - 

1. 	The House adopts the ownership structure registered on 28 March 2019, a copy of which is annexed to this report; 

2. 	In the medium term, the ownership of the company should be transferred to the Uganda Development Corporation, which is the business arm of Government as provided under the Uganda Development Corporation Act, 2016.

Management of the Company 

The committee noted major weaknesses at the policymaking level, that is, at the board level. The interim board members are also fulltime employees of Government and are extremely busy in their substantive public offices; for instance - 

1. 	Mr Bageya Waiswa is the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Works and Transport and we all know how busy this ministry is. 

2. 	Mr Keith Muhakanizi is the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

3. 	Mr Laban Mbulamuko, who is now a director by proxy, - an alternate director - is a commissioner in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

4. 	Mr Bisereko Kyomuhendo is a commissioner in the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. 

Clearly, you can see that these people would not have the time to oversee this company.

Given the above, it would be difficult to imagine that the company will have a good footing if it continues being managed by this board. The current management staff are also holding interim positions, putting the company in an even more precarious situation.

The committee was informed that Capt. Gad Gasatura, who is purported to be the chairperson of the board, has never been registered with the Uganda Registration Services Bureau in accordance with the law. 

The committee recommends that – 

1. 	The shareholders must appoint a substantive and competent board, in any case not later than 30 April 2019. In other words, before we do appropriation for financial year 2019/2020, the board members must be subjected to a fit and proper test and names presented before the House. 

2. 	In the event that this is not done, the House should not appropriate any funds to the activities and operations of the company for the financial year 2019/2020. 

3. 	Parliament closely monitors the operations of the company through regular reporting, that is, by submitting bi-annual reports.

About whether the aircrafts are brand new or not, the minister confirmed under oath that the aircrafts being purchased by the company are brand new and delivery of two of the six aircrafts is expected in early April, 2019. 

On the use of the trade name “Uganda Airlines”, this matter was presented in the minority report. The committee was informed that Government has, in the past, incorporated two companies. The first one is “Uganda Airlines Limited”, incorporated in 1999, and “Uganda Airlines Holdings Limited”, incorporated in 2000. The former, that is, Uganda Airlines Limited, has never been activated while the latter was wound up and is under liquidation. 

According to the Uganda Registration Services Bureau, the two former companies were Government-owned companies and the Government had an option to run the airlines on any of the two or incorporate another company. Government opted to incorporate a new company called “Uganda National Airlines Company Limited” so as to avoid any potential liabilities arising out of the former companies. The new company, incorporated on the 30th day of January 2018, is the “Uganda National Airlines Company Limited”. Government was further advised by the URSB that the name “Uganda Airlines” is available for use by Government.

Mr Speaker, I beg to conclude. The committee requests the House to adopt the report of the committee and supply the supplementary request of Shs 280,046,776,933 as development expenditure for vote 016, Ministry of Works and Transport, for the purpose of purchasing aircrafts for the Uganda National Airlines Company Limited. 

Mr Speaker, I do not have a minority report this time. I think we moved on well as members of the committee. Just to remind the House, we had a majority report that recommended another item of Shs 12 billion payable to Kampala Archdiocese through the Uganda Land Commission for payment of rent arrears. I beg to submit.

May I, at this juncture, invite the minister to lay on the Table the new allotment of shares?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could I do that invitation for you?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Oh! I am sorry I took up your role.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are going to do two things: You are going to formally withdraw the other two with the necessary apologies and then lay the next one on the Table. First withdraw the other ones, which were laid on 27 March 2019, and you had better mean your apology, honourable minister. 

10.28
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Ntege Azuba): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. You may recall that I laid paper on the Table regarding registration of the national airlines company on the Floor. As has been said, the registration process had gaps and for that I regret, on my own behalf and on behalf of Government, the ministry and the company.

Mr Speaker, I now beg to withdraw those papers that I laid on the Table and lay afresh the ones that have been corrected –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, those documents that had been laid on 27 March 2019 will be treated as if the space they occupied was empty. They are expunged from the record of Parliament. Proceed with the new ones.

MS AZUBA: Mr Speaker, I lay on the Table the return of allotment of shares, company form 20, with the particulars – 

1. 	The name of the company is Uganda National Airlines Company Limited;
2. 	The number of shares allotted is 2,000,000;
3. 	Nominal amount of shares allotted is Shs 200 million; and 
4. 	Amount paid or due and payable on each share is Shs 100.

The names of allotment are:

1. 	The Minister of Works and Transport (hon. Monica Azuba Ntege); and
2. 	The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (hon. Matia Kasaija). 

Each is allotted 1,000,000 ordinary shares. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS AZUBA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the special resolution allowing that the company rectifies the allotment of shares, which had wrongly been filed in the Company’s Act on 11th July and file the new one, mentioning that the shareholders should be named as follows:

1. 	The Minister of Works and Transport (hon. Monica Azuba Ntege) and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (hon. Matia Kasaija);
2. 	That the appointment of the Chairman of the Board of Directors, Capt. Gad Gasatura, be filed as a director with the Registrar of Companies; 
3. 	 the resolution be filed with the Registrar of Companies. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Those are two documents laid. Honourable members, you remember that this was the crux of the debate. There was an aspect of the debate on the issue of the Shs 12 billion to an institution of the Catholic Church. There was also a discussion on the issue of monies to be given as payment to Bombardier and Airbus for the purchase of the aeroplanes. Further, there was an issue of ownership of the airlines and the situation of its management as well. 

Legitimate concerns were raised and that is why we had to pause the debate and send the committee back with some documents that had been brought. These have been brought back and the committee has reported accordingly. Can we have a discussion on this and see how to proceed? Everybody wants to speak. Can we use two minutes each? It is not a special session; it is ordinary, so three minutes for each person is okay. 

Let us start with the Member of Parliament for Aringa North. However, before you start, in the public gallery this morning, we have our Parliament Health Week’s ambassadors who include:

    1. Mr Moses Golola; 
    2. Mr Daniel Kazibwe alias Ragga Dee; 
    3. Coach Bob Ssebuggwawo; 
    4. Mr Martin Kawesa; and 
    5. Mr Kawooya Innocent.

They are here to observe the proceedings. As you are aware, the Parliament Health Week is going on and there are activities they are involved in. They are here to observe a bit of our proceedings and then they will go to engage there more actively. You can see how they are dressed; it looks like they are going to be very active this morning and afternoon. You are welcome to Parliament and enjoy the day. (Applause)

10.35
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When the idea of reviving Uganda Airlines came up, all Ugandans got excited and everybody supported it. It has been unfortunate that the handling of this issue came with a number of regrettable situations, which has left many Ugandans wondering what the problem is. Outside, there are many statements being uttered by people. Some see the situation as if individuals were trying to use Government to carry out investment for them, and there were many other comments.

Whereas a number of corrections have been made, I still have a question that I will request either the minister or the committee chairperson to respond to. Although the report has indicated that 100 per cent shares are owned by Government and that they should be transferred to the Uganda Development Corporation, it would appear in the mother documents - the memorandum and articles of association – this has not been changed. The original position still remains. 

I, therefore, seek clarification because if we talk about resolutions of the company, what about the mother documents - the memorandum and articles of association; it does not come out clearly. I have not heard about the transfer to Uganda Development Corporation here, even though the recommendation on page 4 says that 100 per cent should go to Government. I seek clarification on whether this has been corrected in the mother documents. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

10.37
MR KYEWALABYE MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am one of the Ugandans who have wished that we have a national carrier so that we can have Kisoga songs play in the national carrier. I see Ethiopians playing their local songs. However, I am worried about the way things are going. We had Uganda Airlines before - most of the Members here were born by that time - and it “died” in a very bad way. Now even this new airline has started in a zigzag form. 

I need clarification from the Minister on the issue of routes. The former Uganda Airlines had routes; how are we going to regain those routes? You need to be clear on that one.

Secondly, they mentioned the ground handling services. There is no way we can sustain an airline without ground handling services. Remember, those services were given to Entebbe Handling Services (ENHAS). You need to tell us, will ENHAS just give back those services or will it be at a cost? If there is a cost, how much is it? 

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, this is a big project. I studied project management and they would tell us that if a project is big, you do not need to begin at once but go in phases. If you are going in deep water, you begin by testing the shallow water and see if you can really manage. Should we really begin with the six planes? Why can’t we begin with at least three planes so that we see how to move and then add later? I see a big problem beginning with all the six planes at a go, given that even the start is zigzag –(Interruption)

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two matters of procedure on which I seek your guidance. There are documents that have been withdrawn and with an apology. However, we also have evidence that there were forgeries of these documents that were brought to Parliament. Forgery is criminal under our laws and it cannot be remedied by a mere apology. Therefore, wouldn’t it be proper that we proceed against those persons who forged documents, including the minister who signed and altered the forms in allotment, under our criminal procedure system?

Secondly, we are discussing a CRJ900 aircraft. I have done research; these aircrafts are listed and none is sold below $34 million. Actually, Rwanda ordered and paid about $48 million for each CRJ900. The only aircraft that falls within the $27.7 that we are talking about here is the CRJ700 aircraft. This means that the aircraft we are buying is either an older model - the CRJ700 - or it is not brand new. Let me go to the Airbus. The Airbus A3800 goes for $403 million and here we have a document saying that we are going to buy it at $108 million. 

Can we proceed when the aircraft we are buying are in question and the figures applied here do not tally? I beg your guidance on this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you used the words, “there was forgery”. Forgery is one of those that require strict proof. The burden is quite high to prove that somebody has forged a document. That is the law; that is not Jacob Oulanyah.

What happened is that documents were signed when other documents already existed. The people who signed them signed them for the purposes they intended to sign them for, except that there were other documents that had already been signed before. Therefore, the two documents cannot coexist.

There were documents that were signed in July 2018, which the minister said they forgot about, so they signed fresh documents because the House had so impressed on them that without this allotment, it would be difficult for the House to proceed with these matters. That can hardly be called forgery. They have owned up and the documents that they have withdrawn were documents intended for those purposes except they were now two.

What is a forgery? A forgery is a document that purports to say what it is not. It purports to be signed by people who did not sign it. However, this was signed by people who said they signed it. These documents were signed by the people who said they signed them. There is nobody who said “I am so and so” when she was not and signed - Please, let us get this thing straight because it can lead to confusion. The documents that were laid on the Table were dully signed by the people who signed them under their names – Okay, tell me which document was signed by somebody else.

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The first document that was signed in July 2018 was signed by a shareholder purporting to be a company secretary and a company director. She is a shareholder. I will lay it on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, who is it?

MS JOY ATIM: That is the Minister of Works and Transport. She signed without her initials.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But she is the one who signed in her name.

MS JOY ATIM: She is neither the company secretary nor the director. The second document -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let us get that clear. 

MS JOY ATIM: Mr Speaker, that is it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us first deal with the first document. We do not want you raising things just for the sake of raising them. She is the one who signed it and she has not denied it. She is the one who signed under her name, so it is not a forgery. A forgery is if somebody else had signed pretending to be the minister. Please, let us go one by one; let us not get confused here. Let me first deal with the first document because I still have to rule on the point of order.

If she called herself a company secretary or whatever but she signed as a minister and shareholder - What is wrong with that? Is that a forgery? Please, let us not raise issues where there are none. Give me the evidence of forgery and then we deal with it. Forgery means something purports to say what it is not. If that is the line you are taking, then you will not say anything. I want evidence, but that is not evidence.

Honourable members, at the time that the documents were signed, did the person who signed them purport to deal in a capacity that she was not? Was it supposed to be somebody else and she did something wrong? Show me. 

MS JOY ATIM: I beg for your indulgence. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, proceed. 

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you. Mr Speaker, company law stipulates who the company secretary, company directors and shareholders are. However, this is a situation where a shareholder signed purporting to be a director and a secretary. The forgeries were also countersigned here. There is a lot of countersigning because there were some forgeries here.

When the committee disregarded this - They started with the first one and then in the second one, they gave us Gad Gasatura, who the committee found to be an appointee but was not registered with the Registrar of Companies. It is illegal. Thereafter, they gave us this one, which the secretary and the director did not own; it was now the shareholder who signed it. Then they came with a third document, which has now been laid on the Table, where the secretary now signed, but with illegalities. 

We sent them to the Registrar of Companies over six times. When they brought it back, it was not registered, not stamped, not fully filled and very many other things. Thank you. 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Mr Speaker, I agree with you that the person who makes an allegation must prove, and we can prove this strictly. 

However, I would like to point out that in the appointment of the directors, there was a receipt submitted - receipt No. 2180001975267. It was a purported payment of Shs 20,000 on 25 January 2018 for appointment of directors, which attracts its own stamp duty. However, the same receipt number was used, purporting that Shs 2 million was paid for the memorandum and articles of association on 25 January 2018. 

Anybody knows that stamp duty attracts different payments. You cannot use the same receipt for two different payments - one purporting Shs 20,000 and the same receipt number having Shs 2 million. It is not possible. It can only be forgery and fraud, and it shows the rot surrounding the Uganda Airlines deal. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have a copy of the receipt? Let me see it. Please, give me the receipt. 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Mr Speaker, they are part of these documents. You can clearly see it here, but I am going to lay it on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I would like you to bring the receipt itself. Receipts can be issued with different items on them. The same receipt can have five different payment issues. I want the receipt. 

How many of you have not seen receipts? You can purchase 10 items and they can all be put on the same receipt. It would have the same receipt number. Just show me the receipt itself so that I can understand if that receipt had only one item, in which case I would understand what you are saying. 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Mr Speaker, the documents are here and the receipt number is recorded. The amount is Shs 2 million on the receipt of 25 January 2018 for the Memorandum and Articles of Association of Uganda National Airlines Company Limited. The same receipt is here in the document; it is dated 25 January 2018, with Shs 20,000, and is for the return of the notice on appointment of the secretary. They are both here and I beg to lay them on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not the receipt. Honourable members, please, let us go slowly. Does the receipt have the same date? Hon. Odur, I would like you to help this House. Does the receipt have the same date? 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Yes. Mr Speaker, I have transacted and I know the procedures that companies use. When you are altering any document with a company, it attracts a stamp duty. Each transaction attracts its own receipt, which must be stamped and the stamp has provision - just like in the courts of law - where the amount, the receipt number and the time are recorded. It cannot be combined. I am hearing it for the first time here. 

I will challenge them - If what I am saying is wrong, rebut it here because the ministers are here. You have the technical team, so rebut it – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I do not want to draw my own knowledge on this matter. I have also practised law. I have filed papers in the registry and in the court. These days you pay straight in the bank. In the assessment you are given, sometimes they list two or three items on the same assessment. You go, pay and then the receipt is retrieved in triplicate and then you come and distribute the copies. It is the same receipt you pay on the same thing. So, that happens. 

Therefore, I would not think that it is entirely false to have two items combined on one receipt. That would not be an irregularity on its own. Honourable member, do we have a copy of this receipt itself? - Please, let us not start on these procedural issues. We are proceeding well. By the way, I am still trying to rule on the point of order that was raised. I am trying to get the information so that it can guide me in making my ruling. Therefore, please, do not bring your procedural issues as of now. 

The point I am trying to make is that it is not irregular for one receipt to contain two items on it. That alone cannot amount to fraud. Citing the same receipt number for two payments cannot amount to fraud.

MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. If the two payments constitute the same transaction, you can say that there were two payments on one receipt for one transaction. However, from what they are reading, according to the Company’s Act, there were different items for different reasons. Ordinarily, from the face of it - I would not have wanted those who ought to speak to it, to leave the burden to the Speaker to start giving guidance when they have not adduced exactly what happened.

From what I have been hearing while seated there, these were two different items that could not have been meant for the same transaction. The best counsel I would give is that they could be scrutinised probably to help the Speaker guide this House well. Otherwise, if we leave it to both sides - “no, it was not”, “it was” - yet the persons who ought to have the original receipt, who could be privileged to have the original receipt, should help the House and table it so that this House can reach a fair decision on the matter. 

Mr Speaker, it is a serious matter and when we are dealing with a company of this magnitude, we should start from the basics.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I now proceed with the matter, honourable member? You are assisting me to give my ruling. Let me make my ruling. Honourable members, I know a legitimate point when it is stated; I also know an illegitimate point when it is stated and this is based on my experience. I say all these things in good faith. 

The documents being referred to, for which fees were paid, are: One, notification of appointment of director, which was filed on 30 January 2018 and on that same date, the memorandum and articles of association were filed. The person who issued the assessment for payment of whatever was due, because it is coming from the same company and the same document, issued one assessment to cover both payments. Therefore, it was paid and the receipt could only have been one.

These documents are here. Those are the things you pay - the assessments are here - and that is what the honourable member is raising. The point is that there are two payments bearing the same receipt number. I am saying these were the documents; they were filed, assessed in one assessment, payments made on them and one receipt was issued on the same date. Therefore, there could only have been one receipt bearing two items. 

It is the same receipt in the sense that you have item No. 1 as Shs 2 million and another item as Shs 20,000 and then you put a total. When you are recording, that is what you record - “What is the receipt number for this payment? It is this number. What is the receipt number for the other payment? It is the same number.” What is irregular with that? That can hardly be called forgery. 

Hon. Odur, I think you have exhausted this point and we are clear on this. Let us not mislead each other. I only wish the original receipt was here so that we could have resolved this matter quicker.

On the other issue of somebody signing a document in the names of different capacities, it would have been fraud first, if the document was not the document that was issued; secondly, if the person who signed was not the person who claimed to have signed; and thirdly, that the person who signed on this document had fraudulent intent - an intention to defraud somebody else. That would constitute fraud. However, just because you do not know, you cannot say it is fraud. You do not know! (Laughter) Honourable member, you do not know and so you cannot say it is fraud. Your lack of knowledge cannot make a document fraudulent.

Honourable members, in this document that I have seen, I cannot extract any element of fraud in the documentation. They could have been false documents, they could have been filed by mistake – Yes, you can file a document by mistake and withdraw it. Sometimes, you go to court and file a wrong document and then you go and remove it and replace it with the right one. It is a certain process. That is my guidance on the point of order that was raised. Can we now proceed with the debate. 

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of pupils and teachers from Mirembe Junior School, Kampala District. They are represented by hon. Naggayi Sempala and hon. Allan Ssewanyana. You are welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, let us assist each other because these things are important to all of us. The other question about pricing was not a procedural matter. How would I know the pricing? I will leave that one to the ministers to deal with because it is not a procedural matter. I do not work for Boeing neither do I work for Bombardier –(Laughter)– Therefore, how would I be engaging in issues of pricing? I will leave that to the minister; technically, that is not a procedural matter.

Having given that guidance, there are no outstanding procedural matters that came from you. I will now leave that to the minister to explain and then we continue. Can we go on with the debate?

11.04
MS BEATRICE ATIM ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and the committee members for a job well done. I am here to stand by their resolutions because they have really made them quite clear. 

The need for Uganda to have its own aircraft cannot be underestimated and that is core. We have been flying around and I have been feeling sad when I sit in a Kenya Airways aircraft and they say, “the Pride of Africa”, as if we do not exist in Uganda. Firstly, we need our own aircraft in this country. Secondly, the fact that we are in agreement does not remove the problems we have encountered. I will go by the recommendation of the committee that we are not going to approve the funds until more details are presented, which is fine. 

What is at stake right now is that we need to approve these funds because there is a commitment. Thereafter, I pray that this House be given enough time so that the minister presents more details on how we can operationalise these aircrafts.

Mr Speaker, you can see the mood in the House. This is our own and Ugandans are looking forward to that. We have Ugandans even outside the country who would like to come and contribute to this country. Trained Ugandans are languishing in the diaspora. We need to tap into this expertise. I know one Ugandan, Prof. Ben Latigo, who once operated this airline but his expertise is based outside the country. When he came here, he went to Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) and asked how he could be of some use. We have people like hon. Winnie Byanyima. These are our own –(Member timed out.)

11.07
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We need to start on a better footing. That is the love and wish of all Ugandans and that is why we are raising all these questions. I thought wise men only came from the east but on the day you postponed the debate after listening to this, I realised that there are also wise men in the north. Mr Speaker, you made a very wise decision to postpone the debate after the presentation. 

I must also thank the two ladies that presented the minority report here. This puts the majority report and the Members who signed it in disarray. If I may ask, what did you produce in the first report that barely hours later you are producing a much better report? I wish you had delved deeper to understand the issues that the two honourable ladies had seen and raised.

I totally agree with the recommendations that have been made here because they capture more than 80 per cent of the concerns of the Members. The minister has come up to say that she regrets. If you want to discipline a child, you either slap, cane or even disown him. I think we should not disown our minister but we can cane her for these inadequacies so that next time she is a better minister. This cannot be said of a Government. I think they need to do better work.

If I may use the chairman’s words, none of those people that are on the current board should appear in the next board. We need people who know and understand their work and who will do it thoroughly. This team has already failed and we should not see them appearing anywhere among the new appointments. 

There are issues that the committee has recommended here and I think we need to go by them. However, disciplinary action must be taken on those people who were taking us for a ride. I was wondering, because this meeting ended late yesterday, when did we re-register? Overnight? That is why I would like to agree with hon. Anywar that we need more time. Tuesday or Wednesday next week is not very far. This will give time for the minister to come here with a thorough explanation. I see her looking so beaten down because of what has happened –(Member timed out.)

11.10
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I believe that all of us support the revival of Uganda Airlines. The million dollar issue is: Plans have been underway for the revival for the last many years, so I would have thought that preparations were genuinely made because this has not been a one-day event. We have been thinking about it and making preparations to revive Uganda Airlines. However, why do we have all these conflicts and unclear methodologies in reaching a decision to have Uganda Airlines revived?

I am convinced that we need a lot of time because we are committing Ugandans to something. Citizens support the revival but the methodology is wrong. We would not like the Tenth Parliament to be blamed for not doing its due diligence. I believe all of us will achieve, if the minister comes with all the necessary supporting documents. Indeed, as the Committee on Budget has informed us, they sent them back six times to the Registrar of Companies. It does not augur well that as we revive our national airline, there are some mis-coordinated movements here and there in as far as ownership is concerned. 

My humble request is that we take more time – maybe a month - and scrutinise these documents further so that the Tenth Parliament is not blamed. Whatever will happen when we have passed this resolution will impact negatively on all the Members who were in the Tenth Parliament. If, after everything has been done, we find that there were some loopholes and that is why the airline has not taken off –(Member timed out.)

11.13
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga West County, Kagadi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I really want to thank you for the great wisdom you have exercised during this debate. We started off with a situation where the minister and his group were trying to use words that were un-parliamentary. They seemed to be pushing some sort of fraud to be approved on the Floor of the House. With you presiding, however, more information is coming up. The committee is also saying that they should be given more time to understand this matter thoroughly, with more details. 

Whereas I agree with the proposal that we need this airline, we cannot proceed to approve resources when the basics are not clear. You are saying that we have a commitment, for instance. However, who has this commitment? Is it the company that we have been seeing here that has this commitment to buy the aircrafts? People are saying that it is Uganda. However, can we be sure that the invoices are being issued to the Government of Uganda when they have not been laid on the Table? 

If we went ahead to approve resources and it turns out that this company, which from the very beginning had almost 100 per cent ownership, is the company we are approving money for, what will happen to us? Before we proceed, Mr Speaker, we must understand that simple thing: who are the invoices of commitment being issued to? If they are not being issued to the Government of Uganda, who is desirous –(Member timed out.)

11.17
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for allowing us time to catch up with the package of Uganda Airlines Company Limited that had been brought to this Floor. Time and space has enabled us to try and untie what had been bundled for this Parliament to pass. 

I once stood on this very Floor of Parliament and warned about the Standard Gauge Railway (SGR). Unfortunately, our standard gauge railway was launched at a hotel in Munyonyo and that is why more than 10 years down the road, Kenya is able to have its own running while the one for Uganda has remained in Munyonyo. The same case is happening here.

The former Minister of Works and Transport, hon. Byandala, warned, “How do you want to have planes without the airport?” All of us seemed to be quiet about that. It means you are buying aircrafts to enrich someone who owns the airport for business. As a country, where do we benefit? This business of this country being used by one person –(Interjections)– Yes, one person! We are forking out this amount of money for one person. This is for the benefit of a single person in this country.

Let us have the basics. We seem to be putting the cart before the horse. Before you buy the aircrafts, there are certain measures you need to have taken as a country –(Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, it is public knowledge that hon. Ssekikubo has a permanent quarrel with somebody –(Interjections)- who he has not mentioned.

The Government presented this request to a committee of Parliament. The committee looked at all the documentation and added value. That is the beauty of our parliamentary democracy, that at every stage our oversight role can actually improve the process. Government had some issues, which have now been corrected.

The documents show that these aircrafts are going to belong to Uganda. Is it in order for the honourable member to come here in broad daylight, with the whole country watching this debate, and start confusing Ugandans that these aircrafts belong to one person and that we are trying to enrich that one person? Is it in order for a senior Member to continue debating in this House with that kind of language?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Lwemiyaga, I am going to ask you to explain this insistence that the airlines belong to one person or you will have to withdraw.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I started with the information that if this company is to make meaningful investment for the country, there are some basics we need. I said it and it is on the Hansard. However, I said that as long as we do not have the ground - I stand by my words that Entebbe International Airport is under Entebbe Handling Services, which is under one person, in the name of hon. Sam Kutesa. I am not shy about my words. Once you invest –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Henry Bagiire): Mr Speaker, Entebbe International Airport belongs to the Government of Uganda. The airport is owned by the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA), which is an organisation of the Government of Uganda. Entebbe Handling Services is a contractor that has been contracted to do ground handling services and this is an understanding between CAA and ENHAS. 

Entebbe Handling Services has even changed its owners and the name is now National Aviation Services (NAS). Is the honourable member in order to say that ENHAS is the owner of Entebbe International Airport and that the airport is owned by one person?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am not abreast with the facts of what or who owns ENHAS, NAS or whatever it is. All I know is that the airport is under CAA but it has had a concession agreement with agencies to handle some of those things like ground handling and catering. I do not know the details and, therefore, I am not able to rule on that point of order.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I am amazed. Knowing that ENHAS’ contract expired in 2013 and the owner continued collecting money on behalf of Ugandans without any validation of the contract and agreement, what is the minister talking about here? I challenge him; the owners of ENHAS continued collecting money and managing the airport even when their contract expired in 2013 and there was no effort by the minister to renew the contract or allow other Ugandans to participate. That is the state of affairs we are in. If what I am saying is wrong information, I challenge him to tell us, was the ENHAS contract renewed when it expired in 2013? He cannot answer. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, there are people who have taken this country for a ride –(Interruption)

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Speaker, I would like to reiterate my earlier position that Entebbe International Airport is owned by Government and ENHAS has even ceased to be a company in Entebbe. It changed owners, from Entebbe Handling Services to National Aviation Services (NAS). The owners are from Kuwait - (Interjection) – I do not know their names but they are from Kuwait. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us have some order.

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Speaker, the National Aviation Services’ contract is an ongoing process and the people who operate it at Entebbe International Airport are taken through the right process of getting jobs.

We have three ground handling companies, namely DAS Handling Limited, NAS Ground Services and Fresh Handling Limited. Therefore, anything to do with NAS or Entebbe Handling Services owning Entebbe International Airport is wrong information. Is the Member in order to tell this august House that NAS is managing the airport? I think NAS is only carrying out one responsibility in that place, which is ground handling.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the information on the state of the airport has now been put on the record. 

Honourable members, let me say something. As I gauge from the discussions, there is no objection to the revival of the flag carrier. There is also no objection to buying the aircraft. The agreement we have been given is that they are buying brand new aircrafts and for now, we are going with the position that they are brand new aircrafts. There is no disagreement there.

We can now go to the next phase. There is no money that has been made available to buy these aircrafts. The other fact is that a deposit has been made to the purchase of these aircrafts; that is correct and we cannot go back to it. It is also factual, from what has been stated – That is why this meeting had to be convened because I had adjourned the House to Tuesday and we had other things to do. 

Honourable members, we are here because the contract to buy these aircrafts stated that additional or complete payments should be made by tomorrow. The deadline is 30 March 2019. Those are the facts of the contract. In fact, if the copy of the contract was here, it would have assisted us to know that we have a timeline. Also, if we do not make this money available for the additional purchase, under the contract we forfeit whatever we have paid as a deposit. How much have we paid as deposit, which we would lose if we do not perform on the contract?

MS MONICA NTEGE AZUBA: Mr Speaker, we have paid $27.7 million for the Bombardiers. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it for the contract with Bombardier - because they are not the same company?

MS MONICA NTEGE AZUBA: We have another contract with Airbus.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is this for Bombardier?

MS MONICA NTEGE AZUBA: There is another contract with Airbus but this particular one is for the Bombardier, which is the biggest risk now. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is this where we would lose money if we do not pay because we would have not performed in accordance with the terms of the contract? The money is $27.7 million. Honourable members, those are the facts before us. 

These are contracts. If you do not perform, the contract dictates what happens to the parties. The liabilities that accrue are within the contract. Therefore, we are here sitting as Parliament in a meeting called because there is an emergency situation. There have, of course, been gross errors. Let us admit to this - Honourable members, when the Speaker is speaking, give him the courtesy. 

There have been gross errors and I have had the opportunity to tell this to the minister flatly. There have been gross errors in terms of mishandling of documents, running around as if we are not thinking; those have happened. Actually, sometimes from the Speaker’s Chair, you wonder whether there is a Government and there are people thinking in it. (Laughter) That is the truth, because we would not be in this situation. (Applause) If I were the President of this country, I would have sacked a few people straight away. (Applause)

Honourable members, you know what to do when these things happen the way they do. The point is: should we throw away the baby with the bathwater? Please, hon. Odur, let us find a solution to this matter. Should we throw away the baby with the bathwater? [HON. MEMBERS: “No.”] Therefore, in that spirit – 

I have seen that the committee, in their recommendations, have put some check processes. One is on page 4 of the report which says, “In the medium term, the ownership of the company should be transferred to the Uganda Development Corporation, which is the business arm of the Government, as provided under the Uganda Development Corporation Act, 2016.” That is a check.

If I was debating with you that side, the point that I would have picked and run with is on page 5 of the report. It says, “In the event that this is not done, the House should not appropriate any funds for the activities and operations of the company for the Financial Year 2019/2020.” This is going to happen by the 31st of May this year.

These are safety valves for us, which we can activate in the event that things get flouted. Honourable members, kindly help me so that we can handle this process, because it is in our hands to either make that loss of $27.7 million accrue to Government or save it. That is where we are.

Honourable members, can I propose something. With this assurance - Hon. Odur please, allow me. With these guarantees here, can I propose something? Hon. Ssekikubo, can I propose something? Can we deal with the supplementary and then invoke whatever we have agreed and adopt this report in totality and the recommendations therein and then proceed and finish with the supplementary schedule? Can we do this, honourable members? The situation I have is that we are going to start a debate all over again. Do you have another safety valve?

11.37
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. You have guided this House very well. We all agree that we want an airline as soon as yesterday. Both sides agree, in a bipartisan manner, that if we do not go ahead to have these monies appropriated and paid, we forfeit our part of the contract and definitely, Uganda makes a loss. 

Mr Speaker, you have guided well that by May, some of these procedures should be undertaken. I would like to include one of these, and this will clear the air. All that is surrounding this mess is: what are the particulars of the company, who are the directors and who holds the patents? The other safety valve shall only come in when this Parliament stamps its foot on the board of this company. This is an interim board. By May, before we appropriate money, please take care, we need a substantive board that is approved by this House. (Applause)

Secondly, because the board determines the operations of this company, the substantive board of this company, approved by this Parliament, should appear before a bipartisan committee of the entire House to clearly show us the breakdown of the following: Who will manage the ground operations of the airport, because the profitability –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I wish you could state them so that we understand them.

MR NSEREKO: We can build on this as a team. Secondly, give us assurance that the rights to own the ground operations at Entebbe International Airport shall be held by the Uganda National Airlines Company. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that okay, honourable members? 

MR NSEREKO: Let me continue, honourable members. Thirdly, whereas we support the purchase of these aircrafts – I would not like to delve into debate, but profitability of an airline in a landlocked country like we are is based on having more cargo aircrafts. We shall talk about that in future because the profitability that Ugandans want to see is not only from passenger aircrafts. 

The movement of goods is where the expense is high. The more cargo aircrafts that we have, the more profit the Uganda National Airlines Company shall have. (Applause) As a fruit exporter, I know exactly what I am talking about. We are driven out of business as a result of the high cost of movement of these goods. It is two dollars per kilo. Ugandans can only compete –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now you are debating again.

11.41
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Just like everyone, I am not against this but I would like to bring out two important issues.

One, it has been a practice that when Government is forming a company, we do it by an Act of Parliament. Therefore, I wanted to add that the process of forming the Uganda National Airlines Company should actually come here and we form it with an Act of Parliament. That means that two people cannot sit and allot shares like it is happening. This is because every time they want to allot shares, they would have to come here, just like the Uganda National Oil Company, the Uganda Development Bank and the rest. (Applause) Therefore, we should have that added here.

Secondly, we have a small window in the contract agreement -15.2.1 and 15.2.2. It says that Bombardier can only effect whatever they want to do 14 calendar days after default. Therefore, it is not true that 31 March is the deadline. It is here in the agreement. It is not true. We have 14 calendar days in the agreement. Therefore, it should not appear that we are being forced when it is in the agreement here. (Applause) I wanted to put that on the record of the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable ministers, can I have a response to the issues, please? Can I have an assurance on those issues? I hope you were listening? There were issues of ground handling, an Act of Parliament to establish the airline and the board. Is it something that we can do? I do not think the board can come to the House, honourable members, but they can go to the committee. 

11.43
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Ntege Azuba): Mr Speaker, those are very good ideas which we are going to take into consideration. I do not know if I should address the other issues too.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us agree that the recommendations that have been contained in this report should include:

    1. The issue of ground handling should revert to Uganda National Airlines Company.
    2. That the full board – not the interim one - should be constituted and brought before the committee of Parliament, where they will have a discussion.
    3. That for an establishment like this, - you have the Uganda Development Bank Act, the Uganda Development Corporation Act and all these things - there should be an Act of Parliament to eventually hand over the management. (Applause) 

Are we in agreement with this? Are there additions to this? Can I now put the question on the adoption of the report of the committee? Can I put the question, please? I know that you know and you also know that I know. Can we adopt the report with those amendments? 

MR OKOT-OGONG: Mr Speaker, I am sorry for interrupting this debate. I would like to refer to our Rules of Procedure that bar this Parliament from legislating in anticipation. We are now legislating and making serious pronouncements while saying “if something is done” and yet it is very clear in our rules that we cannot make laws in anticipation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, this is not anticipation, otherwise we would never pass the budget because you anticipate what you are going to implement. You mean by passing the budget, all the activities have been done? 

Honourable members, let me deal with this, please. Honourable minister, I just need clarification on the pricing. 

MS MONICA NTEGE AZUBA: Mr Speaker, when you go to the website of the manufacturers, you will find the catalogue prices of all the aircraft. A Member mentioned that the Airbus aircrafts are $403 million and yet we bought them at a less price. That is very true; we bought them at $208 million. The prices on the catalogue are there but there is also room for negotiation. It is the same with Bombardier; as the Member said, the catalogue price is $48 million but we negotiated to $27.7 million. Actually, we should be congratulated for that. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Whereas we have put measures to stop at appropriation stage, we did not put further measures. After we have given them the money and the deal collapses or we discover that they are not even worthy to return for appropriation, what happens to this money we will have already given them? Can’t we have, as one of the resolutions, a clause that states how we shall recover this money? We cannot just give them billions of money. They will go and wait for another deal. These are dealers, as you said.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, can I put the question to the motion for adoption of the report with these amendments? I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

Supplementary Development Expenditure
Vote 016 – Ministry of Works and Transport

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now propose the question that the sum of Shs 280,046,776,933 under vote 016, Ministry of Works and Transport, for financing the cost of the Uganda National Airline be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2018/2019. 

I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 280,046,776,933 under vote 016, Ministry of Works and Transport, for financing the cost of the Uganda National Airline be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2018/2019. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Supplementary Development Expenditure

Vote 156 – Uganda Land Commission

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 12 billion under vote 156, Uganda Land Commission, for completion of the Uganda Martyrs Shrine be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2018/2019. 

I put the question that a total sum of Shs 12 billion under vote 156, Uganda Land Commission, for completion of the Uganda Martyrs Shrine be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2018/2019. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

11.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for the resumption of the House to enable the Committee of Supply to report. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

11.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered Supplementary Sched1ule No.2 for financial year 2018/2019. Under Schedule No.2, it has considered two items for the Uganda Land Commission and the Ministry of Works and Transport.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

11.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of Supply. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much. Congratulations for doing this. We do this in good spirit and whatever remains, we will find ways of handling it. 

There were children who were here and I think they have left already. In the public gallery this morning, we had a delegation of pupils and teachers from Sharp Children’s Centre. They are represented by hon. Brenda Asinde and hon. Peter Mugema. They were here to observe the proceedings. 

House adjourned to Tuesday at 2 o’clock.

(The House2 rose at 11.54 a.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 2 April 2019 at 2.00 p.m.)

