

Tuesday, 24 March 2020

Parliament met at 2.53 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga Alitwala, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. As you can see, we have had to relocate from our Chambers to try and create scientific space for members to work.

Before I begin, I would like to direct that the following members should no longer access Parliament because they were in Dubai. (Applause) 

    1. Hon. Robert Kafeero Ssekitoleko
    2. Hon. Cissy Namujju 
    3. Hon. Emmanuel Ssempala Kigozi
    4.  Ms Adrine Natukunda
    5.  Ms Agatha Akankunda  

If these members are here, they have violated the guidelines issued by the President. We do not expect them to be here. I am therefore instructing Sergeant-At-Arms to ensure that they no longer come to our Chambers.

I have also asked the Clerk to give me the names of other members who travelled recently and I announce them publicly so that they no longer come to this House. They should go in self-quarantine and not here.

Secondly, honourable members, as we informed you last week, despite the situation, we are still expected to do the budget work. However, budget work will be done majorly electronically. We now require the staff assigned to the committees to ensure that issues generated by the committees on the policy statements that need clarification should be shared with the Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) electronically. Members will be required to read and identify the issues to raise. 

The MDAs will share any responses to the issues electronically. Where it becomes necessary, a maximum of four people will interact with the committee on the issues and the response. We expect that to be only one meeting. I hope that the committees can divide the numbers so that we do not have 20 members in the same room together.

Sergeant-at-Arms has prepared the Conference Room as you have seen. There will be no visitors to this Parliament with effect from Thursday, last week and it will continue.
	
In addition, since there will be no Plenary majorly, Parliament shall be covered by only 20 members of the Parliamentary Press Association for the next 32 days.

I have already said all Members of Parliament and staff returning shall be away from Parliament for 14 days in self-quarantine. Persons authorised to access Parliament’s precincts the service providers, suppliers and contractors shall – 

    a) sanitise and wash their hands at any access point;
    b)  have their temperatures taken.

Honourable members, there will be sanitisers at all Parliament entry points and offices with high number of people. The cleaning service providers will be trained in cleaning and sanitising Parliament facilities including the door handles, lifts and washrooms.

Protective gears including masks will be provided to security personnel who should utilise them at all times when on duty. Security personals should also minimise body contact while searching individuals and they are encouraged to use handheld metal detectors. Similarly, the security personnel should not use gloves while on duty but instead use sanitisers. I understand the gloves attract disease.

Authorised personnel accessing the Chamber shall display identification tags within the precincts of Parliament. Any person who has COVID-19 like symptoms shall be isolated at designated place and will be seated comfortably. The officer in charge will call the following numbers – 0800203035 and 0800100066. We have also added Dr Fred Bawulira, the parliamentary doctor. We shall get his number. In addition, they can contact Mr Kagiriita Alex on 0782909153 or Dr Muruta on 0772460297. Honourable members, all of us are obliged to abide by these guidelines. It is inconvenient but it is for our protection. 

We have also scaled down as follows:

    1. Office of the Speaker - the Head of Department will determine the critical staff who can remain in office.
    2. Office of the Deputy Speaker - the Head of Department will determine critical staff.
    3. The Commission Secretariat – Three officers. 
    4. Office of the Leader of Government Business - Six officers 
    5. Office of the Leader of Opposition – All staff to remain on duty because they have to do the alternative papers
    6. Department of Administration and Transport Logistics- all Administrative Assistant will remain on duty but drivers in the pool will be away and remain on call.
    7. Engineering officers - remain on duty.
    8. Department of Library Services – retain seven officers, 
    9. Department of Sergeant At Arms - 20 officers. All office assistants will have to leave except those identified as critical in those four officers 
    10. Corporate Planning and Strategy – Three officers
    11. Communication and Public Affairs Department – Nine officers
    12. Litigation and Compliance - Three officers
    13. Legislative and Procedure - Three officers 
    14. Department of Finance - 15 officers
    15. Department of Human Resource – retain four officers 
    16. Department of Information and Communication Technology – retain seven officers
    17. Department of Research Services – retain 20 officers 
    18. Department of Clerks – retain 21 officers
    19. Parliamentary Budget Office - remain on duty because of the budget 
    20. Department of Official Report – all staff remain on duty. 

The heads of department will determine on rotational basis who will be required to report on duty. Those who are out of office will remain on call. They should keep their telephone lines on and email open. Those who are required to work from home should also adhere to those instructions. This is for the good of all of us.

Honourable members, we have assigned four of our colleagues to go to the National Task Force. However, we have realised that there is still need to assist the government especially the Ministry of Health. I have therefore assigned the following Members of the Committee on Health to do and follow up and oversight on the work going on in the Ministry of Health. We have –

    1. Dr Michael Bukenya 
    2. Dr Sam Lyomoki
    3. Hon. Fred Baseke
    4. Hon. Ssentongo Robina Nakasirye. I think she has been sick. I do not know whether she is fine now.
    5.  Hon. Beatrice  Rwakimari 
    6. Mr  Webby  Bwire – Committee Clerk
    7. Mr William Lubowa – Budget officer.

These will assist in oversight on the work of the Ministry of Health in relation to this pandemic. I think those are the areas I need to communicate.

Honourable members, there are few matters of national concern but majorly –

3.03
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, you have communicated on how the sessional committees are going to handle their work but there are some committees which are still inviting witnesses especially the accountability committees are they still going to continue doing so?

They should also suspend inviting witnesses and we deal with only the sessional committees such that we handle the budget electronically. 

We would like to thank you for taking a decision on the members; this morning we were concerned because one of the members you named we knew had gone to Dubai came back and was moving around freely; some of us had to tell him to get out.

This is for the good of all of us not just one person; it is a risk to the members not only those you have named, we know others who have just returned from outside who should not be allowed to get in.

Last week our team from the Pan African Parliament came back on Monday but one of them on Tuesday was here until we sent him away. 

It was one of the colleagues from the Pan African Parliament who called saying, “We have seen hon. Kakooza on TV; what is he doing there when we are self-quarantining ourselves?”  We must take it to ourselves to ensure that we protect our lives and the lives of the people that we live with. 

THE SPEAKER: The work of accountability committees is suspended until after the budget or until we resume even their clerks have been sent on leave, so they must stop now. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think all of us need our lives. I would like to thank you for all the steps that you have taken to ensure that Parliament becomes safe.

However, the members who are trying to come through the back door are posing a threat to us. We have reliable information that there are members who were in Dubai last week, and the list is well known by the Office of the Clerk and these members were here this morning mixing with us.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nzoghu name them please, simplify our lives. 

MR NZOGHU: These members are from the Physical Infrastructure Committee that is hon. Ssempala, hon. Ssekitoleko and other members.

THE SPEAKER: Those are the ones I named in my opening statement. 

MR NZOGHU: They were the leaders of the group so they should be restricted from accessing Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: That is what I said in my communication. 

3.07
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for your communication and the good radical approach that you have taken as the head of the institution on this problem that we have. 

I appreciate that you have added a team of Members of Parliament to the National Health Organising Committee but I do request that as a member from the border where we have various challenges, I request that you at least get one of us to be on that committee so that we can help to curb issues that are affecting the border too. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on that committee I named hon. Atiku; I do not know whether he is good enough as a border person because he comes from Arua. We have so many borders we have Kenya, Mpondwe border let us look at it.

3.09
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Now that there were members who had just returned, I fear to move nearer to the microphone because it may not be equally safe and that is why I am keeping distance.

Some of the people you mentioned were yesterday in the canteen touching the windows; this raises a big concern to us and our families because we are not sure whether they did not touch anywhere and whether members have not touched there and whether they did not press the buttons in the lift.

I would like to state that we are not sure of ourselves and even our families. I would like to propose that all of us here get tested so that the country can be reassured that its representatives are secure.

The people who are testing at the entrance have been reliably informed that there was a member whose temperature was rising up to 38; how could they allow him to access the precincts of Parliament? This is clear and this member should not have been allowed to access Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Give me the name.

MS BINTU: Hon. Ssempala.

THE SPEAKER: That was the name I read in my communication.

MS BINTU:  Yes, his temperature was high; how could he have been allowed to access Parliament? 

MR SEBAGGLA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague for giving way. Whereas we are so much concerned about the behaviour of our colleagues, how about their families? They are not safe.

I request that a directive to follow up all these Members of Parliament and quarantine them by force should be declared right now.

MS BINTU: Madam Speaker, that should be the way forward because if we are not tested well, then we are going to cause a big problem, because over the weekend people travel to their villages and then comeback and in the villages you interact with so many people in your home. That means we will be carriers. Otherwise, thank you very much and it leaves us in despair. Otherwise, thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I indicated that the cleaners are going to be given instructions on how to clean lifts, door handles, washrooms and everything. They are going to be instructed from now on.

3.13
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Order please!

MS ANYAKUN: My concern is about security. Madam Speaker, we are requesting that if possible, we designate some transport, especially for the police staff. One goes to Kireka and another picks them from Nsambya because these are the people again who come through public transport and they end up touching us at the entrance. They should keep picking them and bringing them back to save them from getting contaminated from the rest of the public means.

There is also a provision –

THE SPEAKER: Order, order!

MS ANYAKUN: There is also a provision for a Bluetooth microphone. Is it possible for Parliament to give such to Members of Parliament? We can have our own Bluetooth microphones that we can be able to come with. Whenever we are coming to the Floor of Parliament, we shall talk at that level where we are; we do not have to come and speak on the same microphone. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: That was response to my communication. Hon. Basalirwa, hon. Driwaru and then hon. Walyomu; let us get those three first on my communication, not on other things.  

3.15
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the matter of your communication, this Parliament is making communications. The President is equally making communications on this pandemic. Unfortunately, the Public Health Act requires that statutory instruments are made to accompany communications of this nature. Those statutory instruments give guidelines on how people should behave.

Unfortunately, we are having communication after communication without force of law. So, some of these issues you are witnessing here arise out of the fact that there is no clear legal framework. I pray that the minister comes to the Floor of the House and introduces these subsidiary legislations for purposes of information and also input from this Parliament. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Basalirwa, the Attorney-General is not here. Who is going to follow up with the statutory instruments? Minister of Finance? The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is seated at the back. Come and tell us about the statutory instruments. How far have you gone? Let us hear from him and then I come to you.

Minister, I hope you will be able to tell us when you are issuing the instruments, following the presidential directives. Are you ready? (Laughter)

3.17
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, these are not normal circumstances. That is why I sat at the back in the first place and I was going in the wrong place.

However, I would like to confirm to the House –

THE SPEAKER: Order! Order please!

PROF. KAMUNTU: You have asked me and I am humbly giving this information: Indeed, all these directives which require the Minister of Health to give statements must be backed by statutory instruments. I will be advising the Attorney-General and the ministry that these statutory instruments be laid before Parliament, as required by law; but they are being prepared, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

3.18
MS ZAITUN DRIWARU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for the actions that you and the President have taken to protect the people of this country. Before I say anything, my colleagues, honourable members, we are saying that we need to be protected. I would like to request all members that when you come here, the first thing is to please sanitise your hands before you touch this because we do not know what you are going to leave there.

Madam Speaker, the issue of self-quarantine is something that Ugandans are not following. On those members plus the staff who you mentioned, I would like to appeal that let us take those people to a gazetted place because at home, they will even be infecting their own people. All those people have got friends and other relatives. It is a very big risk to us. I would like to appeal that they must be followed up and be taken to a gazetted area.

I would also like to buy the idea of hon. Jalia Bintu that all members be tested - because some of you who are even shouting here stealthily went out and came back. It is only because some of you are not known. I would like to end here. When I saw the minister coming this side to use this microphone, I was not surprised because he was formerly a UPC member. Honourable minister, I think it is still that idea. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we assigned four of our colleagues to join the national taskforce. I think they can take up that issue – Hon. Mwijukye – on the issue of quarantining these members and the staff whom we have named and who should be taken to an isolation centre.

3.20
MR MOSES WALYOMU (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for being open and mentioning the honourable Members of Parliament who went to Dubai but decided to come here.

Madam Speaker, I think it is not only Members of Parliament but even other Ugandans who went to Dubai and came back. Yesterday, the Minister of Health was on TV, pleading with and calling on these people to come to the ministry. I think it will also be better if the ministry can come out and mention some of these members of the public, so that the communities can really know that maybe they are seated with so-and-so who went to Dubai and came back; moreover, if we are to consider the 84 people who were on the same plane with the first victim –(Interruption)

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that on Saturday, one of my constituents was among those who returned on Emirates Airlines. He went through the normal process and they told him to go home. 

I have been called by two families in Kawempe North Constituency - the driver who picked the relative and the relative have informed me that they have been calling the ministry numbers without any response. They have 24 members in their family but they are now stuck with them.

I have called the Director General, Dr Mwebaasa and hon. Dr Moriku to help go pick them. It is dangerous for them to use public means to go to gazetted areas. This is why it is very imperative for Government to gazzete that all public vehicles to be used as Ambulances in our various constituencies so that victims can be transported without causing danger to others.

MR WALYOMU: Madam Speaker, I was just receiving information from the honourable member. I would like to thank, hon. Sebaggala for that information. Otherwise, I would like to inform Parliament that it is not only hon. Sebaggala facing these challenges. In my constituency at Kyabirwa, one of the investors returned a day before yesterday. But they could not pick him from his home until my people fought this guy up. Therefore, we need to be serious because this –(Interruption)
 
MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, honourable for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to confirm the House that people are calling Ministry of Health when they notice suspected cases but not getting any response. In Ntinda this afternoon, there were some two suspects noticed. However, people were called those lines; the Ministry of Health did not respond. 

Also, this is not a Kampala disease. We need to see Ministry of Health talking and sensitising the people about this disease using various languages. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the point has been noted that we need to find out those who are travelling with the people who feel sick. Their names should be found and the Government should ensure they are collected and taken to national isolation centres. We have also agreed that our taskforce will ensure that our members and the staff, who went, if they are still in their homes, should be taken to the isolation centres.

Concerning the advocacy, we have been discussing with hon. Ogwang, each member will be able to record a message to be disseminated to their constituents in their language and in English. We are coordinating with hon. Mwijukye and hon. Arinaitwe, they will arrange for you to record the messages. I have already done mine today. However, hon. Ogwang is taking lead on that issue. 

Therefore, get to hon. Mwijukye and hon. Arinaitwe for each of you to record your message to the constituency about the virus. He will tell us about our frequency.

MR WALYOMU: Madam Speaker, as we propose that, Members of Parliament need to be tested. I do request that even my people from my constituency specifically Kyabirwa where this investor was picked from, also need to be tested for us to be sure they are infected or not. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I hope our taskforce is noting.

3.26
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro):  Madam Speaker, we must try to learn from what has happened or from history. Just the other day, China was the first country to record the presence of this killer virus. They put up very serious measures and we all saw what they were doing.

However, sometimes, somehow, we fail to learn from what others have done to achieve what they have. Italy relaxed a bit and you see what is happening there now. I saw the President of Italy crying and shading a tear. This is not far from us. Remember this is a very small world and/or a small village.

This morning, I received information that about 20 people from my constituency who travelled from Dubai recently have gone missing. Police have been struggling - I had to cough some money myself to about four police stations to help police trace those people.

We are told that at that level, Kabuyanda Health Centre IV does not even have some of the facilities. They do not have even these small thermometers to measure temperatures yet they are speculating that already out of the 20 or so have gotten 12 by about 1.30 p.m. One of them came all the way from Rwanda to my constituency; I share a border with Rwanda and Tanzania.

As we speak, the biggest danger is going to come from that place. Get this from me, I would like to inform the Minister of Health - and I have talked to the RDC too – that the emergency lines for Ministry of Health are virtually not on.

Therefore, what do we do from here? As I talked to my colleagues here in the morning - Madam Speaker, if nobody has told you, let me tell you that everybody is scared of asking you to give us some sort of recess so that we can relax and send information –(Applause)– people are not telling you the truth, Madam Speaker.

Why are we here? The courts have closed and no longer have open courts. The schools have closed. What we are still doing here? Why shouldn’t we be given some facilitation? We are no longer supposed to be going out; why don’t we get facilitation?

I spent more than Shs 5 million over the weekend with two trucks with public address system to go and sensitise my people, which is not enough. What are we doing here when our people are beginning to get infected?

I would like to beg you, Madam Speaker, to consider a situation where we go away either today or tomorrow for a short recess at least until the end of the 32 days so that we are with our people, mobilise them, show them the way or guide them. I would like to thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we all live in the same country and we are equally worried. However, if we were not sitting here today, we would not even be able to get this information or give advice to the Government. Therefore, I am aware; do not think that I live in the sky.

3.30
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. From your communication, we are worried as Members of Parliament. And my first suggestion is as my friends have said - because we do not want to leave this place, go back and infect our families, it is necessary that we are tested. 

I had an issue which I can air out now; it is arising out of your communication from the chair; I don’t want to stand up to present an issue of national importance later on.
 
Where I come from, the Islands - this country is going to have a serious problem because of the waters. Yesterday, I was in the Islands. The policemen and all the other security personnel are saying that they want to leave the islands simply because there are no measures put by the Government to protect them. People come in from Kenya and others leave Uganda to Kenya.

The security people do not have even a single machine to test or any protective measure; they fear to catch the virus and die from there. 

When I went to the health centres, they are all saying they want to leave the islands simply because the health centres have not taken any preventive measures. When I called the minister, they told me, “We are aware.” Look at how many boats come from Kenya and yet these policemen are saying, “We cannot check those people because we do not know how they are.”

I am appealing to Government to take –(Interruption) 

Mr alero: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Our borders are very porous. There are people who board aeroplanes from Europe, land in Juba and then use buses or taxis to come in by road. There are those who board from Europe, land in Kisangani in Congo and also use the roads to come to West Nile. This is a very big problem, which the Government must look into. Thank you.

Mr ouma: When I asked the police what the problem is, they said, “The water is vast but we don’t have fuel to patrol the lakes.” Even the army is saying they cannot patrol the lakes because they have no fuel.

I am requesting that instead of bringing problems to this country, why can’t the Government give these people enough fuel? Why can’t Government make sure that all health centres – because we are far away from hospitals and that means we are going to have problems. Thank you.

3.34
Ms Susan Amero (NRM, Woman Representative, Amuria): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for your efforts in fighting this very serious virus. We have a problem in this country and we are sitting on a time bomb. The biggest challenge we have is that we have not taken this virus as a very serious issue. If you can have people pass through the airport and find their way out of there - How did they get out? 

We are implementing the presidential directives haphazardly. We are doing it selectively because yesterday, I heard the minister was lamenting that some members of the first family, State House and Government officials are picking their relatives from the aircraft stand. Who are these and how do we know that they do not have the virus? Why should we implement this directive selectively if we are trying to protect Ugandans? It is a big challenge and before we know it, we might begin crying like Italy.

The other thing is, even here we have members who have been travelling. We know ourselves so why can’t we quarantine ourselves? 

If we are talking about taking recess, the issue of taking recess and talking to our constituents is very important because our voters respect us and they hear our voices. When we speak to them, they know that the problem is real. However, as it is right now, our people think this is just a myth and it is a story that they may never believe. Thank you.

The Speaker: Honourable members, no one has stopped you from going to speak to your people in your constituency on the radio. We had the whole weekend, why didn’t you go? I have just said that I am arranging with hon. Ogwang for you to record messages. It is not because you are sitting here. Where were you on Sunday and Saturday?

Honourable members, we have done enough on the communication. There are a few matters of national concern, although I see that the majority are about prices, personnel, cost of goods and porous borders, among others.

3.36
Ms caroline kamusiime (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukiga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your communication. I am very concerned when you talk about borders because it seems that security is simply concentrating on these big borders. For example in Rukiga, we have always had problems with Rwanda and we have always requested for a detache. 

There are many illegal entries where people are walking from our neighbouring countries without even – People take a week walking. In my constituency, we have 30 of them quarantined. People are allowed to go there and do business freely; they sell clothes and food.

I was called by people in Rukungiri this morning saying that five people who had travelled from Dubai were under quarantine. Since morning I have been trying to call the numbers they gave us but they are not picking. This is a serious issue and I think everyone should come up –(Interruption)

Mr olanya: I would like to thank my colleague for giving me way. I was discussing with my District Health Officer (DHO) in the morning and about 200 people from South Sudan were brought to Amuru and they are being kept in one of the schools called Bibia Primary School. The DHO is stranded; he does not know what to do. He said he is trying to call the Ministry of Health but they are not responding. 

Ms kamusiime: Thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, I request that security concentrates on Rukiga, especially that border because we have no security. Imagine from that border to police is about five kilometres. People are walking, entering without any restriction. Otherwise, we need to fight because this is not a one man’s issue. It is getting out of hand. Thank you.

The Speaker: Members on the taskforce - hon. Mwijukye, you have heard. Is your committee meeting tomorrow? Now you have what to tell the taskforce. You have heard issues of the members. Do you meet every day? Okay.

3.39
The Leader of the Opposition (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I cannot give a statement, as I had earlier informed you, but I would like to add a little to what people have been discussing here. 

We must know that our Ministry of Disaster Preparedness is ill-prepared. We have always talked about being prepared but this is not the case. We know that human beings cannot live without food. We need food and Government has to provide. Hon. Hilary Onek and hon. Musa Ecweru have a lot to say on this. We cannot only task the Ministry of Health because this is a multi-sectorial problem.

When it comes to language, we have the President’s communication only in English. I think some formal and deliberate efforts should be made to translate this into other languages. People are being arrested and taken to the cells every day. In case you land on somebody who is already positive, you are going to kill very many other people. 

What measures have we put in place to ensure that those who have been arrested after the outbreak are not mixed with the rest of the people in detention?

In addition, we need to take care of the health workers and those who are highly exposed. We have the police, prison warders and askaris who are highly exposed to this disease. What measures have we put in place to ensure that those who are highly exposed, health workers, are protected? These health workers have children at home. In some countries, you find a family completely cleared. How are we protecting them? What motivation do we give them to do their work? Therefore, we need those kinds of motivation. 

Madam Speaker, this is a serious thing. I have been telling my people that right now, you must guard your life jealously because it is your life first. Even in the plane, when they want you to protect yourself and you have a baby on your lap, what do they do first? They tell you, before you put the mask on your baby, first put yours because your grave is your grave alone. That is what I can say. 

I thought this is additional information on what people have been saying. It is important that all of us, as Members of Parliament, care about our people. Instead of keeping ourselves here in Kampala, we should go back home and try to also communicate to them. A lot of them do not know English. Maybe other places know English but in my place, some other people do not know English. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you for giving way. I would like to share with you this information. I appreciate the information we have been sharing. At the same time, Madam Speaker, we have to record on the Floor of Parliament that the role the President, you, the Minister of Health and her team have played is commendable. (Applause) I think we need to record that. 

In addition to that, the Leader of the Opposition has raised the question of adequate preparedness for disaster. I think that is a matter we cannot ignore. Parliament willingly gave Shs 15 billion and we had expected that your institution should have been requested to go out and talk to people about locusts, how to prepare and how to preserve the food for any future disaster but nothing was done. No accountability on that Shs 15 billion was made. 

I would like to make a request through you, Madam Speaker, that, the Minister of Health and her team have been overexposed. The story of Dr Matthew Lukwiya is still very fresh with us. He played his role with passion and he died. After that, there is nothing that the Government was able to do. However, the man died for the cause of saving lives. 

We are now seeing the daughter of Uganda, Dr Ruth Aceng and her team, exposing their lives. They have gone and interacted with these people who have come from the plane. They are definitely compromising their own health situation. 

Madam Speaker, this Parliament is aware that people have been given golden handshakes for doing their normal duty without risking their lives. However, there are people risking their lives to save the lives of Ugandans and nobody is talking about any kind of reward and special protection. This is the information I would like to give. May God bless you. 

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, hon. Cecilia Ogwal. I would like to add one thing. Chinese have managed to control their own situation. Can’t we borrow a leaf from them? We have to borrow a leaf from them but I do not see other ministries being vigilant in trying to borrow a leaf from them. Let us borrow a leaf from China. From one Coronavirus case, it went to nine so we should make sure that it never goes to 10. It should come down. I would like to thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think we have done enough with the communication. I would just like the members of the taskforce to stand up: hon. Francis Mwijukye, hon. Benard Atiku, hon. Arinaitwe Rwakajara and hon. Esther Anyakun. Those are the four members we have sent to join the national taskforce. We want them to take your issues to the meeting tomorrow; they are supposed to meet every day. Those are the four people. Give them the concerns you want to take to the national taskforce. 

I have named the four members of the Health Committee who will also follow up but that is a national taskforce. Let us hear from the Minister of Information, Communication and Technology and then we will go back to the Order Paper. 

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (ICT AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Madam Speaker, I am here to respond to one issue regarding the dissemination of information. It is true, as a ministry, we have tried to disseminate the President’s information in our local languages. 

It is also true that we are calling upon all of us here to work with us. I would like to begin by thanking the Rt Hon. Speaker for accepting to give out information in the local language in Lusoga and also in English, as they speak of the National Assembly of Uganda. 

As a ministry, we are going to work with Commissioners Rwakajara and Mwijukye to come up with a programme on how all of us here will be able to give information to our constituents. We are committed to doing that, as far as the Ministry of National Guidance is concerned. 

Colleagues, the issue of this pandemic is very serious and I would like us to lead by example. Madam Speaker, it is very unfortunate, forgive me for saying this, first of all, Government took a position that all of us from Dubai were meant to be in the isolation centre. Therefore, for us to be here, as Members of Parliament, what does it show? We defied the orders from those officers on the frontline. 

I would like to beg that this war is a war for all of us to unite to fight this pandemic. It is very important that if all of us are observing what is happening in Italy and other parts of the world, I can assure you here that we are headed for either the best or worst time. 

Madam Speaker, as far as the Ministry Of National Guidance is concerned, we are ready to work with all Members of Parliament to give our information. We are even going to help you work with FM stations across the country and constituencies to give you airtime to sensitise the people on this specific problem of Coronavirus. 

MR NSEREKO: Thank you very much, hon. Ogwang, Minister of State for Information, Communication and Technology, for the information you have given this House. 

The clarification I would like to seek from you is that the President started disseminating this information weeks ago and it has taken time for this information to be translated into different languages; even placards that are outside there and any other information. 

Notwithstanding that, honourable minister, there was a matter that this Parliament raised on Thursday. That was the matter of the US $100. Member after member rose up and stated that the US $100 would be grossly expensive for many people that are returning and may expose our people who are susceptible to corruption to accept this money and free people to go back home.

Indeed, hardly had we finished making that statement than news was awash with information that many people had been let to go home. Those people have even been recording videos and saying they could not pay the $100 per day.

Therefore, the information we would like to get from you honourable minister is, how do you inform the members of the public that are coming from other countries, for example, Kenya on buses that before you cross the border tonight, that they will be isolated without necessarily paying such huge sums of money?

MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I have the Minister of Finance here. As far as we are concerned as Cabinet, the position was taken and we would like to request the Minister of Finance to come and address the issue which hon. Nsereko has raised.

THE SPEAKER: The $100?

MR OGWANG: Give a brief as far as the issue of the $100 is concerned.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, Minister of Finance.

3.53
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matiya Kasaija): Madam Speaker, first, I would like to thank my sister hon. Cecilia Ogwal. At her age, the way she was running is wonderful. I congratulate her for being in good health. (Laughter)

Turning to the substantive matter, in Cabinet yesterday, we discussed this matter of quarantining people in hotels, which they cannot afford and which neither your Treasury can afford. 

Therefore, we have decided an alternative; something is being done by now, to transfer them into schools. There are some schools in Entebbe - 

THE SPEAKER: Order honourable members.

MR KASAIJA: We have already created facilities to make them comfortable enough; we shall take mattresses for them. I have yet to check with the minister responsible. 

In short, these people are now not going to be confined in hotels. We realized that hotels were so expensive; many of them could not afford them. There was a suggestion that Government should pay, but your Treasury, with all the problems that we are facing, is unable to do so. Therefore, within a few days, they will be transferred to those schools.

Madam Speaker, let me take this opportunity to give a bit of information on two issues. About guarding the border; yesterday, we took a decision; UPDF is going to be deployed all around our borders.

However, as you may know, we have very porous borders. We must appreciate that. We cannot guarantee 100 per cent that there would be no people who will be sneaking in.

I want to assure you, we took a decision yesterday; the army is going to be deployed all around the borders. Yesterday we mentioned the particular border points where medical officers will also be stationed. For what we call panya roads, your army will be deployed there.

Thirdly, we are also cognizant that the police and security agencies have a problem of fuel. That matter also came to us and we are working on it to ensure that the police and army are mobile at any given time. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable minister. Honourable members, for other issues, our taskforce members will attend the meeting tomorrow and every day, they should be updating us on what is happening.

Honourable members, the matters of national interest are the same. They are about high prices of goods and protection of the workers. Therefore, I will just allow three members: hon. Rwabushaija, hon. Kalemba and hon. Tumuramye Genansio.

5.57
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a matter of national importance. As we are aware, our country Uganda -(Interruption)

MR SSEMULI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural issue I would like to raise is that in about five minutes, H.E the President is going to address the nation on this virus. I would like you to guide us whether it is procedurally right to proceed when the head of Government is going to address the nation.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Rwabushaija, please.

MS RWABUSHAIJA: Madam Speaker, I stand on a matter of national importance. As you are aware, our country Uganda, just like many others in the world, are experiencing a social and health challenge due to the outbreak of Coronavirus, now a world pandemic.

You will agree with me that the medical personnel particularly the nurses are at a risk of acquiring this virus since they interact with the patients more than the rest. They are the ones who give medication, test pressure, change beddings. Therefore, most of the time, they are interacting with the patients.

All the Government hospitals and the big private hospitals like Norvik, Victoria, Nakasero, etcetera, are at a risk because the nurses there as I have already mentioned can easily be exposed given that these international clients and frequent travellers go to those hospitals when they are sick.

Madam Speaker, my humbler prayer is that the Government should protect first and foremost the health personnel in those hospitals as they carry out the noble job of protecting and saving our lives particularly those affected with Coronavirus.

My prayer is that Government should come up with special support mechanism to provide temporary accommodation to the nurses to minimize movements from home to hospitals daily. These people are bound to infect their loved ones who are the immediate family members.

I pray that our task members join the rest of the national task forces and air out these views. If possible, as they prepare accommodation –(Interruption)

MR AGABA: Thank you honourable colleague for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give, over a time, when this outbreak started, there has been a belief, which is correct that it is transmitted through fluids especially from the nasal cavity.

Recently, it appears, World Health Organization is saying that this disease can be airborne. There has not been clear information from the ministry on whether it is actually true that Coronavirus is airborne.

However, today, I saw my friend hon. Bahati heavily guarded and I suspected maybe the Cabinet is aware that this disease is airborne. We would like to be sure, if it is airborne, then extra precaution should be taken for the health workers because they are not only closer in contact with the fluid of the patients but they are also in contact with the air they breathe and the one they exchange. Thank you.

MS RWABUSHAIJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Government should also think of widening the taskforce team that should include the owners of or representatives from the private hospitals because in times of emergency, we will need their services. 

The Government should also provide enough protective gear for all Government and private hospitals like the facemasks, gloves, head caps and gowns. Without motivation, the health workers are likely to run away just in case they get a confirmed positive case. Madam Speaker, I submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the same issue hon. Najjuma wanted to raise concerning the health workers in Nakaseke. So, can we ask our committee to take it to the taskforce because you are meeting tomorrow?

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madman Speaker. On that issue, we actually had a submission about it because hon. Anyakun raised it. The World Health Organisation Country Representative allayed the fears that the issue of the virus being airborne is not true. However, for health workers, the liquid that comes out of an infected person can remain on the surface for about three hours. Therefore, for health workers who deal with the patients, it is important to protect them from the viruses that are in the air. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Tomorrow, when you meet the taskforce, please, present that issue of the health workers. Now, let us go to the cost of food.

4.04
MR GENENSIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Madam Speaker, this matter concerns prices of commodities. It is true the whole country is facing rising prices of commodities because of the Covid-19. Since the beginning of last week, there has been persistent increase of prices of commodities throughout the country; particularly, the essential commodities. 

For instance, the price of half a packet of salt has increased from Shs 700 to Shs 3,000 or even higher. A kilogramme of sugar has increased from Shs 3,000 to Shs 6,000. A bar of soap has increased from Shs 3,500 to Shs 6,500 in some places. Even the fares have all gone up. 

This is affecting all of us, particularly the common person who lives in the village - and even those in Kampala here. My prayer is that the Government should provide essential commodities to most families, particularly in the rural areas. Also, –(Interruption)            

MS WATONGOLA: Thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give Parliament is about the commodities. As he mentioned, there are some two items that are very crucial that have been left behind; water and electricity. We are fighting the virus by using water and soap. The price of soap must be reduced because the poor cannot afford. 

Also, we must have power for the people and the poor cannot afford. For instance, you will find that Yaka has been deducted and so, you cannot allow our poor people to go on. We have four items; salt, soap, power and water.

Madam Speaker, tariffs are very high. During this pandemic time, we need the Government to intervene so that people afford the basics. 

MR TUMURAMYE: Madam Speaker, my other prayer is that Government should also reduce or if possible, completely take away the taxes on these commodities. Last week, I went to buy a sanitiser and the small one was Shs 27,000. When I went back after two days, the price had increased to Shs 43,000, meaning that prices of all commodities are increasing. 

If Government can reduce the prices and subsidise commodities, it is going to be very good for us so that we can save our Ugandans. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will ask the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to talk about that. However, before she comes, yesterday, as I was driving to town, I found a very long queue at Shell Petrol Station near the Electoral Commission - from the petrol station up to near the railway. I saw a queue of many vehicles at the petrol station.

4.10
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, on the issue of prices, I have been engaging the traders and industrialists. Government is coming out with a statement tomorrow. We shall give out a statement on all that, especially the essential commodities. On fuel, my colleague, the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, may be, will say something.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, as the minister comes, this is equally related to fuel. The reason the queues were very long on every petrol station is because there was rumour that Kenya was closing because of some debt that we owe them. Therefore, we would like the minister clarify on that issue so that people are settled and they know that everything is fine.

4.11
THE MINISTR OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the issue of fuel, we have had two challenges – and you are entitled to know this information. One, the suppliers in the Middle East that supply us through Mombasa Port, because of this problem that we are debating, have reduced on their production. Therefore, our share of the fuel that we pick from Mombasa Port has gone down. 

We are, however, trying – and may be, I will ask the minister responsible to come and make a statement here to supplement what the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is saying. 

Secondly, because of that problem, our buffer stocks in Jinja are also running low but we have raised this issue with the responsible people in Kenya. (Interjections) Why don’t you allow me to finish?

I would like to give you assurance that we are doing everything possible to make sure the issue of fuel is sorted without having to have those queues. My colleague, the minister responsible will give more details tomorrow. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall ask the Minister for Energy and Mineral Development to come and make a full statement on the issue of our fuel supplies and reserves. 

4.13
MR CHRISTOPHER KALEMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a matter of national importance. I represent a constituency at the border of Mutukula, with Tanzania. 

I appreciate the President and the minister for the efforts put in place so far but we have a porous border. We have eight extra entry points along the border with Tanzania. 

As I speak, people are using these points to enter – especially people from Burundi and Rwanda. They know the history and relationship between Uganda and Rwanda. They have relatives here. They are crossing through River Kagera using boats into Uganda through a place called Kyakatuma. By now, some of them might have reached Nakasongola and many other places. 

The other concern is about people using L. Victoria waters to enter Uganda through Kasensero Landing Site. As of now, the health workers are not supported and they do not have facilities. 

At the border, we have four health centres but all the health workers are not sensitised, just like the ones at Kasensero, Minziro, Kiyebe, Mutukula and Kakuuto. 

If someone comes with a cough, the health workers run away. We are fighting the virus, COVID-19 but there is another virus of egoism. 

Our voters are challenging us because they have read stories that the ministry has already spent over Shs 100 billion on fighting the virus. They are asking us what they have to do because their health workers and the teams at the district are all not facilitated. 

My prayers are that the ministry comes down to Mutukula, Kasensero, Kyakatumwa, Minziro and all those areas. When you enter through Minziro, there is a forest of about 39 Kilometres, where we have a health centre II but the health workers have abandoned it because it is in a forest and people cross as they please. Government must put more effort to go there. 

We also must look at the accountability of these funds, which have been given to these teams to fight the virus. 

THE SPEAKER: Dr Bukenya and your team, the members of the Committee on Health should take an interest in what hon. Kalemba has raised about the lack of support in the health centres near the border.

MR KALEMBA: Sanitisers and masks are not there. Health workers are at risk in my area. (Interruption)

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. I would like to inform the House that the medical team at the isolation centre at Masafu General Hospital has not been trained at all on how to handle patients in case they receive a patient with Coronavirus.

I would also like to use this opportunity - as of now, we have trucks lined up as far as Kenya to Busitema in Uganda. This has come about as a result of the Presidential directive that only drivers and turn-boys should be screened and it worked very well. 

However, on the side of Kenya, President Uhuru Kenyatta gave a directive that there is no truck and driver who is supposed to enter Kenya. By the time he gave the directive, DRC had already released trucks carrying goods to Mombasa. 

Right now, we have as many as 5000 trucks from Busia border to Busitema. Those drivers are in communities. Moreover, by the time they left Congo, the virus had reached there already. 

I would like to use this time to seek advice from Government and since the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is here, on how to we can handle this matter. Thank you. 

MR KALEMBA: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, the isolation centre is in Masaka is 85 kilometres away from Mutukula and 130 kilometres from Kasensero Landing Site. We have a health centre IV in Kakuuto but it is not utilised. 

Government should intervene immediately because all the people crossing through that border are getting absorbed into the communities in my constituency. Please, support the borders. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issues will be taken up by our taskforce and the ministry. 

4.19
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, the trucks with cargo are allowed to enter but restricting personnel to only three people; the driver, the co-driver and one more person. Cargo is allowed to come in and go out. We are restricting people who are travelling on those trucks. (Interjections) Kenya side? We have decided to form a committee comprising of ministers from East Africa to help harmonise our plans for this pandemic. 

THE SPEAKER: Other issues can be given to our committees.

4.20
MS SARAH NAJJUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I notice that our focus is mainly on the health workers, which is right but we should also focus on the police. We have a case in Nakaseke where two people travelled from Rwanda to Ngoma on Friday. The police and the health workers were called in. 

The ministry was informed but up to now, the two people are still living with people in the community. The ministry told the leaders to transport the people from Ngoma to Kampala for further management but up to now, those people are still there. Therefore, we also have a problem with that.

Madam Speaker, when we are talking about giving health workers gadgets, we should also look at the police because they come in case of an emergency. The Ministry of Health should move in as quickly as possible to equip the health units with protective gadgets because in my district of Nakaseke, health facilities like Ngoma, Nakaseke Hospital and Semuto Hospital cannot handle an emergency. They do not have any protective gadgets. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.22
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA-KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, on Sunday, I went to all Grade Three health facilities and police stations in my constituency and district. Most of the issues I found out have been talked about but there are three emerging issues across the country. 

The first is the question of traditional healers, whom we call witchdoctors. In my interaction with the District Police Commander, he told me that traditional healers are crowding up people in their small huts and some of them are sick. There is need for urgent information. In the communication from the President, they were not mentioned. That is one critical issue.

The second critical issue, Madam Speaker, is the question of Ludo and the board game called Omweso. As I was driving through my constituency, I had to take it upon myself to go to every area to say, “please, these Omwesos are dangerous.” You find about 20 or 30 elderly people crowding in one area. This is another other thing that should be prohibited.

The last issue concerns children who are out there for this period and are compounding the problem. What happens is that in traditional setups, the reverse is happening regarding what we tried to achieve by sending children back home. Naturally, in our traditional rural villages, it is very easy for children to play together. Families join and play freely.

Madam Speaker, those three issues are critical and they may compound the problem. The other issues have already been mentioned. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.24
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the issue of Uchumi former staff. I received complaints from the former staff of Uchumi who you said also reached out to you. Uchumi became defunct in 2015 in Uganda and in other countries. The staff went to court and Uchumi agreed to pay these people but to-date, they have not been paid. 

Some of the former staff came to me with this complaint. Rwandan and Tanzanian staff were paid. However, former Ugandan staff have not been paid. What is happening? Is it our weakness?

The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development should explain this to us – (Interjections) Probably, the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should tell us why these people have not been paid. Can you tell us when they are going to be paid? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on that issue, I received a petition as well. I wrote to the official receiver who claimed that he had not yet started work on it but that he was going to work. However, I think it has taken a long time; 2015 to 2020 is long. Let us join hands and ensure that they are paid.

4.27
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Regarding the directives by the President recently, the affected people were churches and bars, which were closed. Many of them are continuing to pay rent. Many people who have been ordered to close down, including churches, bars.

My prayer is, there should be a directive to the landlords that rent be suspended for about three months to allow the situation to normalise. At the moment, people are not earning and the Government has directed that they go and stay in their homes. Rent is a serious matter and I pray, on their behalf, that we direct the landlords countrywide to suspend rent for three months. I so pray.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know what the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives or the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has to say about that difficulty.

4.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, our greatest responsibility and duty is how to slow down the spread of Covid-19 and making sure that this message reaches everywhere. The Government is coming up with some economic stimuli and action on how we can help other areas. However, before we come up with this strategy, I beg the House that we concentrate on how to slow down the spread of Covid-19. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF ESTABLISHMENT OF AREA LICENSING BOARDS UNDER THE ENGULI ACT AND MODALITIES FOR THE REGULATION OF THE MANUFACTURE OF JAGGERY

4.29
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, I rise to respond to the issue raised on the status of establishment of Area Licensing Boards under the Enguli Act and modalities for regulation of the manufacture of jaggery.

Madam Speaker, the Enguli (Manufacture and Licensing) Act, Cap. 86 of 1966 is an Act to regulate the manufacture, licensing and sale of enguli and for other purposes connected therewith. The Act provides for the establishment of Area Licensing Boards to determine the total number of enguli licences that may be issued in Uganda in any one year and limit the number of such licences that may be issued in any district. 

With the developments in the alcohol industry and investment licensing regime in the country, this law is now obsolete and recommended for repeal. 

In 2013, Cabinet approved the implementation of business licensing reforms and authorised the First Parliamentary Counsel to repeal a number of licenses and permits that included Enguli license and Jaggery license, among others. The Area Licensing Boards are not in existence anymore.

Madam Speaker, a jaggery is a traditional non-centrifugal cane sugar, which is made from boiling sugar cane juice got after crushing the sugar cane. It is a concentrated product of cane juice and contains a mixture of sugar crystals and brown liquid called molasses. The color varies from golden brown to dark brown.

The Enguli Act regulates jaggeries exclusively on the manufacture of Enguli and yet, jaggeries can make other products like brown non-centrifugal sugar, candies and cane juice for direct consumption. Thus, the Enguli Act is obsolete and provision for regulating jaggeries is provided in the new Sugar Bill, 2018 just passed by Parliament.

Currently, there are no formally licensed jaggeries and the ministry has not received any applications to establish jaggeries. G.M Sugar, Mayuge Sugar Ltd Uganda Crop Ltd started as jaggeries but have now upgraded into modern Sugar Mills, which are more efficient in processing sugar than traditional jaggeries.

The National Sugar Policy of 2010 and the New Sugar Bill, 20l8 provides for licensing of new sugar mills and Jaggeries on application from an interested investor through the Sugar Board. In addition, the ministry is in the process of developing a comprehensive new Alcoholic Drinks Control Bill, which will then repeal the existing alcohol Enguli (Manufacture and Licensing) Act, the Liquor Act and Shop Hours Act because they are obsolete to effectively regulate the alcohol industry.

Madam Speaker, when this issue was raised in Parliament, we carried out a field visit to follow up the matter. On Thursday, 19th March 2020, a technical team from the ministry travelled to Kamuli on a fact finding mission to establish the following:

The allegation of arresting of jaggery operators in Busoga, which increased the problem of out-growers not selling their sugar cane.

To establish the number of jaggeries licensed in Kamuli and Kaliro districts. In Kamuli, the technical team met and discussed with the District Commercial Officer, the LC 3 Chairman, and the Kamuli Sugarcane Out-growers Cooperatives Chairperson who also happens to be the owner of the mobile motorised sugar cane crusher, operating from Kitayunjwa village in Kamuli District.

Findings
The motorised sugar cane crusher is mobile and crushes about 4-5 tonnes of sugar cane per day. It is mounted on a two wheel truck and is not licensed by local authorities.

The complaint about arrest of mobile jaggery operators was raised by a one James Wako, the Chairman of Kaliro Sugar Cane Growers Association. The team was informed that Management of Kaliro Sugar Mill alleged that the mobile jaggery trucks are poaching the company's sugarcane and alerted police to keep a close watch to scare away the poachers but no person was arrested.

Madam Speaker, there are no jaggeries licensed in Kamuli and Kaliro or the entire Busoga in accordance to the provisions of the Enguli (Manufacture and Licensing) Act. Attached is Form 2 of application for a jaggery license.

I would like to conclude by saying that jaggeries are mini-sugar mills, which are supposed to be licensed in one location just like a modern sugar factory.

The ministry received several complaints regarding sugarcane poaching by the mobile sugar crushers that enter in the middle of the cane fields, cut and crush the sugar cane and run away with juice to be processed somewhere else. This juice is unsafe for human consumption because it is not tested and certified. These jaggeries must be licensed in one location decided by the local authorities. Licensing the jaggeries in one location ensures traceability and easier monitoring.

Madam Speaker, His Excellency the President in a letter dated 3 November 2006, a copy of which I will lay on the Table on jaggery mills directed that the illicit activities of the jaggeries should be halted because they negatively affected the steady supply of sugarcane to the sugar mills.

The ministry has never licensed any jaggery since 1986 and nobody has been arrested for operating a jaggery. Those were our findings. I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Before I invite Members, I hope you will address the contents of the President’s letter. At least in the area that I represent, there is no longer shortage of sugarcane for anyone. Actually, there is an excess of sugarcane. So, this letter should not even be quoted because it does not address the situation. 

MR AGABA: Madam Speaker, I would like to first appreciate the fact that we are improvising to have our sessions amidst coronavirus spread.

The way we are using the microphone might be another source of challenge. I am proposing that before other Members use it - In fact, we have only two microphones. When we come here, we should sanitise our hands. I think in anticipation, you may even touch anywhere. Some of us may not touch or even switch on the microphone. I think this might be great source of problem since Members are speaking into it.

Madam Speaker, we are not sure whether some fluids are going into the microphone. I am therefore asking: Is it possible to sanitise it as we speak since it is the safest? The rest might be possible but this microphone might be a source of infection. Some of us are using it closely, while others are at a distance. We can actually inhale what is within the air. I thought I would seek your guidance through the procedural issue on how we should engage in using this microphone. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I am not yet an expert on the issues but I will advise you.

4.41
MR DANIEL MUHEIRWE (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Kikuube): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the report. She has ably explained why there are no licences and I think her line of interest is that.

I am aware of the spirit in which the matter was raised but my only bias is about the quality of the alcohol they are producing, which has not been addressed.

I am not very informed about the quality of alcohol but I have been informed by the people who consume it that it is adulterated. 

Some people reach an extent of putting in surgical spirit and others penicillin so that when you shake, it brings beads and because they would like to increase on quality, they put a lot of chemicals, which are harmful to our people.

I would not mind if you are not interested in the money that comes with licencing but what about addressing the quality of the alcohol we are drinking in our local bars? Even in the villages, there are people with local drums on our streams boiling. 

I used to take molasses from some factory for my livestock and I found that it had been stolen by people who were going to boil the alcohol. How far are you enforcing that Act so that we can have both quality and licenced producers? Thank you.

4.43
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for the information you have given to the House. The minister informed us that there was a fact finding visit in Kamuli and Kaliro where I come from.

I believe that during that fact finding visit, you should have established a number of issues pertaining to this industry of sugarcane and sugar growing.

You have acknowledged that the jaggeries exist but are not licenced but you have raised an issue of concern to the manufactures that jaggeries are pouching on their sugarcane. 

That draws me to that first point of fact finding. If you really moved in Kamuli and Kaliro, you should have seen the vast gardens of flowering canes.

A flowering cane means that this cane is beyond maturity and starting to lose its content of sugar. It is happening because the sugar manufacturers are not consuming the available sugarcane. 

If they claim that their cane is being pouched on, there is a lot of desperation on the side of the farmer when the cane, which is mature is not harvested because you cannot make a contract for somebody to supply you cane after 18 months and then, you wait until it is 30 months. It cannot happen. The farmer would be losing.

I do not know what the ministry is doing to protect these farmers who are on the weak end and cannot engage these powerful people who have a lot of money.

While I do not condone unlicensed jaggeries, what should these poor people do whose cane is not harvested after two and half years?

Honestly, there is too much cane in the villages beyond what the manufactures can consume and they have made this statement themselves. That is the reason why some people try to export some of this cane to Kenya.

We need to find a solution on what has to be done to help these farmers. You need to engage the manufacturers on their part because they are breaching their contracts with the farmers.

A farmer will not wait until 30 months when his cane is in the garden. It stands risks of fire and at the same time, it stands losing the content of sugar on which the prices are based. Thank you very much.

4.47
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement concerning jaggeries. There is an issue, which Parliament must take serious.

The minister reported that some of the factories started as jaggeries and at the moment, they are very able factories, which produce sugar. This means that they are important.

Honourable minister, what are you going to do for those jaggeries, which have been operating illegally and are still operating for so many years since 1984 as you mentioned?

There has not been any licence for a jaggery and they have never been closed and in that case, they have never been supervised, which means the product they are bringing is not of quality and our people are consuming substandard or adulterated products.

In this case, I wish to hear from you what you are going to do to make sure that those jaggeries are operating well because I believe those are the same people who will have factories of sugar in future. If we kill them now, that means we shall always import investors to come and invest in the sugarcane industry.

I talked of an issue concerning innovation and in history, we know that no Ugandan has been in the sugar industry for many years. 

Indians who started this industry came long ago and we have not learnt anything from them. That brings out the importance of those jaggeries, because they are going to make Ugandans learn how to produce sugar so that we do not base on foreigners for the sugar industry. Thank you.

4.49
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. However, I would like to inquire whether the minister sent a serious team to do that research because if the team carried out the research in Busoga, specifically in Kamuli and Kaliro, how could they zero down on only one jaggery? 

We are basing on facts that were collected from that one jaggery to inform the statement. I believe we are at a loss in that respect. 

Madam Speaker, the issue of sugarcane in Busoga is a serious one. I expected the minister to tell this House that “there are these number of jaggeries in Busoga”. Just like there was a deliberate move by Government to help the tea growers to come up with a factory, the dairy cooperatives to come up with dairy and beef processing machines and the way Government has deliberately helped the areas that are growing fruits to come up with juice processing factories; I expected the minister to say that they are going to, for instance, collect all these jaggery operators, legalise them, form them into a cooperative and support them, since the current factories in Busoga do not have capacity to crush the available sugarcanes.
Hence, it has occasioned loss for the farmers to the extent that even in Kenya where they have been taking their canes, the current situation of the Coronavirus cannot allow them to export. 

Madam Speaker, I will conclude by urging the minister to come up with a deliberate move to help the farmers and out-growers of sugarcane to form themselves into a cooperative and get a sugar processing plant. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Before I allow hon. Kibalya, I would like the minister to know that when the President was in Busoga, meeting the sugarcane growers, he pledged to establish a sugarcane mill run by the indigenous people and to establish incubation centres in each of the districts of Busoga to process juice, sugar, syrup, briquettes, toilet paper and other products.  

Honourable minister, we hope that you will fast-track that, the way we have assisted other industrialists. 

4.53
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I request that the minister comes to respond to some of the issues that we have raised, particularly the issue you have hinted on. It is on the pledge and promise by the President when he was on tour in Busonga. This is haunting us because whenever you go back, people ask about the updates on that pledge. As you said, as the minister comes to respond, she should respond to that so that we get the update as we go.

My observation is that this is where at times, we find challenges. When the issue of arresting people who operate jaggeries in Busoga was raised, they raised it to the leaders. I was also there. However, the minister managed to send a team to the area without even informing people who knew what they were raising. We could have helped because unlike what your team told you, people were arrested. 

When they arrest them, the police intimidate them and they get kitu kidogo and release them but these people continue to suffer because they must look for money to get back their machines. We can get more facts, honourable minister, if you need them but the team claiming they have not arrested people, it is not true.

Furthermore, it could be right that there are no licensed jaggeries. However, licensing a jaggery in Kamuli in Busoga is hard because you cannot have one area of operation. When you take a jaggery to one place on a sugarcane plantation, you must be sure that it will give you sukali gulu as you mentioned. The plantation that is in a swamp cannot give good sukali gulu. They must look for a plantation that is on dry land. That is one area.

In addition, when they say that these people encroach and poach on the plantations of millers, that is not true. These jaggeries can only be used on small plantations of two, three to four acres. It cannot work on a plantation, which is more than five acres because it takes long. So, they are using small acres to make sure they help these people. The minister said they take them in the middle of the plantation, they crush at night and go with the sugar. That is not true, honourable minister. 

These people who are operating jaggeries in known places and somebody will know that they are running it because they operate during the day and not at night. They operate on the request of the owner of the plantation and not the millers. The way these millers are behaving, they only listen to you. Some of us are leaders in those places.

One time, please, have a meeting with the owners of Kamuli Sugar. They will not listen. Even if you call the Director to share something, he will simply ask, “Can I leave the business and you come in the business? I only listen to the minister. I only want to listen to the President.” They do not want to listen to us but we wonder how we shall lead a situation where the miller can only listen to the minister and the President. How are we helping our people?

Madam Speaker, next time, when the minister is going for a fact-finding mission, put us in the know so that we also help. I have a lot of information concerning sugarcane growing in my area. I information about these jaggeries and how they operate, the behaviour of police, how these guys of Kaliro and Kamuli Sugar behave towards the growers. 

Therefore, we need to share in the interest of our farmers and of our Government. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I would like to give you an example. In December, I organised training for value addition at the Resident District Commissioner’s office to manufacture juice, briquettes and toilet paper. That morning, I started at Enterprise Uganda where I had to close a meeting. 

By the time I got to the RDC’s office, I was told that the police had come to arrest the people who were producing jaggery there. They were told that this is a Government programme and then, they retreated. This happened in December at the headquarters in Kamuli. (Laughter) They had come to arrest them.

4.58
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me this opportunity to make a rejoinder to the presentation by the honourable minister. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. However, I need some clarification.

First, I would like to know the spirit behind this statement. Whereas at the beginning, it would appear that the minister was trying to wash her hands clean – that they do not have any hand in whatever is going on in the industry; when you look at the conclusion, the minister is talking about receiving complaints about those who poached the canes. At the end of it all, she refers to the letter written by the President in 2006, sometime back – more than a decade ago.

The impression I get is that at the back of her mind, the minister is trying to give an impression that there are those who are disadvantaging others. By operating these jaggeries, there is an intention by others or some operators to disadvantage established sugarcane operators. That is why the minister tends to refer to the letter, which was written more than a decade ago by the President. 

At that time, the situation could have been different. May be, there was a shortage of sugarcane but now, the situation is not the same. Of course, at the end of it all, the minister tries to allude to people who are adulterating the products and kind of trying to negatively impact on the industry. 

Therefore, I would like to find out what spirit is behind the minister’s statement because it does not come out clearly. She is not responding to the issues being raised. The concern is that farmers have excess sugarcanes and they want to dispose them of yet, Government is not helping them.

Secondly, these people have been operating their jaggeries yet the statement is limited to only one area. The conclusion does not seem to reflect the condition on the ground. 

Therefore, I would like to know the spirit that informed the minister’s statement. Is the minister trying to say that these jaggeries should be phased out and that there is no enabling law? I would like to find out. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.01
MS ANN MARIE NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This Parliament needs to address this problem once and for all. Let it cease being an issue of Busoga or Bunyoro regions that grow sugarcane. 

Parliament appropriated monies - we were in Atyak and Amuru and assisting farmers there. We have even provided money to a private investor to open up a company for purposes of helping farmers there to plant sugarcane for it on the basis of a memorandum of understanding that even after the sugarcane grows, they are paid.

What happens to Busoga now - this is an area where many people earn from sugarcane growing yet, they do not have enough land. I must speak for them because many of them are in our areas not because they want to but because they are looking for areas where they can earn a living, they are growing sugarcane in my area as well.

One time, we had no sugar in the country and now, they are growing sugarcane, which has no market. How does Parliament come in to assist the people whom we have motivated through advice to work but nobody buying their sugarcane? 

About the jaggeries, I would not wish to think that it is only the big companies that can survive in business. Many businesses and factories have come from small entities and grown. Many of us are trying to come up with industries but if we want to say no to jaggeries, that is unfortunate.

Many of the members of Parliament may have gone to school using money from those businesses. Many of their parents may have produced and sold Waragi but we are now saying no to jaggeries. How will you have a jaggery operator that can transform into a big factory tomorrow?  (Interruption)

MR DAVID MUTEBI: Thank you, my sister. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give is that at the height of the Mabira Forest problem, Government encouraged farmers, especially out-growers, to venture into sugarcane growing. Because of that, that activity was done around all our areas. Our problem now is that these sugarcanes cannot be absorbed by the factories.

That is why people have resorted to producing jaggery using the canes. They also now process enguli out of it. It is therefore not fair for Government to stop people completely to utilise these sugarcanes as they deem it fit. Government should take a step to find alternative ways of utilising these sugarcanes. (Applause) 

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, we need alternatives; comparative value addition.  If sugarcanes cannot be processed into sugar, what else can we process out of it? How do we help? How can the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives seek assistance from this Parliament to assist this situation? 

What do you have that we can discuss? People need to be assisted. They have obtained loans and put in their energy, yet, they have nowhere to sell their canes. Others are trying to be innovative yet, we are now saying that because the rich man’s sugar is being stolen – and who is supposed to give security to his sugarcane - you are going to confiscate people’s machines?

MR MUWANGA: As a passer-by, I have critical information for Government. When you go to Busoga and these other areas, you will see huge factories but the neighbourhood is very poor. For a Government that serves the interests of the people, it should be of paramount importance that as the investors become rich, they have airfields. I visited one of those factories and they have private planes yet, the neighbourhood is extremely poor.

However, because they want to survive, they innovate in these ways. I am not so much into enguli. That is why Busoga today, when you speak about a community that is the poorest of the poor, you go to Busoga and yet, the region has very rich farmers.

Therefore, of paramount importance, as we come up with all these policies, is the fact that Government of Uganda - and as for the people of Uganda, it seems more increasingly that we care more about the investors  who make all the profits leaving our people poorer.

The minister here should first have spoken in the interest of the poor people and then later on - she seems to be protecting the interests of the rich and not in any way speaking for the poorest of the poor. (Interjections) Please, do not point at me because we come from the same area, the greater Mpigi. Even those issues are there.

I went to Gulu the other day and visited an area where they are trying to grow sugarcane, to address the youths. They are losing land and everything. Five years from now, the people of Atyak will be poorer than they are today. That cannot happen when there is a Government that speaks for investors. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: That was a long submission.

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: As I conclude, Madam Speaker, the honourable minister is talking of repealing the Enguli Act but we need to be real to ourselves. Unless we do not want to speak the truth, some members of Parliament have gone to school using money from enguli sales. How do we add value? They are saying the Enguli Act was enacted because the white colonialists did not want it and they wanted to promote their whisky at the expense of what we could produce here.

I hope even Coronavirus has showed it today that we can even use waragi to produce sanitizers. We need to add value to what we locally produce. We need to welcome the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and we are requesting that you work with the Ministry of Information, Communication and Technology and other ministries to see how best we help the people to add value but not to scare them away from their business.

THE SPEAKER: As I invite hon. Ogwal, honourable minister, the point raised by hon. Nankabirwa is extremely important. In Western Uganda, when there was a lot of tea grown, Government established tea factories there. That is what we are asking for. There is over production of sugarcane in some parts of this country. When is Government - in Northern Uganda, we spotted Atyak Sugar Factory, which was good but from our funds of Government. When is the Government going to respond to the issues of the glut is in Busoga.

5.10
ms cecilia ogwal (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I had wanted to raise this issue under point of procedure but I was guided that probably it would be better to make it as a substantive contribution. 

I would like to draw the attention of the House to the Sugar Bill, which was passed last week. I did not have chance to participate in that debate. However, I would like the minister to clarify to us why she would not wait to look into the details in the Sugar Bill and see where the gaps are; where the issues she has raised could have been fitted. Or if there are no such areas where the issues she has raised can be fitted, then maybe we can find other avenues of using regulations.

Secondly, on Page 5 of the minister’s submission, the minister says, “Jaggeries are mini sugar mills, which are supposed to be licensed in one location just like a modern sugar factory.” 
My question is; when members of Parliament from Busoga and generally Uganda were concerned about the excessive production of sugarcane, lacking buyers in the country and even making desperate moves to go to Kenya to sell sugarcane, why didn’t the minister take action? This is the kind of thing you should be encouraging. 

I think it should have been a Government policy to encourage these jaggeries so that we do not allow unnecessary excesses that would require our sugarcane growers to be discouraged from continuing with the production. Therefore, I would like the minister to address this issue appropriately –(Interjection)- before you give me information, I would like to let the minister know that although in Lango we do not grow sugar, we are renowned for producing Enguli, which is called Lira Lira; the best brand in Uganda. It is known all over Uganda; it means that it is the Lira brand. (Laughter)

Therefore, you should know that we know the quality of jaggery. We are interested in jaggery production and everything concerning jaggery. I do not drink Enguli, myself. I am a mulokole and would even discourage the drinking of Enguli. However, because our rural people, our poor women and poor farmers are producing jaggery, I would plead with the minister to take care and interest in the poor people before addressing the interests of the rich. That is my plea to the minister.  I can get your information.

Mr kibalya: Thank you, senior citizen, for allowing me to give the information. This is to bring to the attention of the minister what is happening in Kamuli. The big millers that you are promoting and cherishing can only give permits to two categories of people. The first category are those people that got support from them as a factory - the big farmers who have more than 100 or 200 acres. 

The second category is the private farmers who are equally as big as those that got support from them. If a poor farmer in Kamuli has 20 acres and below, you cannot get a license however much you try to fight. Therefore, as you fight, cherish and promote these big investors and millers, just know that it is not the wish of the ones using the jaggeries.

It is because they have no access to permits and room for supplying cane in those factories. They cannot even be given chance to be listened to by those investors that you are promoting.

The Speaker: Let us conclude.

5.16
Mr fred tumuheirwe (FDC, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement she made and also to remind ourselves about – I would like to make a small reference to the Sugar Bill that was recently passed by Parliament. 

In it, is a creation of a Sugar Board, which was meant to harmonise and regulate the entire sugar industry including production and marketing. It has no bounds. It will start from the smallest farmer to the biggest miller; the domestic market up to the export markets. Therefore, I would like to assume that in your statement, you were trying to say that the Sugar Bill is going to address all these concerns.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, you alluded to the fact that in Western Uganda when there was too much tea, there was assistance by Government by creating tea factories. I would like to remind the honourable minister and the House that when the President was consulting in Busoga, he committed himself to allocating Shs 30 billion to establish a sugar mill for indigenous producers. 

Therefore, the question to the minister should be whether that has been considered by the ministry in their ministerial policy statement; and whether there is a budget and give it a timeframe when the indigenous sugarcane growers in Busoga are going to be given that money and assistance to establish the mill so that they can be able to compete with the big millers. That is my concern.

5.18
Mr Michael mawanda (IND. Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her statement. 

I have two issues. The first issue is that hon. Nankabirwa talked about value addition. When I was in India [Hon. Members: “When?”] don’t mind, it is some two years ago; almost three or four years ago – (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, we had time to move around. One of the reasons India is managing its 1.2 billion people is that it has gone down to assist its citizens. We came across these cottage factories mostly of sugarcane. They were extracting juice. During our stay in India, we used to enjoy juice extracted from sugarcane. They would cut that fresh sugarcane. They had a small machine that extracted very good juice from the sugarcane.

Therefore, instead of us lamenting that there are no buyers for the sugarcane, why can’t the ministry look at this option of adding value to the sugarcane by extracting juice from it? 

Secondly, I know some people in Busoga, mostly in areas of Kisozi who are operating jaggeries. They have borrowed money. Here, business is mostly done in the informal sector by people who are not known. They do not have security to go to the banks and borrow money. They use some of their plantations; one or two acres to be able to put those farms up. 

After borrowing, they are being chased by Government without considering that these people have families and children to look after. What is the Government doing to these people? It is not their problem that they are informal. If you contacted the local people, they will definitely tell you what activity these people are doing. 

We should not discourage them. Some of the people hon. Nankabirwa was talking about have run away from their homes in Busoga. They are in Nakasongola and their families are suffering. What is the Government doing to such kind of people? I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: As I invite hon. Oguzu to take the Floor, honourable members, I wanted to live by example. If you want fresh cane juice and you are in Kamuli, go to Century Hotel. You will find fresh cane juice straight from the garden.

5.20
MR DENIS OGUZU LEE (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I have listened to the minister and I was trying to link her statement to what has been planned in NDP III. I think the statement fell short of what we expected.

We are aware that the Government intends to promote agro-industrialisation but if you look at the proposed budget of the ministry for the coming year, you will find that there is a plan to set up a tea factory in Zombo to support farmers in that area and many other places. Busoga is missing and yet it has comparative advantage in the area of sugarcanes.

Right now, the Uganda Industrial Research Institute is helping different communities set up industries but I do not see this coordination between the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Uganda Industrial Research Institute to be able to support people who were engaged in the setup of the jaggeries. Instead, they are proposing that those engaged in Enguli production should stop. 

I think very soon, we are going to have a situation where we will set up a ministry responsible for closing but not advancing industrialisation in Uganda. I am aware there is the Buy Ugandan, Build Uganda (BUBU) Policy being promoted by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. How are you going to ensure this policy delivers if we do not support the indigenous people in whatever they are doing? 

Madam Speaker –(Interruption) 

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. Some of us have what we call dual citizenship. My mother is Kenyan and my father is Ugandan. I am a Ugandan by birth but I also cannot deny my mother who comes from across the borders that were put there by the colonialists. 

Kenya’s model empowers the local people in Kenya to do everything that they innovate by themselves. If you go to Kenya, in Teso and Busia County, the jaggeries right now have led to the coming up of new trading centres because Kenya, as a Government, has put money into the people who have these jaggeries. 

The fact is that we have a lot of sugarcane exported to Kenya because of Kenya’s support. However, it is always funny that whereas our neighbours promote, we kill the idea of the people. That is the information I would like to give. Thank you. 

MS BBUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleague, for giving way. In the Sugar Bill, there is the Sugar Board that is meant to regulate. 

My concern is on this regulation. Regulation is very important but when we are regulating, we should regulate at different levels. One level regulation is certainly going to kill incentives and development of the small players. We need a two-tier regulation; what we call light regulation for the micro people and other small producers. 

We also need the first tier regulations for the big ones because if we have one type of regulation, the high tier, they are going to end up with their usual curtail. A case in point is the oil industry here. Even if the prices go down, they will sit down in their curtail and keep them high. However, if there were small players, given chance, they would check them. 

In this case, under regulation, we should have a two-tier regulation. I thank you, colleague. 

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, I have not spoken in the House since morning and this information is very brief. I need this House to note that during the President’s speech on the issue of the Coronavirus, he tried to emphasise local production to substitute what we are failing to get externally. 

Therefore, in order for us to be a strong nation, we need to be strong enough and look at our own people first. Before we talk about investors, we should be the investors. I think that is critical. 

If you go to Entebbe, for instance right now, even the cargo handling, which used to be under the control of Ugandans, is now under the hands of the Arabs. Is that what we want to see, as a country? We are in problems. That is the information. 

MR OGUZU LEE: To conclude, Madam Speaker, the opportunities to support our indigenous people are certainly enormous. We would want the ministry to move from a policy perspective and ensure these people are supported. 

For example, we finance the Uganda Development Bank (UDB) and today, if we want to ask how much of that money has gone to support these people, we may hardly point to any. 

Yesterday, the ministry sat with alcohol producers. They looked at conversion of about 7.5 million litres of ethanol to sanitizers. These are all opportunities the local people can benefit from, if we empowered them. I would want to see the ministry move in that direction and ensure there is coordination with other ministries so that the opportunities are optimised. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, life is interesting. Last week, I was bashed for informing Ugandans that there is a young man producing a sanitizer to deal with Coronavirus. Yesterday, he launched it but I was bashed for informing the public that this is happening. 

5.28
MR MOSES NAGWOMU (NRM, Bunyole East County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. Thank you, honourable minister, for the statement. Mine is an appeal. The President, everywhere, is encouraging value addition. 
Rightly, as my colleague has said, when you go back to his statement in this Coronavirus scourge here, he said this was an opportunity for Ugandans, who have been spending money outside Uganda, to invest here. 

Madam Speaker, I had the opportunity of visiting some relatives of mine in Busoga region, who are growing sugarcane. It is very surprising that sometime back, a tonne of cane sugar was at Shs. 170,000. Right now, it is at Shs. 110,000. They told me for a truck of cane sugar to be transported to a factory, they spend Shs. 350,000 and each truck is supposed to carry 10 tonnes but they carry 8 tonnes.

Honourable members, this is not a laughing matter. We should not promote economic dualism. Otherwise, we may not live anywhere. This is our country. I request that as the regulations are put in place as the Chairperson of Committee on National Economy has indicated, the two regulations - the first and second tiers - these other jaggeries are just acting as an alternative to the farmers who cannot access markets for their cane in the bigger factories. The only alternative are these jaggeries. 

Honourable members, while here, we should not forget where we came from. Many of our parents never went to school, like my mother whom I buried recently. Her education level was primary two but she raised me, after I lost my father at two years. However, when we come here and forget those people on the ground, we are not doing good service to them. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to request the honourable minister - I know the cooperatives ministry is under your docket with a full minister. I request that you go and organise those jaggeries that do not qualify for licenses and put them in a cooperative group so that you can help them to boost their business. I beg to move. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister.

5.34
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I would like to clarify two key issues.

First, we did not say that rendering the Enguli Act, we would not come up with another law. The Enguli Act is emerging into an Alcoholic Drinks Control Bill, which we are drafting because the Enguli Act was of 1966 and it is obsolete and archaic. Therefore, we will come with the Bill – the Alcoholic Drinks Control Bill -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, in your statement, you said Cabinet approved the reforms in 2013 and this is 2020 -

MS KYAMBADDE: I beg your pardon, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: In your statement, you said that Cabinet approved the implementation, business and licensing reforms in 2013 and this is 2020. The speed at which you are moving - I do not know.

MS KYAMBADDE: We will improve on that, Madam Speaker. Secondly, on the issue of fact-finding; why didn’t we involve the members of Parliament? We had only one day and our team went and met the team from Kamuli –(Interjections)– we did not say that we do not support the jaggeries. In fact, in the Sugar Bill, there is a provision for the jaggeries. 

I would like to thank the Members for passing the Sugar Bill because when you look at the Sugar Board -

THE SPEAKER: Why aren’t you allowing the minister to submit?

MR MACHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable minister for giving way. I rose on a procedural matter on whether we are proceeding well. The Minister talked about 2013 but this matter has been on and off, as our people are being punished. As I talk, these people have not been licensed; they keep torturing them because of the absence of the law. I do not know whether we are proceeding well with this matter.

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, this issue was raised in Cabinet twice and we have issues with the Ministry of Health. They kept telling us to take it back and review it and that is why it has taken a while. There have been some issues between us and the Ministry of Health but we will bring it.

Madam Speaker, I beg that you protect me so that I respond to the issues appropriately. Another issue that I wanted to bring out is that in this particular case, we are only responding to the issue of jaggeries. If you want any issue on sugar, we will come back with a detailed report on the demand and on the excess cane that we have and all that.

However, on this particular case, we are responding directly to a specific case in Kamuli, which was raised. The other Members did not tell us where the other jaggeries were. The fact that the jaggeries are not licensed, how are we supposed to know where they are?

In this particular case, I would like to thank the Speaker because she mentioned a specific one and we went there. Therefore, I request my colleagues to also mention the others so that we carry out a survey because how would we know where a jaggery operating from if it is unlicensed?

Where we went, we used your leaders from the area. Are you familiar with the people we are talking about? The LC III chairpersons - all these people are locals. Therefore, our team worked with the local officials in the area. I would like to emphasise the fact that we support jaggeries; we are not against them but let us organise them. 

I would like to thank you for the Bill because it streamlines the licensing, the management and the regulation of the jaggeries. Let us just pray that it is approved by the President so that we act immediately.

On the issue of the sugar project, we are aware and we have lined it up under the Uganda Development Corporation (UDC). However, we cannot go ahead with it at the moment if we do not have a Bill to regulate the sector. How do we start an industry when it is not fully regulated? We cannot just act on a policy. 

Therefore, we have lined it up under UDC; let us organise these people into cooperatives so that the cooperatives can manage the sugar project if we are to start a project. However, we have lined it up under UDC and we are going to add value to sugar for the indigenous group in that area. I seek your further support in this. 

On the issue of not protecting farmers, we are protecting farmers –(Interjections)– that is why we came up with a policy and in that policy, there is a provision that protects farmers. That is why we came up with a Bill and in that Bill, there is a provision that protects farmers and that is why we are saying that on the board, there must be farmers, there must be out growers and even those of jaggeries are members of the board. 

Therefore, we cannot regulate that sector; we cannot do without implementing or enforcing this particular Bill. I thank you for that but I would like my colleague, through you, Madam Speaker, to substantiate on the issues that I have raised here.

I thank you very much, for your comments and we stand committed to support the indigenous farmer not only in Busoga but in Uganda as a whole. 

THE SPEAKER: Can I direct the committee or would you like to add something?

5.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, I will just add one or two points to what the honourable minister has submitted or emphasised. First of all, the jaggeries have not been denied operation. Jaggeries are recognised as actually mini mills or factories. 

Madam Speaker, remember in our statement, we said that Mayuge, GM and all the small mills operating right now in Busoga or elsewhere started as jaggeries and they developed. That means that we do recognise the fact that jaggeries are a basis for growing into bigger mills in the future. However, the law is what has been missing because the law, on which we premised the operationalisation or establishment of the jaggeries, is obsolete.

Therefore, when we were shaping the Sugar Bill, we went through the Bill very closely with colleagues on the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. We made sure that we indicate the protection of the jaggeries by law. We also provided in the law how we could actually – we have been talking about associations. First of all, we recognise in the new law, the formation of associations and cooperatives, amongst sugar growers.

Secondly, even the small scale manufactures are also recognised in the new law. So, we thank the House, like I did the other day, for having passed the Sugar Bill. We are now going to move because we have been operating without it – there was that lacuna. Therefore, we are now going to support - and even other proposals like hon. Syda Bbumba said and regulations. In regulating the operations of jaggeries, we must emphasise the support of our people; agro-processing and value addition, we must support our people. 

Even through UDC, UDC is specifically aimed at supporting our own - the indigenous people. Therefore, when the Rt Hon. Speaker raised the issue of establishing the mill by the out-growers in Busoga region as indicated by His Excellency the President, we have already been given instructions by His Excellency the President, to start working on this issue. So, we are really moving. 

Honourable colleagues, we were given directives about two months ago and we have started. As we debate the policy statement, we have that at the back of our mind because it is one of those important critical issues that we have to support. Once we do that, it is one way of having affirmative action for some of these regions. I also come from the East and I must declare my interest. (Laughter) 

I would be more than delighted to see a project like this one, which takes billions of shillings, coming our way and supporting our people. Honourable members, we are here to support jaggeries and as a ministry, through UDC, we are going to support the growth of jaggeries in this country as a basis of supporting small scale farmers. 

Therefore, streamlining and actually making sure that the sugar sector or industry is effective and efficient in this country. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, is directed to specifically look out for this issue during the budget to ensure that the UDC provides money for this industry. Thank you.

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE DELAYED COMPENSATION OF UGANDAN TRADERS WHO MADE LOSSES IN SOUTH SUDAN

5.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I will try to summarise the statement, which has been provided and uploaded to Members. This is not a new issue to this House. We appropriated Shs 76 billion to support companies that were affected while trading in South Sudan. After appropriation, the ministry took another independent verification of some of the companies as it was provided under Article 10 of the Bilateral Agreement. A report was produced where Ernst&Young did some extra work. 

We have presented this report to Cabinet and we are not yet out of Cabinet. Also, we received some companies that went to court and they got a ruling that we should actually continue to implement the bilateral agreement, as we signed it. 

Madam Speaker, before hon. Kasaija left, we discussed this issue and said that on the Shs 76 billion which was appropriated, we are committing that this will be paid in the coming quarter as and when cash flow improves. This is the summary of this issue, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The last quarter of this year?

MR BAHATI: Yes, the last quarter, which begins in April. I beg to lay these two documents - one on the verification by Ernst & Young and the court ruling on this issue. That is the summary of this matter.

5.50
MR NOAH OLEGA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. I know that Government and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development are trying hard to make sure that our traders who suffered losses in Southern Sudan are given some support to resume their trade activities. 

I am also aware that these traders give us taxes. That is why there is need for us to support them. My concern is about the criteria used to sieve and get these people for compensation. One time, I was informed that we had 170 traders who raised complaints but I am told that only about 30 qualified. I would like to know from the minister what criterion was used. How were these people picked out of the many?

I have a case here of somebody who was a trader in Southern Sudan, who supplied the SPLA and they paid him partly and then refused to pay the balance. The man went to court and the ruling is even here. He, and two others, told me that they, who are not known, seem to be lagging behind and it seems that they will not get justice.

Madam Speaker, Ugandans believe that it is this august House that will give them a right to their properties and who will hear their cries. To get justice from Parliament is something that they understand very well. That is why they told me to find out what criterion was used to get these people. 

Secondly, being at the borders, this issue of compensation is giving me a lot of trouble. They always ask me what we are doing about it. They ask what is happening with the ministry of finance. 
My prayer is –(Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking clarification from my colleague so that we have this cleared once and for all. Hon. Olega says that he has another complainant whose documents are there. I would like to seek clarification from him whether he submitted the documents to the committee and also whether he appeared before the committee.

MR OLEGA: Thank you. It is true that the papers were submitted to the ministry of finance but to their dismay, their names never came out. That is why they are raising complaints otherwise we know the work was done. We are perturbed to hear that only a few people were chosen. There are three people here who are raising the same issues. 

My prayer is that let the minister do a thorough job and tell these traders why they have not qualified. There must be a report so that they know what transpired and why they did not meet the standards to be paid. Let this matter be revisited and handled thoroughly. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you mention the three names so that we know? 

MR OLEGA: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the documents here on the Table. There is Yumbe Multi-Purpose Agency Limited, Mogul Housing Solutions Limited and there is one from a gentleman in Lira, the Amadi Abdul Aziz Enterprise. Those are the people who raised matters to me. Thank you. 

5.55
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The traders had anticipated that by your intervention in this issue – their hopes went high but it is a very big disappointment with the ministry of finance because you guided this process all through. 

It is very unfair for the ministry of finance to set up another verification committee. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, the reason you set up a select committee of Parliament is because traders had complained to you and through the Members that they had been left out initially when the bilateral agreement was made to pay the 10 companies that the Government of South Sudan was supposed to pay the US$ 56 million. It is fully embedded in the bilateral agreement. 

It was after that complaint that you set up that committee. We interfaced with the ministry of finance and the ministry of trade to find out why only the 10 and why not other companies yet they had also traded. Parliament received our report. If I can only take you back, remember, the 10 companies had traded in the grain reserve of the Government of South Sudan, which was independent.

These other companies had supplied SPLA. They had given consultancy services; they had given construction services and so many others. When the Government of South Sudan got into problems, they could not pay. That is when the traders asked the Government of Uganda to lead them to do the negotiations with the Government of South Sudan and consequently, this bilateral. 

That is why section 10 of the bilateral talks of the unverified claims that would be verified. Section 6 of this bilateral mentions, it reads, “In consideration of the Government of South Sudan undertaking to reimburse to Government of Uganda monies paid to Uganda traders, pursuant to this agreement, the Government of Uganda agrees to make arrangements to pay to Uganda traders, monies owed to them by the Government of South Sudan.” 

That is why, in our interface with the ministries of finance and trade, we were to find out why only 10, why not others. They explained to us that the bilateral required verification not by Uganda but by the Government of South Sudan. Uganda, you have no capacity to verify who supplied South Sudan. It is South Sudan to verify who did business with it. 

Madam Speaker, they continuously informed us that the Government of South Sudan failed to give them a verification committee and that is when we came to you and you agreed to send us to South Sudan. We met the Speaker of Parliament. We met hon. Gen. Salvatore, the Minister of Finance, who by then was the undersecretary in South Sudan - equivalent to the PS - who had signed and given out the contracts. 

We met the Minister of Trade, Gen. Mayom and the Minister for East African Community Affairs. We met the Minister of Defence, Gen. Manyang because there were issues to do with the Ministry of Defence for Ugandans’ plots and equipment that had been confiscated. We sat and agreed. We asked them why they had not set up a verification committee. 

We were sent to South Sudan by the Speaker of Parliament and as we left, we told them that we were from parliament and that the Speaker would want proof that we had indeed met them. Madam Speaker, we presented a copy to you – we were able to obtain a verification committee. 

While in South Sudan we even had to write to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that if they so desired, they also send members to join the verification committee of South Sudan. These were the words of South Sudan: “You said we are the ones who are not compliant, the verification committee is there.” Madam Speaker, it is attached to the report that we laid to Parliament. I personally carried those letters when we came back to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and they received them.

Madam Speaker, in the desire to assist the traders, you did your work. You guided Parliament to even include some money that the budget could accommodate. We were able to include Shs 76 billion. Having done that, we realised that what was necessary was so much that maybe our budget could not handle. That is why our recommendation, which Parliament approved, was that the Government of Uganda should even consider domestic borrowing. 

What we found in South Sudan was that Uganda has done a lot for South Sudan, including the training of Parliament of South Sudan. Through trade in South Sudan – if you recall, in 2010 Uganda was earning about $1,200 million from South Sudan but now it could even be less than $300 million. Do you know why? Our traders who traded with South Sudan have gone broke. Their buildings and other assets are being attached by banks. 

Our space has been taken over by Kenya, South Africa, Eritrea, Ethiopia and our traders cannot do much. Why is it that the Government of Uganda cannot help the traders even when Parliament came and put money in the budget? Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, who are you – even when the Parliament of Uganda appropriates, guided by the Speaker, even when you have a sovereign guarantee for the $41 million?

Finally, Madam Speaker, you remember there was an issue of those traders who – many of them were from northern Uganda: West Nile, Lango and Acholi. They were very near South Sudan and they had lost during the war. Some of them were even selling tomatoes. We found a woman who was receiving maize from Uganda. She had just sold to those ones who had contracts. She was raped by 27 men. 

She asked us, “What do I do? Where do I go? I don’t have anything.” That is the third category that we think the ministry of finance can verify because we recommended ex-gratia for those to go back to work. On these other unverified claims, South Sudan was very ready. We left them at work. 

In conclusion, the Government of Uganda under section 6 of the Bilateral – because you undertook an obligation, you cannot run out of it this business of involving Ernst & Young – the Government of South Sudan told us, “We are the ones who traded with the companies, not Uganda. We are the ones to verify.” We think the involvement of Ernst & Young is to leave out the companies of Uganda that are crippled. If South Sudan is willing to reimburse us, why do we want to block out Ugandans? 

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I invite hon. Olanya, I heard that the cost of hiring Ernst & Young as a consultant was almost Shs 2 billion.

6.04
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I call upon the minister to be very careful and strategic in this compensation. If you look at the list of these companies and where they come from – we need to remove the tribal sentiments in this compensation. Many Ugandans lost in this trade. 

My district borders South Sudan. We have reliable information that the ministry in South Sudan gave a list of those companies that they were trading with to the Ugandan Government but the ministry in Uganda rejected some of the companies. I would like the minister to clarify why. Those companies traded with South Sudan not Uganda. Why do you reject the list given by the South Sudan Government?

Secondly, Madam Speaker, we have other traders who lost their vehicles during the process. When they were supplying goods, their vehicles were confiscated by the SPLA and for some of them the vehicles were just taken. Those people are not on the list.

In Amuru, as my colleague stated, very many people lost during that time and they were left out. We have many boda boda guys from Uganda who had gone to work in South Sudan. They lost all their motorbikes and none of them has been included on this list. Madam Speaker, let the ministry take very keen interest in the verification and compensation. What I foresee is that we may have more problems arising after the compensation.

6.07
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I would like to seek from the minister is, one, why the choice of Ernst & Young and like you have just said, spending Shs 2 billion, which could have actually compensated even 10 investors - our local people and they would be happy especially the women?

Madam Speaker, I come from Amuru and that is my area of operation. I see how these women and men suffer on that road. If only 10 people are being compensated, what are we doing about the small traders? Why did you choose Ernst & Young as opposed to using our own Auditor-General? That is the clarification I want from the minister. 

Madam Speaker, Let us do a lot of soul searching, especially during this time of coronavirus. If we have been corrupt and segregative, let us search our hearts as Christians and as Muslims and do the right things. Very many people are crying with our names.

Madam Speaker, I am an African. They say that when people cry with your name all the time, it brings calamities. I am praying that we are sincere. Let us look at these vulnerable people – people who used the little money which they had borrowed and are now stranded. This is my appeal as a mother and common woman. Thank you. 

6.09
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke County North, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Many of us supported the liberation of South Sudan. We did not only want a peaceful neighbour but we saw opportunities for markets for Uganda and we are happy that when they came, Ugandans got markets and started supplying.

Madam Speaker, what looked like an opportunity has now turned out to be a curse on our traders. Many of our people who supply South Sudan have gone under. Their properties have been seized and many of them are in hiding because the banks are following them up.

The last time I presented a report for domestic borrowing to settle part of this debt, one of the strong recommendations we made was that we should have a firm list; we should have these people verified. After presenting that report, I was attacked by all sorts of people, all of them with apparent valid claims that they supplied. Some of them were even partially paid but they were not on the list and that the others, especially the small companies, supplied but they were not considered at all.

Madam Speaker, can the minister explain to us why only a few of those people who supplied or did business with South Sudan are the ones being considered? We also need to know what Government has in plan for redeeming our people who supplied South Sudan but have now gone under. 

Madam Speaker, this is a serious matter. It has affected our economy. I remember some time ago, we were doing trade of up to $1,200 million. As we speak, the trade we have with South Sudan is less than $20 million. Imagine from $1,200 million, we are now at $20 million. This has caused a problem to many of our people who put up buildings, especially downtown, in anticipation that they were going to do business with South Sudan. Their properties are empty because there is no business.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, Government should come up with clear and firm plans. This time, we should give them timeframes which should be strictly followed in completing the verification. Thank you.

6.12
BRIG. FLAVIA BYEKWASO(UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is just a simple clarification. 

Madam Speaker, what we are dealing with is a matter of facts; either people supplied or not. If they said Ernst & Young was contracted to do those verifications, I would like to request the minister to give us the names of the 10 companies. We also need to be helped to understand why the 10 were given and not others.

I remember sometime when this matter came up in Parliament – I do not remember the day - there was a very long list. I would like to understand whether that list – we can check the Hansard - is what was used or whether there is another list that was given to Ernst & Young. Thank you, Madam Speaker.


6.14
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, if you listened to the honourable minister, he was very economical with his words. He chose them deliberately.

Madam Speaker, this is a very important matter. I expected the honourable minister to read this report verbatim but he chose to summarise yet we have failed to see the summary. I would like to request hon. Bahati to give us the list of the companies that Parliament gave a directive for payment.

Secondly, the minister should give us the list of those companies that have been paid. Otherwise, reading between the lines –(Interjection)– in your presentation, you failed to give information and that is why we are asking for clarification. Honourable minister, time will come for you to respond.

Madam Speaker, when you read between the lines, you will get to know the reasons the minister did not give us the list of those who have been paid. We are told that they are companies owned by those who are in higher positions; the super men and super women.

When it came to the time of payment, he said these monies would be released by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Planning in the fourth quarter but he was not categorical. He said, “…resources permitting.” This shows that they are not committed to pay even in the fourth quarter. This sounds funny.

Madam Speaker, in a situation where the Government of South Sudan has even guaranteed to pay – that is why the minister said we had recommended that Government should get a loan to pay. Otherwise, the Government of South Sudan has committed to pay this money. It is only a matter of time but we wanted to support our businessmen such that they continue doing business.

The minister has been very mean with facts and so, let him disprove us by laying on the Table all the bare facts. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.17
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I would like to start by thanking the minister for having come with a statement. It is on the iPads.

Madam Speaker, I think one critical issue is that we are using the taxes of Ugandans to compensate the people who made the losses. If the Government of South Sudan accepted to pay our money back, we are only going to raise that money through the taxes generated by this country.

My problem is the way in which we discriminate and choose to favour the rich against the poor. This is something that we must give attention to. We all pay taxes across the country and so, we must enjoy the taxes equally without any discrimination.

I have a problem with the issue of verification. How on earth can we say that Ernst & Young should be the one verifying what happened in South Sudan? They are not going to verify on international accounting standards in South Sudan. We are verifying people who made losses.

I feel pity for my neighbours in Bugisu. I used to see them on trucks carrying onions, tomatoes and matooke, taking them to South Sudan. Our traders even carried goats but they all lost. At the end, we realised one thing; it is a fight between Goliath and David - the rich and the poor. That is why they ran to court to say that you should not go further and verify. Why do you stop a verification process if you have clear facts?

Madam Speaker, this is disturbing. I propose that this Parliament should show that it has a muscle of enforcement. How on earth can the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development be the one to overtake Parliament? Madam Speaker, when we issue resolutions, they are not implemented. Why? I think this is something that disturbs a lot.

This Parliament will stand to lose if we do not stand by our words. I would rather urge, Madam Speaker, that you contact your colleague in South Sudan to see what we can do about the verification issue that has stalled. Otherwise, that is where the gist of the matter is.

According to the traders who have lost, over 180 companies were involved but today its only 10 and after the 10 they are now talking about three and you wonder if the three are from Galilee! Where are the 10 coming from? Some people are now a little in heaven but we are still on earth, even with this kind of economic tremor. It is so disturbing. It is time for us to search our souls and think about Uganda within the borders of Uganda.

The minister needs to help us; the problem is not yours specifically but Government and you are part of Government. We need to solve this problem once and for all. All companies need to be compensated. Those in Kumi keep calling me every day and I am almost tempted to use my personal salary to give somebody a handout but I cannot because I am also doing badly economically. It is time we attended to the matter because it is urgent, a concern, a national issue and a priority like the coronavirus. Thank you.

6.20
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a Member of Parliament that represents most of the traders, I am so ashamed by the submission of the honourable minister. It is demeaning not only to Ugandans but to us, Members of Parliament.

I remember you were here and if you look straight in my eyes - you were seated across –(Interjections) – It is a fact and it is even ashaming. You stood up; Rt Hon. Oulanyah was in the chair and he asked you this question: “In this case, what guarantee do you give to this august House that the rest of the 33 companies, first, will be paid and secondly, that we shall conduct a verification whereby you will contact your counterparts in South Sudan to give you a list of all those that supplied them…” - He did not talk of Ernst & Young – “…in consideration of the following, bearing in mind that there was a verification that was conducted by the Ministry of Trade and Uganda Revenue Authority.”

You said this: “Mr Speaker, we abide by everything you say, but Parliament should help us salvage this situation and honour this payment in order for us to honour the agreement. Within three months, we shall have come back, we will have visited South Sudan and our counterparts, and we will have come back with a comprehensive list of every Ugandan that supplied them and we shall also make sure that we work hand in hand with the Ministry of Trade and Uganda Revenue Authority to show us all those people that paid their taxes and conducted trade in South Sudan.”

I am sorry to say that you did nothing to honour the words that you said on this Floor of Parliament. What does that mean? Now, you come back today telling us you are ready to pay what Ernst & Young has approved. In any case, honourable minister, are you passing a vote of no confidence in the office of the Auditor-General? 

If you want valid verification, it is simple; one, you have Uganda Revenue Authority who will show who paid taxes for what; two, write to your counterpart in South Sudan. This is not your money. This money will be paid for by South Sudan; it is Uganda that is guaranteeing that all its persons that traded with South Sudan be given comfort in form of money in order to cushion them in this dire situation, so that they can continue trading. You have no right to be selective in this matter.

Parliament constituted a committee to supplement your effect. They went and met the people of South Sudan and their leadership including the ministers of finance, like hon. Nankabirwa elucidated. In return, the Ministry of Finance of South Sudan clearly said that all those people who had laid their claims in Uganda had indeed supplied them. They came back, laid the report in Parliament and we adopted the report. You are part of this Parliament. Therefore, where do you get the audacity to go ahead and carry out another verification when the Parliament of Uganda has conducted its own verification on the basis of which it has granted you powers to pay out monies that it has appropriated?

Therefore, Madam Speaker, it is high time that the resolutions of Parliament are taken seriously. People outside there think we are jokers when we resolve and urge Government, because we appropriate. That is why hon. Bahati came to us to seek authority; if we were inconsequential, he would not have come to seek authority from this august House. Because you sought authority and we are the representatives of these people, we gave you a clawback that the following - a, b, d, e, f, g - should be adhered to.

As a supplement, Parliament spent its own monies to constitute a committee in order to supplement your effort. They came back with a report, which you did not honour; you trashed it and threw it in the bin”. 

A country that works for a few - We have been suffering with the issue of coronavirus and you heard people saying that people who think they are above the law came and picked up their relatives from the tarmac. As a result, every single Ugandan is going to pay the price of this indiscipline of the people who think that they are above the law and cannot be treated equally like other Ugandans. The same is happening in payments, promotions, recruitment, scholarships. What is going on in this country that we cannot solve as people’s legislators? 

I would like to read out the companies that he presented the other time, since he was economical with the truth - “Rubya Investors, Kibungo Enterprises, Aponye…” Remember we told you that if we lift the veil and find out who the directors are in Aponye, they appear twice on the list of payment in different companies. Aponye is one company but the same directors appear in Afro Kai Limited and they appear on two verification lists, on the list of the first 10 and the second 10. That is not fair. You do not omit other Ugandans as if they do not contribute to the economic strength of this country in favour of some Ugandans.

Let us lift the veil. The chairperson of the committee is here, let her come and read the names of the directors; they are the same –(Interjections)- Allow me to complete. Lift the veil of the first 10 companies and you will realise that the seven beneficiary companies belong to the same directors with the same annexures of the same relatives. Therefore, Ugandan taxpayers are footing a bill of $56 million for about four families. 

We are talking of providing food for Ugandans in this dire situation, giving small companies tax rebates, rescheduling loans, and we are here sitting to legislate to give authority to the Minister of Finance to only pay about six Ugandan families $56 million. We should not accept this. My prayer is that we halt the payment until Parliament is satisfied with everyone that is going to be paid.

6.28
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, it is very unfortunate that we are discussing the same matter which we discussed for hours earlier on and it is in our records.

I have two documents here which we must honour. One, which is the most important, is a letter dated 2 May 2018 and signed by the Clerk to Parliament. In that particular letter, which followed a lengthy debate, Parliament resolved that 23 companies be added to the ten companies. The letter is here, signed by the Clerk to Parliament; it is on our record.

Let me explain about the 10 companies. In 2016, the 10 companies got cash payment in dollars from South Sudan and they do not deny that. The 10 companies are known; they are in our Hansard. Unfortunately, I did not come with it for this particular meeting. I would have shared it with you.

The second document, which I would like us to reflect on, is a document signed by Doris Akol, Commissioner-General of Uganda Revenue Authority (URA). In that particular document, the Commissioner-General has actually confirmed the Parliament list of 23, which actually means Parliament is confirming that not only should the 10 companies benefit from the compensation but the South Sudan Government and URA have all agreed that the additional 23 have been verified and must be paid. So, that is confirmation of the 33 – 10 plus 23.

However, Madam Speaker, in Doris Akol’s letter, there is a question on two companies. One of them is called Aponye Uganda Limited. I analysed the documents given to me by the various suppliers and we found that there are about four companies with similar directors which benefitted from the first payment in cash. I think it was $15 million; I cannot confirm but the minister should know. Cash payment was given to the ten companies. I think we need to investigate Aponye. That same company has got similar directors in other companies which were also paid under the 10 and they are still claiming for more.

My plea is that we should be honest. I know we all need money but knowing what Corona virus is doing to the world, money may not be able to help us but at least, let us exercise some integrity and honesty, particularly for people from northern Uganda. There is one Acholi man from Kitgum who vowed never to buy any shirt. The man resolved to put on only one shirt and that particular person was a very well-known businessman. The lady, who was mentioned by the chairperson of the ad hoc committee, was raped. That lady came to my office, Madam Speaker. I am glad she did not come to you because I think you would have wept. That lady is saying all she wants is what is due to her.

Madam Speaker, people from the north have suffered. This was an opportunity for some of our people to do honest business with their brothers in South Sudan. So, I ask the minister, - it does not matter how much money you want from here - you must be fair to those who have lost their property.

6.34
MR JOHNSON SSENYONGA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to support the motion. 

I was a member of the Committee on National Economy. We were able to know the first group of the 23 and the other group of the 10 was considered. There is also another group of the small suppliers, according to the report, who should be considered. Some of them even have bounced cheques; for someone to be paid a cheque and it bounces, that confirms that he must have supplied but there was no money.

Our concern, honourable minister, is that all those should be considered. We have some small suppliers from our localities. They are not demanding billions; you can hear them talking about Shs 170 million. That is a lot of money to a small supplier. The recommendation in the report was clear, that since the South Sudan Government has accepted, even those ones should be considered, and we will be seen to be fair to all. That is my concern. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.35
MR GORDON BAFAKI (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the minister. I have heard about Ernst & Young. I was in Parliament when we adopted the report about South Sudan. You went and hired Ernst & Young. What I want to know is what the terms of reference were that you gave Ernst & Young that Parliament did not tackle.

Secondly, what was the scope of that audit? As far as I am concerned and aware, Ugandans have been trading with South Sudan since 2008. Parliament needs to know what the scope was that you used to get only three companies that you say qualified to be paid.

Madam Speaker, Ugandans are suffering. People who traded with South Sudan are suffering. I can tell you the economy is not doing well. I have heard hon. Matia Kasaija is coming to borrow for budget support. Why should you go to borrow for budget support and leave millions and billions of dollars in South Sudan? Honourable members, why should we allow hon. Bahati to come to borrow for budget support yet he has not paid South Sudan people? I think this is completely irregular. We should not allow Government to borrow for budget support and yet money is dormant in South Sudan. 

Madam Speaker, I want to implore you to set timelines for when the Government of Uganda is set to pay the South Sudan traders. Otherwise, we shall keep on discussing and having reports by Parliament, being coached by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development with their permanent secretaries, and we shall keep on talking and talking day in, day out. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Baba Diri, hon. Dulu, hon. Othieno and then I come this side. Hon. Baba Diri; help her to get to the podium. Come with hon. Lucy Akello. 

6.39 
MS MARGRET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the report presented, although the report has equally disappointed us and our voters who include the traders.

Madam Speaker, these very traders - the businessmen and women who are suffering today because they lost a lot of their properties - are the people who made us rich. When we were trading with South Sudan, our economy improved greatly; we had money. However, because of this war and now business is not going on well, our economy has come down.

I stay in Koboko and many of my people are businessmen and businesswomen. They are now suffering. They cannot go back to get loans because they had already taken loans, which they have not paid. Their children are not going to school and they keep asking us again and again what we are doing to help them get paid.

When we set up a committee to investigate and get the right people to be paid, it gave us hope. Our people also got hope that maybe Parliament was now coming in to do something. However, it is a disappointment that our report has not been considered and nothing has been done for our people. In fact, our people are losing trust in us. They feel we are wasting time talking here without helping them.

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development must do something. Let us accept the list of people who did the work. We said that there are three grades, especially the small businessmen and businesswomen, the middle men who had been sacrificing the little and they had to be compensated.

Who are the first 10 you talked about? We need to investigate them because the one I know, called KKT, are still complaining that they have not been paid enough. Not all their money has been given. It means this money was given to few individuals instead of giving it to everybody concerned. If we investigate, we could still recover this money from these rich people. Let us do something and recover this money from them.

Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, please let us hurry up with the final list and get money to compensate our people who are suffering. Many are going to die and many have died because of pressure. The sooner we help them, the better. Thank you very much. I would like to see that our people are compensated so that they can proceed with their businesses. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

6.43
MR MARK DULU (Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As I stand here, I know most of you also think about how useful your names are and how useful the name of this Parliament is. My fear is that as we do this collectively in good faith, outside there we could be looked at as people who have done all this intentionally for the purpose of benefiting those in certain positions.

For that matter, Madam Speaker, I feel - and this is my own opinion - that for anybody not to be left out, at least we should have all these people categorised in three groups. You could call them large, medium and small; small of course would include these enterprises like the boda boda riders that people have talked about.

Also, the method of people doing things from one up to the last number is not good. There should be some sort of segregation of duty. The same person sets terms and conditions, goes and executes them and does all that. That is not good. It should not be allowed for one person to do this and then verify. Madam Speaker, if there was a possibility of having people to separately deal with this matter, it would be better. 

Tell me what the auditors will do there. The records are available in Juba. I am sure that Juba must be having a registrar of companies; it is available. What will the auditors do there? The honourable minister should tell us the piece of work that requires experts. I really doubt and it is very irritating. 

If you visited Juba, you will realise that our people trade with a lot of difficulty. Actually, Government has not protected them in many aspects. If you visited Juba, you would get Eritreans, Kenyans and Ethiopians there but they are fully protected by their governments. For us, if you are to go there and begin trading, you should either go and get South Sudan nationality or you get a partner who is a South Sudanese; that is when your company can be registered. However, when companies from Kenya, Ethiopia and Eritrea go there, they go as expatriates or as foreign investors and their ways are always clean. I rest my case.

6.46
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (West Budama County North, Tororo): Madam Speaker, the Jopadhola people did not have the paternity testing technology but they believed that you can only know who your true father is on the day your mother dies. On that day, if she says that so and so is your father, that is it; that will be your father. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, South Sudan has told us who the claimants are and that is it. They have told us whom they traded with, whom they owe and they even issued us a sovereign guarantee. Now, who are we to start saying that those are not the people they traded with? Who are we to start saying, “no, we want to bring another list of those you traded with”? South Sudan is the one that knows those they traded with and their list was given to us.

Madam Speaker, you sent a team to South Sudan, a committee of Parliament. They verified and gave us a report. I do not understand why the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - (Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: The information I would like to give my brother is to the effect that even in the letter they wrote, attached to the report of the committee, they clearly stated the entire list and it is here. I have managed to retrieve the report and the list; they clearly say, “claims at the Ministry of Finance, Government of South Sudan, awaiting authorisation for payment or those that have been partially paid”. Those are some of them that even have cheques that were not honoured.

Honourable, I did not want to interfere with your discussion but at an appropriate time, if the Rt Hon. Speaker so wishes, I will come here and read out the entire letter having a list of those that traded with the Government of South Sudan. Thank you.

MR OTHIENO:  Thank you, honourable, for that information. Madam Speaker, let us behave the way the Jopadhola did. Once the mother says this is the father of the child, that should be the case. You are not the mother, so you cannot start claiming, “no, that woman is telling a lie”. That is how the Jopadhola determine the paternity of everybody.

In this case, South Sudan has helped us. They have given us a list of those who should be paid. I do not see any reason why the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should start dilly-dallying and appointing Ernst & Young. Why give them Shs 2 billion, unless you have an interest in Ernst & Young? The committee went there and did its work; did we even pay Shs 1 billion? 

Madam Speaker, I think Parliament needs to investigate the circumstances under which Ernst & Young was procured to the extent of paying Shs 2 billion. Why didn’t you pay the businessmen the Shs 2 billion? You have the money to pay Ernst & Young but the businessmen are crying, business is doing badly and we cannot do business in South Sudan. Pay these businessmen so that they can resuscitate their businesses.

I strongly believe that the reason why the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is cagey is because of these additional 23 businesspeople to be paid. If it were not for these people, I believe that by now they would have paid the original 10 companies. However, because the 23 were brought in, they are now saying, “We must verify”.

As far as I am concerned, there is no need for dilly-dallying. This House should make its stand very clear; the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should pay the people. After all, South Sudan has agreed to pay.

6.51
Mr james baba (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Madam Speaker, I am not a Jopadhola nor am I related to them but the outcry out there is what the chairperson of the ad hoc committee documented in her report. The undocumented people who had no recommendations are the majority for whom this House should stand. They have not been catered for in this compensation. In that report, which hon. Nankabirwa presented in May 2019, there was a very clear recommendation that these people be considered. There was a very clear recommendation that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should be tasked to verify who these people are.

I had the occasion to visit South Sudan in 2010 or earlier. They took me to the largest market in Juba and it was composed of Ugandan traders. These are the ones featuring on this list of 10 or 23. Where are these people? They lost all their businesses and they accounted for the big trade surplus we had with South Sudan at that time. Therefore, we must recover this business. We must recover our trading patterns with South Sudan. That country will settle down; they have purchasing capacity with their own revenues and we must not lose that opportunity at all. Therefore, the first people we should look to are the small traders. 

My prayers are: one, let us request the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to verify the small undocumented traders who suffered losses; two, as per the recommendation, Government should do domestic borrowing of money so that these people can be paid ex gratia awards so that they feel that their losses have been covered. Thank you.

6.53
Mr david abala (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I also would like to thank the minister for giving us a sketchy report. 

Since we are in a period of lent and we are praying, allow me to read two verses from the Bible and I do not mind if I end here. Proverbs 31:8-9 states, “Speak up for those who cannot speak for themselves, for the rights of all who are destitute. Speak up and judge fairly; defend the rights of the poor and needy.”

Proverbs 3:27 states, “Do not withhold good from those who deserve it…” Let me stop here.

The Bible is very clear. If you listen to what Members have been talking about and their reference to the report, it is unfortunate that some people in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development seem to be dragging their feet. They know very well that these people deserve to be paid. Unfortunately, they seem to be interested in kickbacks. 

I would like to be on record because it is something that is very bad. Why should we delay to pay people who deserve to be paid? The Government of South Sudan had made it very clear and they even sent a list here. The business of the minister and Government of Uganda was only to verify and proceed with the payment. Unfortunately, they have not done so. Instead, they have decided to drag their feet because they know that some of them are going to benefit out of this confusion. 

That is why those people who deserve to be paid - for example, there are so many consultants who were not paid. There are those people who supplied - the small businessmen - who have been ignored. They must be included so that they are paid their money.

As Parliament, we do not need to sugar-coat things. These are some of the things that are embarrassing us as a country. It is an abuse to Uganda. The motto of Uganda says, “For God and my Country.” Where is God in the – (Member timed out.) 

The Speaker: Conclude.

Mr Abala: Where is God in that payment? That is why I would like to implore the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to remember that the great God in heaven who created you in His own image is embarrassed because of what you people are doing in that ministry. The most important thing is to have these people paid. That is the only way in which we, as Ugandans, shall be happy.

Finally, I would like to add that the mere fact that –(Member timed out.)

6.57
Mr moses nagwomu (NRM, Bunyole East County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to register my disappointment, especially when it comes to the issue of Ernst & Young. I would like to thank hon. Nankabirwa for the report at that time. I remember that I did not agree with that report initially but at the end of the day, I had to agree.

First, Ernst & Young being given Shs 2 billion to go and do verification means they are going to go to South Sudan but this information was already provided by the committee. (Interjections)- South Sudan provided the information; you said this and it is there.

Secondly, Ernst & Young is to go to the Automated System for Customs Data (ASYCUDA) of Uganda Revenue Authority where they will have to look at the customs procedure codes to see all these businessmen and which items were being exported. They will look at all of them - (Interjections) - All those are URA experts. We were there –(Interruption) 

MR BAGOOLE: Thank you very much, hon. Nagwomu, for giving way. I would like to thank all the Members who have been contributing to this. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Nagwomu was referring to me as one of the experts because I worked with ASYCUDA. Besides that, I used to hate Keith Muhakanizi, the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury (PS/ST). In accounts, just like in law, there are principles that govern paying out money from the Government coffers. I do not want to drag this House to history but I want to remind my good friend - this information goes directly to hon. Bahati and the honourable Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. 

Sometime ago, Mr Muhakanizi requested you and all those teams that were claiming to be paid to produce some documents. That is the only information I would like to give this House, Madam Speaker. Both the ministry team and the traders who were claiming for the money did not provide the documents. How do you want the PS/ST to pay out the money on behalf of South Sudan when the documents are not there? Thank you very much.

MR NAGWOMU: Thank you for the information. What I would like to put to this House is that the expenditure to Ernst & Young is not called for. I would like to thank you for that information. 

There is a saying that a rich man amongst the poor is a poor man. If the business community of Uganda is not paid, then the whole general population of Uganda is poor. The trickledown theory of money circulation or supply will not be felt. 

Honourable minister, it is good that hon. Cecilia Ogwal – 

THE SPEAKER: Just a minute. I understand hon. Bagoole has just returned from Nairobi; is it true? Can you get out of this room and go for quarantine, please. 

MR NAGWOMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like my brother, hon. Othieno said, the mother who knows the real information about the child is the Commissioner-General of Uganda Revenue Authority. She provided the information because all that information is within the system.

I can also inform this House – 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude. 

MR NAGWOMU: The other thing is that from day one, when they were qualifying all these businesspeople, I wanted to know which items were being exported because there is an element of duty drawback; you export local manufactured goods to a country and you come and claim the duty. The country is losing that money; so you end up paying another person because he even recovered some money somewhere. We needed to know all that information. 

We also needed to know who executed the bond in force. When you are exporting, you execute a bond in force so that the insurance can also cover you. Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the opportunity. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, can you tell us why you have not paid?

7.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, this issue has been here for quite some time. The House has debated this issue, I think for four years now, and we were making progress on this matter. 

The issue was that the committee was set, as you have heard. Parliament made a resolution and even appropriated money - Shs 76 billion - against a number of companies. Parliament also said, go ahead and verify for others. I think the issue that we are asking ourselves, without opening the debate again, is: what are you doing to pay the Shs. 76 billion and implement the resolution of Parliament?

Madam Speaker, given the information and the way people are debating, I really wanted to request you, either on a personal level or whatever, to call the head of the Treasury, who is hon. Matia Kasaija, to come and answer that question. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Enough has been said on this matter; what value are we adding? Honourable members, last week, when the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development came, he told me he wanted to be the one to answer this question and then he left. Today, I do not know why he left.  

7.07
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, I am very happy with what hon. Bahati has said because just last week, two people, one was from Lango and the other from Acholi – there is a woman who kept coming to me all the time. I asked hon. Bahati why he lets people to live like slaves in their own country. Hon. Bahati told me that if this thing comes to Parliament, we should ask the minister. That means he cannot answer that question. 

Let the minister come answer this question. The minister has made our people slaves. They are not free. They are now waiting for the President to answer them. Whenever the President goes anywhere, for example when he goes to the north, people must dress up in yellow to try and look for him to try and answer these questions. Why don’t you ministers work? Thank you. 

7.08
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I stand here to move a motion. However, before I do that, I think it is very important that Parliament should record that although the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development appointed Ernst & Young to verify the traders, the same ministry, or some persons involved in the exercise through the traders, petitioned court to leave the mighty 10 out of the verification exercise. That is the information, which you must keep and refer to later. 

However, for now, Madam Speaker, we as an institution of Parliament, we cannot deal with Muhakanizi, the Secretary to the Treasury, directly. We have an authority and mandate and we had passed a resolution on 3 April 2018. Our Clerk wrote to the minister to implement our resolution and that letter was dated 2 May 2018. 

Madam Speaker, I stand here to move that this Parliament maintain the position that was passed in our earlier resolution, which demands that the 23 companies be added to the 10.

I further move that the company that was recommended for further investigation, Aponye and others, be investigated. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Was that part of the resolution? No, let us reaffirm our resolution; we do not add new things. We reaffirm our original resolution and demand that the Government complies with that resolution. That is where we are.

MS OGWAL: I beg to move.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I would like to agree with the affirmation but then there are questions that we had put to hon. Bahati, which he has asked your chair to ask the minister to come back here and explain. Therefore, we beg that you give express instructions that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Kasaija, comes to this House tomorrow to answer to those questions.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we agree to reaffirm our resolution of 2018; I think that one is a given. 

Concerning the timeline for the minister, I had called this meeting for two reasons. One, to inform you about the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) of the Parliament from now on, and also to advise on how to deal with the issues of the coronavirus, including the taskforce and so on.

I had hoped that the Government would bring the budget on Thursday but I have no information about that. I had also hoped that the Leader of the Opposition would present her alternative proposals on Thursday but she is not ready. Therefore, to that extent, we shall meet again on Tuesday. I expect you to bring the budget on Tuesday and the alternative statement. Therefore, there will be no plenary between now and Tuesday. However, let hon. Okupa raise something small before we leave, so that we can leave you to go work from home.

7.12
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter I am raising is connected to the issue of hon. Olanya. Please, can we listen to one another.

This is a matter relating to Uganda’s failure to cooperate with the Financial Action Task Force (FATF). Madam Speaker, Uganda is one of those countries that have been listed as having failed to comply with the Financial Action Task Force. Uganda has been named among Iran, Pakistan, Ghana, Yemen, Panama, Syria, Cambodia, Bahamas, Botswana, Mongolia, Zimbabwe, Iceland, Albania, Myanmar, Barbados, Jamaica, Nicaragua, and Mauritius. 

The failure of Uganda to follow the guidelines has affected Ugandans living outside the country. At this time of the coronavirus crisis, we have Ugandans under the Ugandan community in South Korea and they have been denied the opportunity to remit money back home to help their families.

On 20 March 2020, a one Mr Desire Mawa, with telephone number +821054206431, did communicate to his Excellency the Ambassador of Uganda to Japan that covers the area, raising this complaint. In his letter to the ambassador, he states thus:

“I am writing to bring it to your attention that banks in South Korea no longer allow Ugandan passport holders from sending money through bank to bank, Western Union and other remittances and services. 

They argue that the Government of Uganda is no complying with the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) policies and is thus listed as a non-cooperative country. Please, see the attached document from the bank…” - Madam Speaker, I will read that shortly.

“…The banks are requesting Ugandans to provide their sources of income proof such as employment letters and tax records but they still do not allow those who provide them to send money to Uganda and other countries.

They started this policy last month on 20 February when Uganda was expelled for non-compliance.

We humbly request our Government’s intervention, otherwise this will have a big impact on our families back home since they depend on us financially. Thank you.”  It is signed.

Madam Speaker, after this notice from FATF about the non-cooperative countries, this is what they issued to the Ugandans living in South Korea:
“We regret to inform you that a strict rule would apply to banking transactions of citizens of FATF non-cooperative countries of which Uganda has been named.

An individual or a company from a FATF non-cooperative country should explain the purpose of the transaction by submitting the authorised document. The bank will verify the purpose of the transaction, which might take more than a day. 

The Financial Action Task Force is an inter-governmental body established in 1989 by the ministers of the member countries.”

Madam Speaker, Uganda has failed and this has affected Ugandans living in the Diaspora. At this time, they are now having a challenge. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should explain because we did pass the law on the Financial Intelligence Authority and on money laundering and I think the minister even brought an amendment. What is that that Uganda has failed to do, to the extent that now we are categorized among the non-cooperative countries, thus affecting the remittances to this country.

THE SPEAKER: I hope we shall get some answers because this House cooperated; you brought an amendment, we passed it in record time and we thought we had finished.

7.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I request that we give that information on Tuesday because this is getting us by surprise and we have been doing very well. It has not been brought to our attention, at least at a political level, that we have been suspended because of anything. So, we will give information to the House on Tuesday. 

Also, tomorrow I can give bilateral communication to hon. Elijah Okupa and those affected people.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will come personally to answer the issue that concerns South Sudan on Tuesday. There was a final matter that hon. Agaba wanted to raise.

MR AGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just for the record, I know that the Hansard, which is the record of our discussions, is accessed by many people for now and for the future. 

Just referring a little back to the discussion we had about South Sudan compensation, the Leader of the Opposition in her statement made an allegation that may not be easily verifiable. The allegation refers to a personal discussion between the honourable minister Bahati and her, in which hon. Bahati made some indications to her that when this question comes up again, it should be referred to the senior minister. 

It has insinuations of a working relationship of two colleagues from the same ministry and we have different ways in which we run the ministries. I rise to plead with you that that particular part of the discussion should be expunged from the Hansard because it is not easily verifiable and it cannot be confirmed –(Interjection)– and it includes a personal discussion between the Leader of the Opposition and hon. Bahati.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you need not to worry. Last week, the minister himself told me that he wanted to be present to make that statement. He told me in the House and it is not a secret. 

MR AGABA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I just wanted to clear this issue. It is true that the Leader of the Opposition asked me about these issues of South Sudan and I told her that the minister is here to answer those questions. He had said he was coming to answer that question personally. So, there is nothing to do with a working relationship but there is everything to do with answering the questions of Members of Parliament here. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us just lay two papers on the Table.

LAYING OF PAPERS

7.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority Annual Performance Report, for the year 2018/2019.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back.

7.23
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the delegation to the 75th African Parliamentary Union Executive Committee Meeting and the 42nd Conference of the Parliamentary Union held in Djibouti from 25-29 November 2019. The delegation comprised of:

    1. The Rt. Hon. Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga – Leader of delegation
    2. Hon. Sarah Nakawunde – Member
    3. Hon. Emmanuel Ongiertho – Member
    4. Hon. Hellen Kahunde – Member
    5. Hon. Geoffrey Dhamuzungu – Member
    6. Hon. James Baba – Member.

I beg to lay, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You could have given a brief highlight.

MR JAMES BABA:  Madam Speaker, the conference adopted three important resolutions:
    1. The importance of young people’s contribution to the promotion of democracy, peace and security, and the rule of law in African countries.
    2. Promotion of a diversified economy and the local processing of basic commodities for employment of women and the youth. For your information, this was the contribution of the Ugandan delegation to the conference agenda.
    3. The role of parliaments in reducing maternal and neonatal mortality rates in Africa.

By a proclamation, the conference passed a declaration on the resolution of the European Union on Algeria, among others, condemning the interference of the European Parliament in the internal affairs of Algeria. 

There was also the adoption of the memorandum of understanding between the Shura Council of Qatar and the African Parliamentary Union and pending further consultations, how the two parliaments can work together.

Finally, on the sidelines, the Rt Hon. Speaker held a meeting with a delegation of Qatar and discussed areas of cooperation between the Parliament of Uganda and the Parliament of Qatar.

Madam Speaker, I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Baba. Honourable members, the information therein can be used in your arguments and contributions at different workshops.

Honourable members, as we indicated, we shall minimise contact. Therefore, all outstanding issues will be handled on Tuesday. I hope the agencies which we have identified will be ready for the budget. The alternative statements and any other thing that will be pending will be handled on Tuesday. Plenary is adjourned until then. You can work from home, and make sure that you start work on the policy statements. 

House adjourned to Tuesday next week at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.27 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 31 March 2020 at 2.00 p.m.) 

