Wednesday, 2 March 2022

Parliament met at 2.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you very much, for coming for today’s session and for the commitment you have for your country and voters. Thank you for coming and working for our nation. 

I have a polite reminder from the Clerk’s Office. This is a reminder that all ordinary, official and diplomatic machine-readable passports will no longer be valid for international travel after 2nd April. You are, therefore, urged to replace the old readable ones with the new international East African e-passports. 

This applies to all categories above: that is the diplomatic, the ordinary and then officials. Please get in touch with protocol section in Room 114, South Wing if you have not made any transition and have your passports changed. We do not want to get any embarrassment that a Member of Parliament was confiscated somewhere. Yesterday, I was telling somebody, “Can we travel?” But then the Member did not have a passport. 

Members, get your passports changed for convenience. I would like to thank you very much. We can have matters of national importance. Hon. Odur?

Before Hon. Odur comes on board, the Minister of Local Government has requested me to have a one-day session with all Members of Parliament and we discuss issues of Parish Development Model. Isn’t that good for you to share your ideas? We will put a tent outside and we shall have a whole day of discussion. That is an inclusion in the process. Hon. Odur?

2.11
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is an urgent matter under rule 49 and I thank you for admitting it. 

The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has a project called the “Agriculture Cluster Development Project”, which is being implemented in a number of selected districts, including Lira District, where I come from. This project has contracted a number of farmers to supply them with inputs specifically the cassava cuttings, which happened last year. But up to date, the ministry has not paid the farmers who supplied these cassava cuttings. 

The farmers come from Lira, Alebtong, Dokolo and Kaberamaido districts. I have also learnt that the same has happened in other parts of the country. These farmers have children who go to school. Some of them fell sick and some lives have been lost because they cannot afford treatment, and their basic needs require money. They fulfilled their obligation to supply, but the ministry has not paid. It is not that the ministry does not have money, this project is funded by the World Bank, and money is lying idle at the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

My prayer is that, Madam Speaker, you require the minister responsible for agriculture to expeditiously process the payments so that these farmers get their money. However, in the alternative without prejudice to my first prayer, I also ask you to direct the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to interest themselves in what is happening to this project. 

Otherwise, the country stands to lose the money, which is given to us and is not being used. I will give my brother, Hon. Silwany, to provide information.

MR SILWANY: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give this honourable House is that as we talk today, most of the projects in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) have stalled. The ministry has money, but implementation is not being done and nothing is going on. I think there is a lot of bureaucracy that has increased in this ministry either by the technical people or where, but there are projects that are not moving and everything is at a standstill. 

That is the information I wanted to give to the honourable member that it is not only that project, but many other projects under MAAIF are actually stuck. We need an urgent attention of this House.

MR ODUR: Thank you for that information –(Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, colleague. Madam Speaker, two or three weeks ago, we interfaced with the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. The challenge in the ministry is that the current permanent secretary is the former commandant of Kyankwanzi. 

It is becoming hard for the minister to push the General.  When we were interfacing with the committee, the Permanent Secretary was clear; he said, “They are pushing me to pay, but I have to take my time and understand some of these things, because it seems some people supplied ‘air’”. Now, by the time the permanent secretary proves whether some people supplied “air” or not, it may be three years. 

That is the challenge in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. It may require another voice beyond the minister coming because the minister is going to come here. 

Hon. Fred Kyakulaga   was there and he will come. He will give the same story which the ministers have always given. However, if we have to push this, Madam Speaker, it will require another voice beyond there.

MR ODUR: Thank you, Hon. Kibalya. Madam Speaker, in summary, I implore you to use your authority to prevail over the ministry because these farmers are really suffering and they need to access their money. They have done their part and they can be verified. I will not come back, but you conclude with your information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you done with your prayers? Yes, Hon. Rose Obigah?

MS OBIGAH: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Recently, we got maize seeds from NAADS. Previously, NAADS gave us 3,000 kilogrammes; but it is very painful that from 3,000 kilogrammes NAADS has now come down to 2,000 kilogrammes. Yet the 3,000 kilogrammes for us as Members of Parliament was very difficult to give out. I visited NAADS office and found out that the Executive Director is totally suffocated. 

Unless this Parliament takes an initiative to see what is happening in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries – it is more than we can swallow. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as it is said, agriculture is the backbone of Uganda’s economy. Whatever is being said is failing. There is under-absorption of funds. Hon. Jim Muhwezi, are you the Chair of the House now? Can you keep quiet? 

The under-absorption in the Ministry of Agriculture is affecting the entire country. The rigidity that is in the ministry is affecting the country. The Permanent Secretaries should stop undermining our ministers. It is the minister who knows what is required at the grassroots. Failure to pay the people who supply the cassava cuttings is a problem. What happens if these people go to court? 

Minister of Agriculture, we need a comprehensive report because I also got a petition from Busoga on the same. We need a comprehensive report on what is happening with the payments. We also want to understand what the reason for giving someone 2,000 kilogrammes is; a woman who is managing a constituency yet you are keeping money in an account and you are not spending it. 

The budget committee should not approve the Ministry Of Agriculture’s budget until they absorb their money. How can you come and ask for a supplementary budget when you have failed to absorb what you have? That is the Ministry of Agriculture for you. 

Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, I would like you to handle this issue of the under-absorption, non-payment of suppliers and the rationing of the maize seeds. Who tells you the whole country wants maize? We do not want maize. 

They promised us hoes here, but the hoes have not arrived yet, but there is money on the account; let them give us hoes. I need that response in one week’s time, honourable minister.

MS HELLEN ADOA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. We shall bring the report to the House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. In the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from the Worship House of Nansana. They include:

    1. Pastor Wilson Bugembe, the leader of the delegation. Pastor, you are very welcome to the Parliament of Uganda. He says we need a miracle in this House. This House is also a house of worship. 

    2. Nalule Matovu.

    3. Alice Matama.

    4. Brenda Muyamba.

You are all most welcome. This is the Parliament of Uganda and it is your Parliament. It is a very holy Parliament, but please, continue praying for us. (Applause)

2.20
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am concerned about the increase of fake products on the market. With an estimated Shs 41 trillion of the budget, about Shs 6 trillion is going to be lost in substandard products and counterfeits, if this is not stopped. 

This is also a threat to intellectual property. It jeopardises innovation, undermines legitimate business and is a risk to consumer health and safety. Of course given the weak regulatory standards and mechanisms and high moral decadence and corruption, this culture has continued to grow. 

Whereas the Uganda National Bureau of Standards is implementing a series of guidelines known as pre-export verification and conformity standards, most companies under this programme do not have presence in countries where these products come from. 

Subsequently, they just issue fake certificates. You find that they have a certificate of conformity to standards, but they have substandard products. 

Also, the PPDA process of awarding these contracts is marred by corruption. 

My prayers are:

    1. That there is need, by this Parliament, to investigate the capacity of all the contracted companies and how effective they are in providing this service of giving out these certificates of conformity. 

    2. That the relevant committee of Parliament should investigate the procurement procedure for these companies by UNBS. 

I pray so, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Committee on Tourism and Trade, please take the initiative to investigate this and report to the House. 

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, I thank you and I thank the honourable colleague for the information that he has given the House. 

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right, honourable colleague, for you to lay these documents on the Table so that we talk from an informed point of view?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what the committee is going to do. Why are you taking work away from the committee? It is a concern and the committee is going to look at that. 

Hon. Odia, you are most welcome today. (Laughter)

2.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable member must be the lucky one to be welcomed by the Speaker in the House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is coming to the House for the first time. That is why.

MR BAHATI: On the issue of counterfeit goods on the market, we will also – as the committee looks at the issues raised by Hon. Mwijukye – we will be coming to the House to make a statement on the specific issues that he has raised, but also to inform the House that the ministry is in advanced stages of bringing to the House the counter –(Interruption)

MS AISHA KABANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, may I know whether in the same way we shall have the opportunity to know about the counterfeit COVID-19 vaccine that was reported by State House operatives, which was discovered somewhere in a health centre in Kabowa?

From that time, we have not heard anything. It was reported to be a fake vaccine administered to people in a government health centre. The proof was that the papers were losing colour yet ordinarily they should not. 

There has been total silence from Government. Shall we also have the opportunity to get information about it? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will want that from the Minister of Health. For now, let us get this from the Minister of State for Trade, Industry and Cooperatives.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I wanted to give the House is that we are working out the Counterfeit and Consumer Protection Bill, which we will bring to the House in a few months from now. This Bill will go a long way to protect consumers and ensure that the goods we produce in this country and those that are imported are standard and meet the standard humans can consume. As the committee does its work, we will be coming up with a Bill to strengthen the regulation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, when shall we have the Bill in the House?

MR BAHATI: We will require two months. Thank you.

MS PACUTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As much as I appreciate the minister initiating the process of bringing a Bill, in the meantime, how do we protect consumers?  When you go to Kikuubo or some shops in the suburbs of Kampala, a seller will boldly ask you - one time, I wanted to buy a padlock and they asked me whether I wanted a genuine or a fake one. I asked them:  “give me both. I am actually going to buy more than one.” Can you imagine I could not tell, which of the two was fake or genuine? A Bill may take us about one or three months. In the meantime, how do we protect Ugandans? As a country, we are losing a lot of revenue because we are encouraging counterfeits.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I do not want you to be misled that there is a Bill coming. It is a private Member bringing a Bill on consumer protection. Government has not taken any initiative to bring this Bill.

2.30
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA    (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, Minister Bahati should be very open to this House because in the 10th Parliament, there was a Bill on counterfeit goods that Cabinet withdrew on the argument that there were already existing laws to deal with counterfeits. We protested but they did not listen.

I am surprised that now the honourable minister says there is an intended Bill; it is not there. Our argument at that time and I hope it is addressed this time was that you cannot deal with counterfeits in different legislations. We urged that it was necessary to have one uniform legislation dealing with counterfeits across board but they rejected our advice.

The Member who is asking, “What happens to Ugandans at this point in time?” -  there is a weak legal regime, which the minister refused to address at that time. This is why we are suffering. In fact, this is why the honourable minister of trade on our side is raising a substantive matter. I hope the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry and the private Member come very quickly so that we address the gap. Otherwise, I am not sure that the Government is determined to bring another law because they withdrew what they brought.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I had already made a ruling that this should go to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry because we want to understand how a consumer is protected, what do we do with these counterfeit products and when do we have the law to do that? All you need to do is to give your information to the committee and I have given them two weeks.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, hon. Basalirwa said I needed to be open to the House and indeed, I am open. I do not know whether he knows everything in Government, but I want to tell him that we are working on the consumer protection Bill. Hon. Basalirwa, I do not know whether you know everything. 

The second point is what hon. Pacuto raised that in the meantime, what are we doing as we prepare the Bill?  There are a number of steps we are undertaking to protect the consumer.

First, we have the Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS), which is trying to ensure that the standards are captured at the source of production or importation. The second is that when these products go into the market, some of them are fake and we normally do enforcement and sampling of these products. We have also continued to educate the public to not buy anything that does not possess a sign of UNBS.

We are also moving ahead to put Q-Marks, where you can have a product on shelf and use your iPhone where necessary to detect whether the sign of UNBS is correct or not. Those are some of the steps we are taking. Otherwise, we shall inform the committee of the steps we are taking as they investigate the matter. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, all you have said is what I expect you to take to the committee.

MS OSORU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the effort the minister is making here. However, I would like to give him information. In Kikuubo, the fake products we are talking about today include products of the Uganda Breweries Limited (UBL) and UBL is our own company. Madam Speaker, UBL has fake products such as Uganda Waragi, Jack Daniel’s. These are found in Kikuubo.

When UNBS goes to inspect fake products on the market, they fine customers who have these fake products, confiscate them without compensation because these people are buyers who get fake products from their suppliers. Now, we are wondering: where do these fake products come from? 

Honourable minister, the information is that our own Uganda Waragi has a fake product and such kind of things will kill our country. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She is speaking from authority because she is a businesswoman who deals in waragi. (Applause)

2.34
MR DICKSON KATESHUMBWA (NRM, Sheema Municipality, Sheema): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue of counterfeit and fake goods on the market is not new. This House has talked about it several times. Indeed, there is an existing law - the East African Community Customs Management Act that prohibits counterfeit of all forms. What is failing us is implementation as usual.

We have got companies, which were contracted to undertake pre-shipment inspection. What we expect the Government to do is to give us a performance report. Since we started contracting these companies, how has the situation changed? Madam Speaker, what we are seeing on the market is that despite the expenditure that has been made over the years, these products continue to come and they come with certificates. So, what is the performance of these companies and why do we need to get foreign companies to do this job? Why don’t we equip UNBS and strengthen them to undertake this mandate since we are talking of import substitution and trying to empower Ugandans? 

Honourable minister, we are falling short of implementation. Therefore, we need a comprehensive performance assessment of what happened over the last ten years since these companies have been performing this pre-shipment inspection. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, we need a report in two weeks’ time to that effect, with a thorough analysis of what is happening.

MS AISHA KABANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have informed this House – and we have all heard on radios – that there are counterfeit vaccines. We know how important people’s lives are and the effect of the counterfeit vaccines in circulation.

Is it not procedurally right, Madam Speaker, that you equally direct the Minister of Health to give us a report on the fake vaccines that were reportedly in circulation and what they did about them? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Aisha, I thought I had made a directive. I said the Minister of Health must handle that – and that is a directive.

2.37
DR NOAH MUSA (Independent, Koboko North County, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise, under rule 49, to raise a matter of urgent national importance, regarding the training or phasing out of the comprehensive nurse cadre.

Madam Speaker, the comprehensive enrolled nurse cadre was introduced in the country in 1993/1994, at a time when we had a very critical shortage of human resource for health. This particular cadre is trained in multiple skills of nursing.

However, there have been challenges in this cadre getting recruited in the public service of this country and there were debates to phase it out. This year, the Ministry of Education and Sports took a decision to phase out comprehensive nurse training, both at certificate and diploma levels.

According to the Commissioner of Business, Technical and Vocational Education Training in the Ministry of Education and Sports, Dr Safina Musenne, employers find the course irrelevant and the Ministry of Education and Sports also found the course redundant, given that the business, technical and vocational education is now world or work-driven. Therefore, no new candidates will be recruited for the training of comprehensive nurse, effective this academic year.

Madam Speaker, unfortunately, training schools continue to admit students for the course, especially at diploma level. I have the Government admission list with me, honourable colleagues, in which Soroti School of Comprehensive Nursing has admitted about 160 students to do a diploma in comprehensive nursing. I also have an admission list for Masaka School of Comprehensive Nursing, where 80 students have been admitted to pursue this course. 

I have a copy of an admission letter, which reads, in part: “The course will commence on a date that will be announced, after clearance from the Ministry of Education and Sports…”

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Education Sports seems to be going against its own announcement of phasing out this course and this may be due to the pressure from the training schools, yet we know these Ugandans will not be able to get employment. Soon, public service will go ahead and restructure and they will not be employed.

Madam Speaker, I would like to lay this on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are you laying on the Table? 

DR MUSA: The admissions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No! What are you laying? We do not just receive papers like that.

DR MUSA: Okay. Thank you. So, my prayers are:

    1. Ministry of Education and Sports needs to clarify why they should go ahead and allow nursing training schools to go ahead and train these cadres, when actually they have made pronouncements that the course has been phased out.

    2. Ministry of Education and Sports needs to direct these training institutions to give these students alternative courses that match their scores at A’ Level and courses that are relevant to our world of work.

    3. Ministry of Education and Sports, together with Ministry of Health, need to develop an abridged course for all those who trained in comprehensive nursing because these nurses will have to go back to school to train again because they are not going to fit in nursing or midwifery. Therefore, it is important to design an abridged course for them to specialise either in nursing or midwifery. 

Thank you. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. What was that you were laying on the Table?

DR MUSA: The admission lists.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where did it come from?

DR MUSA: I got this from the Ministry of Education and Sports’ website.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it authenticated? (Laughter)

DR MUSA: Yes, from Ministry of Education and Sports’ website.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it signed and stamped? You know, we do not go on a fishing expedition – fishing for documents. So, if it is not authenticated, then we will require that information from the minister.

DR MUSA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Education and Sports, the issue is:  why are you phasing out these courses? What is the mischief that you are trying to cure?

2.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Indeed, it is true that the human capital development for health is handled by the Ministry of Education and Sports – the training for all categories of health workers.

This particular course – comprehensive nursing – which my colleague talked about, indeed, started some years back –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What does a comprehensive nurse do?

DR MORIKU: They handle both the nursing and midwifery part, but not in a comprehensive manner. The course for nursing takes two-and-a-half years and the course for midwifery equally takes two-and-a-half years. This is at certificate level in a nursing and midwifery school. However, comprehensive nursing training handles the two within the same period. Eventually, it was found out that this does not provide the right competence, skills –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a clarification.

MS RUTH LEMATIA: A comprehensive nurse training does not only have –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She is a nurse, by the way. You hear from her.

MS RUTH LEMATIA: The comprehensive nursing training does not only address midwifery and nursing. It, as well, has community health, pediatrics and psychiatry. Each of these courses, if addressed one by one, takes two-and-a-half years. So, all of them have been put together and that is why it has been discovered that the midwifery part, which is the most essential, is lacking out of the comprehensive training. I guess that is why the Ministry of Education and Sports had to stop the course. Thank you.

DR MORIKU: Madam Speaker, we cannot go into the nitty-gritty of the teaching like pediatrics, public health and other departments. That is why I summarised it as “nursing and midwifery”. However, just like my colleague said, there are details which we cannot exhaust here, but should there be need, we can explain in detail.

In summary, Madam Speaker, this is being phased out such that we continue with only nursing and midwifery separately –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does nursing bring all the components of midwifery?

DR MORIKU: Nursing is nursing – you provide nursing. With midwifery, you deal with deliveries, antenatal care, immunisation, specialised maternal delivery and the baby.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, what are you doing now with people who were trained before?

DR MORIKU: So, people who are being trained normally go back to study to bridge that gap that they missed in midwifery before some of them are fully recruited into the public service. Even then, the scheme of service had not captured that category. What we are now doing is to phase off –(Interruption)

MS AVUR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for asking one of the questions to which I wanted to get clarification, from the minister. We already have those that have been purportedly trained – because my understanding is that they are half baked - and have been deployed in various health centers/facilities in this country, but at the risk of exposing Ugandans especially mothers, to danger. And so, the question is: what are you going to do with them? 

The minister has partly said that they are going to be retrained. I would like the minister to inform this House and the country at whose cost this will be done. Further, tell this Parliament how many of such half-baked nurses are deployed in our facilities where are they? 

And as you weed them out, what happens to the mothers who are now going to different health facilities, labouring now, or going to labour next month? Or going to - I mean, what are we doing? 

MR MUSILA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the same vein, and this is to the honourable minister, some of us are even victims rather than our children. But the most important issue I would like to raise - and the minister should provide an answer to the country - is the hullabaloo at the Nurses’ Council, especially when it comes to licensing these younger people. 

My own children had to miss out on the adverts because it takes about one or so years to get licensed. 

The next issue, which the minister should answer, concerns the male midwives - and I have one around - I have been informed that they have now been phased out. Certainly, it is quite very unique to have a male midwife whom they have phased off. However, what do we with those already trained? I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, there is no problem having a male midwife because we also have male gynecologists. Anyway, we may not come to an end on this. First of all, who approved the abolition of the courses? How was it approved? Did it come to this House? Honourable Minister, did it come to the House?

DR MORIKU: Madam Speaker, thank you so much. With your permission, I could just respond to a few questions and if allowed, I can bring just a small two-page paper indicating the brief genesis and the way forward. Madam Speaker, allow me to say that the use of the phrase “half-baked human personnel in health facilities” by my colleague is bad language. What we say -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You mean for all those years we have been half-baked? 

DR MORIKU: No, no!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And remember, those are the midwives that have been delivering our mothers.

DR MORIKU: We don't use such language.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I am referring this matter to the Committee on Health. Go provide your information to the committee because they know more about what these midwives have done over the years.

DR MORIKU: Thank you, and much obliged. My ministry trains, but the service -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your ministry will work with the Ministry of Health. 

2.52
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise under rule 49(1) to speak to a matter of national importance regarding the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE), which others called the senior citizens grants for older persons, whose arrears now have eight months, and Government does not seem to care about it. 

Madam speaker during the fourth quarter of the Financial Year 2020/2021, 270,203 older persons were not paid due to a shortage of funds. This shortage came from the government side. The development partners -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, it is free sitting. If you don't have where to sit, kindly cross to this side.

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Speaker, the shortage came from the government side because the development partners did their part and as a result, Shs 36.2 billion arrears was accumulated. 

At the passing of this current budget, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development gave assurance to this august House that they would come up with a supplementary budget to clear these arrears. However, this has not come to pass. 

Madam Speaker, the older persons commit this money to their health, to the welfare of the orphaned and vulnerable children that they live with and to their nutrition and food. And so, spending eight months without getting this money has made their children miss school, for lack of scholastic materials and other welfare materials. 

Madam Speaker, the older persons’ health, expensive as you all know – they have now failed now to take care of their health. And the culture of arrears and inconsistent and inadequate releases continues to hamper the implementation of SAGE. This practice even poses a bigger risk in case the development partners withdraw this funding for this project in June this year.

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development proposed, in the Budget Framework Paper, that they would push this Shs 36.2 billion to the next financial year as domestic arrears. However, as we talk, the budget call circular indicates this has been dropped.

Are we mocking the older persons? Are we true to the older persons? I will take the information, Madam Speaker before I present my prayers –(Interruption)

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that it is ironic that a Government led by older people can fail to take care of older persons. The President is an older person; the prime ministers are older persons too and all these segments of society. Government is actually failing to take care of their own. 

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you very much, Hon. Basalirwa, for that piece of information. Madam Speaker, these older persons are not claiming a favour; they are claiming a right. And this particular Government, right from their constitution, NDP and the NRM manifesto and all the international obligations has signed into taking care of the welfare of not only the vulnerable persons, but the older persons too. 

Madam Speaker, my prayer is for the House to task the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Ministry of Finance to bring a supplementary budget before the close of this financial year, because the older persons have already waited for eight months; you can't tell them to wait any longer. They cannot wait for domestic arrears, which even the budget call circular has not indicated. 

I would like to plead with this honourable Parliament, not to consider any more supplementary budget this financial year, if it does not carry the Shs 36.2 billion for SAGE. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, much as we talk about supplementary budgets, we passed a supplementary budget here. To date, most institutions have not got paid from that supplementary budget. Therefore, why should we continue passing supplementary budgets, yet, institutions are not getting paid? You brought a supplementary budget two, three, four - which one are we going for? Which one will be paid? You are going to bring another tomorrow. 

MR KATESHUMBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The issue you are raising is a matter of concern. I sit on the Budget Committee and I think the issue we are facing is the undermining of the budget process through releases that are discriminatory. When we pass the budget and it is according to the set priorities, we expect the Ministry of Finance, when they are releasing the money, to be consistent.

If you talk about the supplementary budget that was passed - I will give an example of REA. We approved the transfer of the vote of REA to the Ministry of Energy. 

We know that in our constituencies, we have a lot of projects that were being done by REA. One of the issues we asked the ministries to guarantee us was whether the service delivery - or whether there would be continuity of the projects that were being done. 

To our shock, first of all, the budget by REA, the Shs 128 billion that was passed by this Parliament was suppressed to Shs 76 billion. Only Shs 40 billion was released. As a result, all the Members of Parliament know what is happening in our constituencies - the projects are stalled, the poles are standing and there is no activity taking place. 

Therefore, we are asking ourselves - the Ministry of Finance should clarify - what criteria do you use to release money? What we are seeing is that the actions of the ministry are violating section 12 of the Budget Act and Section 25 of the Public Finance Management Act. We need consistency. (Interruption) I take the information.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Katesh, you are becoming the Speaker. (Laughter)
 
MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank hon. Kateshumbwa for giving way. I have about three questions to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. It is not lawful under the laws governing our country to pass a supplementary schedule and then, you come with another without supplying the first one. We have seen this happen in this Parliament several times. You pass then agencies keep complaining. We do not get any feedback. Even in the previous Parliament, I was sitting on the Budget Committee and the same thing was happening. 

The information I want to give hon. Kateshumbwa is that it has been happening and it is something that this Parliament must come out strongly to fight and resist because we cannot supply air. If we supply the budget, the agencies that you have given the budget to must get the money to implement the activities of our voters who are yearning and waiting for services.

MR KATESHUMBWA: Thank you very much for the information. I want to conclude on this point, Madam Speaker, that we need –(Interjection)– I will take it before I finish. Even the suppressions by Government need to come to the House. If you suppress the budget that was approved by the House, you need to come back to the House and tell us which priorities you have dropped. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The 40 per cent suppressions?

MR KATESHUMBWA: Yes. If we continue with this, we are exposed in our constituencies. If the activities that were ongoing for which Parliament has released money, then the money is taken somewhere else, what should we tell our constituents? 

Therefore, we want the Ministry to be consistent with the implementation of the budget and not undermine Parliament when it comes to the appropriation mandate. I take the information.

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Kateshumbwa for giving way. Hon. Kateshumbwa talked about REA. Currently, a bigger number of people who are supposed to receive Yaka metres have not received them for the last four or five years. Very many Ugandans are stuck. Therefore, until we follow up such programmes – we had the Lubowa project. We gave people a whooping Shs 1.4 trillion, but there is nothing to show on the ground for the Lubowa Specialised Hospital. 

Madam Speaker, the information I wanted to give hon. Kateshumbwa is that we have always given out the money, but who follows it up? It is all eaten. Thank you. 

3.02
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Firstly, the mover of this matter of national importance requests Government to come here with a supplementary budget to fund SAGE. This was not an unfunded priority. It was fully funded and so, there is no need to come here with a supplementary to fund it. Government should only make good of the funds that were appropriated. Therefore, failure to execute the budget is a failure on behalf of Government. I would like to just correct you that we should demand the release of money because we passed funds for SAGE. 

There was a big debate here on SAGE in the last Parliament as we budgeted. Hon. Musasizi was part of the Committee on Budget that approved this money – and hon. Bahati. Please, simply go and pay the elderly. To not pay people who are 70 to 80 years is indecent and speaks badly of Government. I do not want to take the line of hon. Basalirwa, but it looks ugly that you do not care for your father or mother. Let us find the money. 

We are all looking bad in our constituencies as MPs. We pass around and old people say, “We are not paid.” 

The subsidiary legislation hon. Kateshumbwa is talking about is the big issue in this country. Government, the sole power to appropriate is reserved to this Parliament. That is a constitutional obligation. Only this Parliament does. Suppression of the budget had a subsidiary element of appropriation, which is an upfront on the powers of Parliament. Therefore, you cannot do subsidiary appropriation. It is illegal and inappropriate. 

Our humble appeal – one day, I read a letter written by the President of this Republic. He used these words; “Supplementary budgets are a bad act of indiscipline on behalf of Government executors of the budget. It should be stopped.”

Madam Speaker, this Parliament should find a way of stopping the character of supplementaries. The reason people are not paid is because we entertain supplementary budgets. They become the number one priority for Government to pay and they leave items that we have budgeted for. May we get a deadline on this? A mere saying that they will come here at their own discretion - can the Minister of Finance - I have a list of the current releases. 

Some agencies have now got 112 per cent release in the third quarter while we have not paid money to the elderly people. Can we get a specific date when the elderly people will be paid? Can we task the minister to make that commitment before this House? This is the only firewall for our people. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I would like to hear from the former chairman of PAC, Hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi.

3.06
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, when we go for supplementary budgets, it clearly shows that when Government brings a budget here for approval, it is lying to us. This is because a budget is the expected income and expenditure. The supplementary is basically for those unforeseeable issues like matters which arise. 

It is very dangerous to come here to say, “We need a supplementary for the SAGE - for the old people”, whom we know because initially it was supposed to be 60 years, and we adjusted it to 80 years because we wanted to accommodate those very few old people due to the resource envelope. 

The Committee on Budget is also doing us a disservice – [HON. MEMBER: “Point of Order.”]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  What is the point of order for? Under which rule do you rise? [HON. MEMBER: “COVID-19 rule.”] There is no COVID rule. Can I have a submission? You know this information is very important for you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nathan, put on your mask.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the protection. It is always important to have very good-mannered children. If you have those ill-mannered children, I do not know what you can do to them. For one to wake up and raise a point of order is very unfortunate. 

The Committee on Budget is also doing us a disservice; before they agree to see a supplementary, they should first say, “We gave you a budget; how did it perform? What is the reason why we should give you a supplementary?” However, the Committee on Budget is very fast - including my good friend, Hon. Kateshumbwa - at running to examine the budget again, which has been passed. 

It is very unfortunate that when we still had Hon. Musasizi as a Member of Parliament and the chairperson of the Committee on Finance, he was always against supplementary budgets. But now he is a chief leader of supplementary budgets. This is very unfortunate. We thought we took you to the Ministry of Finance to help us, but now you have become a problem. (Laughter)  

I think it would be very important to advise the President to look for other people because the man we gave him to help us has turned against us –(Interjection)– oh, he is a fisherman. I am sorry.  
Madam Speaker, we must follow the Constitution. Our Constitution is very clear that when Parliament passes a budget, it must be implemented as it is. If there are issues - if you want to amend anything - you must come back to Parliament and again Parliament gives you authority to do amendments. 

We even made technical allocations in the Public Finance Management Act; that you cannot go beyond five per cent of the budget line. For example, if you want to adjust money on a budget line of Shs 10 million - five per cent of Shs 10 million is Shs 50,000 - you can only be allowed up to Shs 50,000, but eventually you must come and report. But you cannot go beyond that five per cent. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, we would like to plead, first, with the chairperson of the Committee on Budget to please follow the rules. We would also like to plead with Hon. Musasizi, whom we sent to the Ministry of Finance, to kindly be better. We sent you together with Hon. Lugoloobi to be our ambassadors and assist us, but you are now becoming a – I have reserved that one for tomorrow. 

Madam Speaker, thank you very much for the opportunity. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Nandala-Mafabi.  

Hon. Musasizi, I would like you to respond to this as a former chairperson of the committee; do not speak as a minister. 

    1. We need to know when you made the suppression of the 40 per cent – what Hon. Kateshumbwa said - did you seek for an approval? 

    2. What happened to the SAGE money? Is there a problem that we need to address? Why are they not being paid? 

    3. Why are rampant supplementary gaps coming up? If the supplementaries are there, like I said before in Supplementary 001, institutions have not been paid up to now. 

You brought 002, 003 and 004 and I know 005 is coming tomorrow. So, what happens with the ones we approved before? What happened to that supply? Could you guide this House on what we should do? Minister, can you respond? You used to be his vice-chairperson. 

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the honourable colleagues for the concern they have raised. I would also like to appreciate Hon. Nandala-Mafabi for acknowledging –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Use a microphone, honourable.  
  
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, I doubt whether this microphone is not picking properly. Allow me to first of all appreciate Hon. Nandala-Mafabi for acknowledging my contribution while I was the chairperson of the Committee on Finance, and also a member of the Committee on Budget. 

It is true that I was an advocate of “no supplementary spending” to the extent possible that in 2015, we eliminated supplementary spending in the Public Finance Management Act before the amendment was introduced again. I was with Hon. Nandala-Mafabi and he knows this very well. 

However, Hon. Flavia Rwabuhoro made my work very complicated. How I wish she had identified the budget for the current year running; how much was it? How much have we been able to release? And what is the variance? It would have been easier for me - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I thought you are the custodian of the budget procedure? Why do you want the honourable member to be the one to identify it when you are the custodian of the budget?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, I am building my point. As far as I am concerned, we have been releasing funds on a quarterly basis to take care of SAGE. If I got her properly, she is requesting for a supplementary; she is taking us to a direction where I would not wish to go -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when was the last time the older persons were paid? 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, as far as I am concerned - I can confirm tomorrow whether we released money for the third quarter. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we do not want to speak on hearsay. Can you lay on the Table, tomorrow, the evidence that the older persons have been paid?. (Applause) 

MR MUSASIZI: Yes, I can do that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please lay on the Table that these people have been paid and they are not on arrears tomorrow.

MR MUSASIZI: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. Point No.2 is on the 40 per cent suppression. It is true, at the beginning of this financial year, we suppressed some budgets by 40 per cent before parliamentary approval. However, when we brought Supplementary Schedule No.1, Parliament regularised these commitments and therefore, we got the approval of this House. 

The next point is on the failure to release supplementary funding, which has been appropriated by Parliament. I do acknowledge that we have not performed on time as far as releasing these funds are concerned. This is because there is a technical challenge, which we faced. We passed the supplementary expenditure but we did not provide for the resource or how this supplementary expending was going to be financed. I will be coming here -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it is good that you are talking to some people who know issues of revenue and expenditure. Before you think of expenditure, you must know where you are going to get the money from. Therefore, for you to come to the House and ask for money and you do not know the source of funding is unfortunate. I know you as a very good accountant. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, can I –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I want someone who knows – 

MR MUSASIZI: So that we reason together.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Musasizi, you have really betrayed accountants today – Laughter)- First of all, you are the one who has been authorised to collect revenue. Secondly, you are also the one who has been authorised to even spend. When you come here for expenditure, you must have a backup for the revenue. 

Madam Speaker, I am very worried that a whole minister can bring a budget here - that will not be a budget because a supplementary is a budget. We said a budget consists of income and expenditure. Therefore, how do you bring expenditure without income? It means you were assuming that Members of Parliament would be asleep, pass whatever you have brought and then go and manage your processes – [Mr Muwanga Kivumbi rose_] you can give me information, my brother. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Eddie Kwizera? No, you are going to respond.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, I would like to give information to Hon. Nandala-Mafabi. The difference between a normal budget and a supplementary is that a normal budget is based on anticipated revenue, but for a supplementary, a source must be assured. You cannot come to Parliament and set conditionality for passing a supplementary budget - the source of funding is always established before we pass a supplementary. 

Therefore, under supplementary expenditure, you cannot raise the issue of anticipated revenue. Revenues are not anticipated; they are assured. So, what are you talking about, Sir?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In the supplementary, there is certainty of income. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, for the information. Maybe let us educate the minister further. (Laughter)

Initially, the budget which you bring, is expected income and expenditure and these are based on activities you have planned to implement. However, while executing the budget, you may discover new unforeseeable circumstances coming and then you can say, you need a supplementary. The other scenario could be that for some of the activities you planned for, you discovered that they cannot be executed and you want to make an adjustment. This is where you can say, “I have got this amount of money, which I want to apply to these new activities” because you are adjusting them. 

Honourable minister, I would like to advise you that whenever you come, do not lie to Members of Parliament because if you first brought expenditure and then forgot revenue - I think what Parliament should do, first of all, is to reject that entire supplementary and you start afresh.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Eddie Kwizera?

MR EDDIE KWIZERA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to refer the minister to rule 153 of our Rules of Procedure, where the minister is empowered to bring a supplementary for consideration. 

Rule 153(2) reads: “The supplementary estimates presented in subrule (1) shall clearly spell out the source of funding for the supplementary expenditure request for each vote.” Therefore, why can't the minister follow the rules of this House? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is also provided for under the Public Finance Management Act, section 25. Hon. Jonathan Odur, is it on the same matter? 

MR ODUR: Yes, it is important. When an Appropriation Bill or supplementary comes here, first of all, it is a Bill and no Bill can be processed in this House without a Certificate of Financial Implication. (Interjection)– Yes, it is still appropriation and every time they bring it here, it is accompanied by that. Therefore, for the minister to come here and turn around, and yet it is the same ministry that proposes - I think that is not in order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is why I was telling the minister to speak as a former chairperson of the committee and not as a minister today. Minister, who is the former Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development -

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, it is true that the source of funding is normally looked at when we are bringing a supplementary budget. The anomaly that occurred, which was included in the source of funding, was a borrowing and this borrowing ought to have first been approved by this House. This is the technical issue, but I will be coming back soon to seek authorisation to borrow in order to fully finance this supplementary budget.

DR AGNES ATIM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Listening to the minister raises two critical things. One, it seems we are really planning to fail because if you bring a supplementary of a source that you have not secured, it means there is really a big planning problem. 

The second issue it raises is that SAGE is a recurrent cost; it is just like you cannot fail to plan for your salary. Saying that SAGE slipped away and in the Budget Framework Paper (BFP) it becomes domestic arrears, in my view, we also have a problem with prioritisation. If it is a recurring payment and you know they are supposed to be paid every month, how come you forget about the older persons yet you do not forget about your own salary and other recurrent activities? (Applause)

As you rightly put it, we seem to be having a disconnect between what we bring here and what we are actually doing. As Parliament, we might have to really start looking at all those processes critically because when you bring it here, we assume that you have already followed all the rules as laid out in the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, as we agreed, tomorrow, you will lay on Table the recent payment for SAGE without arrears.
 
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, can I say something? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, do. 

MR MUSASIZI: It is good these matters are coming up when we are going to the last stage of our budgeting cycle. I would like to say that, sometimes, these things happen. You may budget – the budgeting for SAGE is not something extraordinary. Sometimes, these things happen. 

It is good the honourable member raising the matter is a chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and an ex-officio member of the Budget Committee. 

I would like to commit before this House that we shall have an in-depth engagement with her, together with the committee, to look into the SAGE budget with the view of addressing the concerns she is raising, in the next financial year’s budget.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister must know that borrowing is also a source of funding. If you had brought here a budget and said that you wanted Shs 2 billion, but your source of funding was borrowing –(Interjections)- Hon. Kateshumbwa knows that revenue sources are tax and non-tax revenue, but even borrowing is a source of revenue. 

Therefore, when you came here for a supplementary, you would have said: “I have brought this supplementary, but my source is borrowing.” We would have said, “please, go back and bring the resolution for borrowing.”

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am glad that today hon. Mafabi is in the House because we normally synergise over these matters together. Like I mentioned earlier, somehow, we missed out on the idea of seeking authorisation of this House to borrow, before the supplementary budget was considered.

I would like to seek the indulgence of this House. Please, bear with us. In the coming weeks, we should come here to address that anomaly –(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall have that payment laid on the Table tomorrow. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, can I clarify this? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, go ahead. 

MR MUSASIZI: The colleagues are concerned about whether I can bring a motion seeking to borrow tomorrow. (Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who has told you to borrow? 

MR MUSASIZI: This is what they are saying. There is a process we go through – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as we wait for the document tomorrow, one of your cardinal roles, as Members of Parliament, is appropriation. We made our budget for Parliament of Uganda for 2022/2023, but it is very unfortunate that the minister has had to write to me, saying that they are not going to fund inland travels and a number of other issues. 

Therefore, I am wondering whether the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has taken over the role of appropriation. Why do you want to stifle the operations of Parliament? (Applause)

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, it is not our intention to stifle the work of Parliament or any other MDA. However – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do not call us “any other MDA”. This is the Parliament of Uganda, which does appropriation. (Applause)

MR MUSASIZI: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. However, I would like to also say this: we pass a budget, as Parliament, premised on revenue performance and other revenue processes. When I do not get all the money, I release what I have – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As a Member of Parliament, what are your priority areas? Don’t you need to do an oversight role? How do you do it?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, as a Member of Parliament, my priority area number one is to ensure service delivery for my people. Number two is oversight. I must be facilitated to do oversight – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you are saying that you are not going to facilitate Parliament. 

MR MUSASIZI: What I am saying – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. I am talking about what you have documented, as the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and the letter arrived today. 

Honourable members, the letter arrived today, saying that in the next financial year, we will not have local travels and no external travels. All those kinds of things will not be there. (Interjections)

MR MUSASIZI: Can we look at that letter? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next item, please. Honourable members, we are going to receive a report from the Minister of Gender. Remember that we are going to have International Women’s Day. It is going to be celebrated. We are inviting all the men to come and celebrate this day.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE OCCASION OF COMMEMORATING THE INTERNATIONAL WOMEN’S DAY ON 8 MARCH 2022

3.33
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In 1975, the United Nations declared 8th of March as the International Women’s Day, on which all member states of the UN recognise and honour women. 

The International Women’s Day has its origin in the struggle by women for social change and their right to participate on equal terms with men in political, social, cultural and economic processes. 

It is a global day for celebrating the achievements made on the delivery of gender equality and women’s empowerment. The day also serves as a call for action to accelerate progress towards gender equality and women’s empowerment.

Uganda declared the International Women’s Day a national day in 1984 and since then we have been celebrating it on an annual basis. The last national celebration was held on 8th March, 2021 at State House, Entebbe under the theme –(Interruption)

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, you can see that while the honourable minister is presenting a statement on Women’s Day about four men have walked out as if this does not concern them yet most of them are married. Is it in order for the men to walk out when this statement on women –(Interjections)- so you stay. Thank you very much, those who have stayed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us listen to a report from the minister. She is going to make it brief. All she is informing you is about the upcoming Women’s Day celebrations and inviting the good men; those who have walked out are the bad men.

MS AMONGI: Since the previous celebrations, some of the key gender empowerment initiatives and programmes included, among others, continued support to women groups in wealth creation through the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme. Cumulatively, a total of 16,542 women groups, with 191,476 members, have been supported with credit and entrepreneurship skills. 

The ministry has developed and launched the National Gender-based Violence Multi-sectoral COVID-19 response plan for 2021/2022 to 2024/2025 to address the escalating cases of teenage pregnancy, offer support to young mothers and ensure that gender-based violence centres are established.

The ministry, in liaison with the Ministry of Local Government, lobbied for the initiation of 30 per cent quarter for women and youth in the delivery of the Parish Development Model, reserving 30 per cent under the parish development model for them.

The campaign to end teenage pregnancy and guidelines on prevention and management of teenage pregnancies in schools was launched by Her Excellency, the Vice-President, the First Lady and Minister of Education and Sports, and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. It is coordinated by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and will run until 2026.

The ministry has initiated the National Women Leaders’ Forum, which will be launched tomorrow by Her Excellency, the Vice- President at Skyz Hotel. Madam Speaker and all the women Members of Parliament have been invited.

Serena’s hall was not enough for all the Members; it could only occupy about 150 and so, we have got a bigger hall at Skyz Hotel. We welcome you there tomorrow.

The ministry is also scaling up the implementation of green jobs and fair markets programme to ensure skilling and reskilling. It targets “jua khali” youth and women in all the constituencies and the “jua khali” tool kits have benefitted 308 groups, with 6,846 members supported.

We have also finalised a project called, “Generating Growth opportunities and Productivity of Women Enterprises” (GroWE), which is being financed by the World Bank with a component of a grant. It will support women entrepreneurs who are not able to benefit from the Parish Development Model.

We realised that the Parish Development Model is targeting women majorly in agriculture whose capital does not exceed Shs 5,000,000. The women whose capital is beyond Shs 5,000,000 will benefit from this entrepreneurship skill. 

The ministry has also strengthened collaboration with Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA) and MPs, in order to engender legislative processes and create awareness on women rights.

One of the achievements has been the recent passing of the Succession (Amendment) Act, 2022, among others. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, and honourable members, for this landmark achievement.

The national celebration will be held under the theme; “Gender equality today for a sustainable tomorrow.” The theme highlights the significance of the equal relationship between men and women as a precondition for long term development outcomes in our country. 

It also recognises the need to advance gender equality in the context of climate crisis, disaster risk reduction in light of the current severe and lasting impact of climate change on women and girls.

The venue for the celebration for this year’s International Women’s Day is going to be in Kololo Ceremonial Grounds. Because of the impact of COVID-19 and the lack of budgetary allocation to go upcountry, we will still hold this event at Kololo and His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, will be the chief guest.

Preparations are ongoing with the Ministry of Gender overseeing and coordinating the celebration and will lead all the stakeholders in commemorating the event.

Government MDAs, civil society, private sector, media, communities and individuals are all involved in the preparatory activities. 

All local governments and Kampala Capital City Authority have been informed and guided to also observe, at their individual districts and cities, the International Women’s Day while observing the COVID-19 Standard Operating Procedures.

I wish to inform you that a series of activities have been planned: 

1. 	The Women Leaders’ Forum, which is going to be held on 3rd March.

2. 	The Uganda Women’s Entrepreneurship Programme National Conference which will be held between 9th  to 10th at Hotel Africana, still organised by the Ministry of Gender together with CARE and International Centre for Research.

3. 	The National Women Council Conference will be held on 7th March at Imperial Royale and it is organised by the National Women’s Council.

4. 	Community mobilisation for mind-set change sensitisation was held between 23rd to 24th February in Kalangala District and organised by Uganda National Women’s Council. At the event, there was awareness and guidelines on second chance education for girls, tree planting, a campaign on menstrual hygiene, and community dialogue to uptake on Government programme.

5. 	A blood donation drive is to be held between 1st to 4th March at City Square organised in conjunction with the Uganda Police Force.

I, therefore, wish to invite you, Madam Speaker, and the honourable members to join in the celebrations, which will take place  on Tuesday, 8th  March 2022. I further encourage honourable members to also organise and support their districts in the celebrating the International Women’s Day.

I wish to acknowledge and appreciate the Members of Parliament for the continued commitment to accelerate gender equality, women empowerment in our country through gender responsive legislation, reviewing budgets of the ministries to ensure they are gender sensitive, and response to equity in respect to gender. Thank you and I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much, Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, for the report. Clarification from Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, Miss Uganda? (Laughter)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the minister. First of all, I am grateful that finally, we are going to have celebrations nationally in Kololo. 

I believe that the invitation will be extended to villagers as well because we, who represent village constituencies; they really feel elevated when they come to Kampala. So, even if they are about four or five, it would be good to have our villagers also share in the joy of celebrating at a national level.

I also seek clarification on the World Bank credit, loan or grant facilities. What agency will be disbursing this money because they World Bank does not just deal directly with either the ministry of with the Government? There should be an agency that will manage the fund. 

How can we, the rural women who are trying to go beyond agriculture, be able to access that money? Most of the time, we hear about this money. We hear about the loan lines of credit and so on, but accessing those lines becomes too complicated for those of us who are rural in the way we do our things.

So, Madam Speaker, I would like the minister to clarify for us how we can handle those matters. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. Minister, we want to know whether we shall have some people from Bukedea here. 

3.47
MS LILLIAN ABER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The shadow minister will speak last.

MS ABER: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join the world in commemorating the International Women’s Day. Indeed, it is a worthy celebration. However, on Women’s Day, we take that opportunity to evaluate the women issues in this country. 

Madam Speaker, I credit the country for having done a lot in terms of women representation in politics. I want to credit the country and thank them for our policies. However, there is a lot that we need to do in terms of women empowerment. 

Our women in the villages today are grappling and struggling with maintaining families. You realise that most of the young people; most of the powerful women in this country like you, Madam Speaker, are raised by women, single-handedly.

Madam Speaker, we need a lot of interventions in ensuring that men who neglect their duties are brought to book. (Applause) Today, we have single mothers struggling. You bear children with someone’s daughter, but you cannot take responsibility. Madam Speaker, we need the law to touch these unfriendly men. I do not mean these friendly men who are looking at me, but those unfriendly ones who do not want to take responsibility must be brought to book.

I would like to talk about the issue of government programmes. I am not happy that UWEP, a programme meant for women, is again being sliced off and taken on another new project. We need projects for women, as many as we can, and they must be funded and if we do not fund these projects – we know for sure that all these small projects we are looking at - the small entrepreneurship projects - are being managed by women. 

Madam Speaker, I want to thank you and the honourable minister for talking about the green jobs; we need more money for green jobs. We need equipment to be bought and given to the villages to support women. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much, Hon. Lillian Aber. We need responsible men, not irresponsible ones like Hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi, I have seen you standing. Okay, let us have Hon. Santa, then Hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi. 

3.50
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start by thanking the minister for this brief, but I seek clarification. 

One has been mentioned by Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. We normally have a very good well-funded programme for Women’s Day at national level, but when it comes to the district level, Madam Speaker, it is always left to the women Members of Parliament. (Applause) 

So, the clarification that I am seeking from the honourable minister is that whereas you have invited us for the programme here at Kololo, what programme do you have for the women at the district level? Is it decentralised? How can we really make sure that the women and the majority at the grassroots also enjoy this day like the women at the national level? 

Madam Speaker, I thank the honourable minister, again, for the theme of the Women’s Day. She has mentioned the impact of climate change on the women and girls. Truly, when you look at the impact of climate change, the people who bear most of the burden are women. So, while this theme touches the issue of climate change, I would like to know if there is a specific programme that the Ministry of Gender has, which is targeting women, as far as climate change is concerned. 

Madam Speaker, when you go to the villages, the fuel that the women need to even prepare food and other activities is not there. So, I would like the minister to tell us, the women representatives and even the male representatives in this House, whether this is specific package for the women, as far as the issue of climate change is concerned. 

I thank you, honourable minister, as we join you to support the women and celebrate this day. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Members, maybe as a reminder, we have Ash Wednesday today and the Archbishop of Nebbi is already here. Honourable minister of education?

3.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to join –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe, before the honourable minister comes in, I am organising a dinner for all the women Members of Parliament –(Applause)– for Women’s Day. 

DR MORIKU: Thank you so much. Members, I want to join you in thanking our honourable Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure? Honourable Members of Parliament, when I say “women”, the women come with men. So, why should you bother? They come with men. They say, “Behind a successful man, there is always a woman”. So, you are all going to be invited.

DR MORIKU: Thank you for that wise invitation. Honourable members, I stand to appreciate and thank the honourable minister for the preparation and celebration of International Women’s Day for this year, 2022. Special appreciation goes to the Government of Uganda for the affirmative action for us, the women, and for our girls in various areas, like affirmative action for entry
to university. 

I rise in a special way to thank our Speaker in commemoration of that day. In order to commemorate the day, as he has just mentioned, our own Rt Hon. Speaker, who is a lady and mother, has organised a get together for all the women, Members of Parliament, women in Parliament of Uganda, together with the friendly men. This will take place at an appropriate time. The dates and the venues will be communicated. 

I have been mandated to take the lead to set a committee to see to it that this special event, first of its kind, is going to be historical in Parliament and it will be a great success. 

We thank you, Madam Speaker, and we look forward to celebrating that day when it is announced. I thank you.

3.56
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. First of all, I have been a member of UWOPA since 2001. Unfortunately, this Parliament has not been seeing my deductions being done. I do not know what happened. Either they have sacked me or if you have not sacked me, I am still a member of UWOPA. 

Madam Speaker, if you have seen the population of the world, the number of women is more than the number of men. And unfortunately, when a child is sick at home, it is the woman who is more concerned, school fees; it is the woman who is more concerned. (Interjection)- Yes, by the way, if you have not noticed, there are many Members - 

If you have seen phone calls, a woman will be calling saying I do not have school fees and when you ask her what about the husband, she says that the husband disappeared from home long ago and his where abouts are not known. Surely, women are the most concerned people in this country and the world in general. They are the kindest people, but unfortunately, the programmes we draw do not favour them at all. 

I heard my sister hon. Santa said - not the one who said that Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme (UWEP) the one which was in the Ministry of Gender - during the audit, they said that they returned part of the money, but that they also did not return some. 

Of course, I know it is men who don't pay loans, but women pay loans. In fact, I must congratulate you because I was involved in one consultancy internationally, small loans given to women changed their lives and they paid them up. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker for me on this women’s Day, first of all, since it started in 1994, I want to congratulate them and it should continue. But I want to ask the government to come up with real deliberate action plans for women. 

You see, if you want this country to develop, I know education is politely above, but women should be having the biggest investment. For example, if we are talking about micro finance to finance the smaller ones, I consider it to finance women, if women –(Interjection)- Yes, I am very serious on this, I have seen it myself. 

If you finance women, you will get more dividends in this country than if you fund other activities. If I were the Minister of Finance and I am now talking to the one who is there, is he still there? I would like you to go and change the workplan. (Interjections)- My younger brother hon. Musasizi- by the way, I am bigger because I am number 32 in the institute and I do not know what number you are.

I would like you to go and look at the issue of Microfinance Support Centre. We open up a window specifically for women. I can tell you the moment you do that, let us commit about Shs 100 billion in Microfinance Support Centre to give small loans to women. That Shs 100 billion will multiply within five years and you will have half a trillion because women –(Interruption)

MS AISHA KABANDA: Thank you very much, my honourable senior, hon. Mafabi. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How did hon. Kabanda get to the microphone?

MS AISHA KABANDA: Honourable, I just wanted to inform you that helping the suffering women you are talking about needs a holistic approach. Women suffer issues from all corners; the injustice is in courts and everywhere. The extrajudicial killings, you remember, women that were killed in the November demonstrations, one was carrying a plate of food and she was shot. You saw a woman crying for her 15 years old child who was killed. Therefore, helping women needs a holistic approach. 

Madam Speaker, Mama Sigirinya has come here many times crying before you to be helped for her son to access the right to bail. Helping women needs a holistic approach to the whole system, including the democratic institutions of this country to be addressed. 

Finally, the information to my colleague and the minister, is that you have just spoken about blood donation. I have attempted to do blood donation on Women's Day and they are asking for facilitation and everything that I should do to help them to go and get blood. So, we do not know what to do and how we can help. 

People are dying for lack of blood, but the Government organ that should collect blood needs facilitation from Members of Parliament to be able to collect blood from the public. We do not know how to move on. Thank you, hon. Mafabi, for giving me a way.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You are welcome. Madam Speaker, I want to conclude by saying yes, we cannot address all issues at once. Most importantly, we are happy; we have FIDA for lawyers for women. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a motion here.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Something is there at least women in the legal process, there is something, but in financial sector, we want them to become financially inclusive. The moment they have money, they will pay a lawyer, take their children to school and go for help, but if they have no money, even if you give them all the lawyers on earth, they will lack what to do.

Therefore, let us make them rich. And by the way, if you give money to a woman and it generates income, we men will be the beneficiaries. You will come home and there is food. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. There is a motion here.

4.02
MR DAVID KABANDA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I understand that the minister was just giving information to the House about International Women's Day. I move a motion under Rule 59(c) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament that the debate be closed because the minister was just giving information to this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know very well how we have debated about women in this House. We have talked about them remaining in this House. And everybody in this House knows how important a woman is; how responsible women are. When we remain in a place of responsibility, you will get good results. 

A woman takes 99 per cent of responsibility - Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, today, you have been a very good gentleman – 99 per cent of responsibility in a home. So, as women, we are only inviting you. 

Honourable Minister for Gender, what we would like you to do to encourage the Government and the Executive is an inclusion of women in everything; full inclusion of women and you know once you include a woman in any activity, you get feedback and results. 

However, I would also like to thank the Government, 60 per cent of the top leadership of the Executive are women. We are proud to be women; we are proud Ugandan women. The motion has been brought. Is it seconded? In the interest of time, the motion is seconded and passed. Thank you. Next item.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON THE ALLEGED MISMANAGEMENT OF SOROTI FRUIT FACTORY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will be closing the House at exactly 5.00p.m. We will be going for Mass. Meanwhile, I know Hon. Nandala-Mafabi is interested in the Soroti Fruit Factory since that is where he comes from. 

4.05
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Mwine Mpaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay the minutes and the supporting documents of the report of the sectoral Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the alleged mismanagement of Soroti Fruits Limited (SOFTE).

Report of the sectoral Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the alleged mismanagement of Soroti Fruits Limited
 
In the interest of time, I am going to try to summarise and refer honourable members to the pages where most of the information is. 

Introduction

The Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry has the honour to present its report findings from the 16 to 17 February 2022 in the districts of Soroti, specifically Soroti Fruits Limited. This was in pursuance of the directive by the Speaker to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry to take up the matter of fact-finding regarding the allegation of resource mismanagement and abuse as presented on the Floor of Parliament by Hon. Ebwalu Jonathan, MP, Soroti West Division, Soroti City, on 8 February 2022. 

The committee has agreed to report the following:

The background is on page 1, honourable members. On page 2, we have the composition of the board. The company has a board of directors with a composition of two directors from the minority shareholder, who are Teso Tropical Fruit Farmers' Cooperative Union (TEFCU) and five directors from the majority shareholder, which is Uganda Development Corporation (UDC). 

Investment in Soroti Fruits Limited

The initial investment in Soroti Fruits Limited (SOFTE) amounted to US8$, which is equivalent to Shs 29.6 billion from Korea International Cooperation Agency (KOICA). This was used mainly for plant construction, equipment phase and associated costs including importation, transportation and staff training. From the Financial Year 2010/2011 to date, the Government has spent Shs 41.13 billion on the factory, hence in total capitalisation of Shs 70.73 billion. The rationale is on page 3 and page 4, honourable members. 

I now wish to take you to page 5, the objectives: 

    1. To ascertain the alleged mismanagement of resources and abuse of office at Soroti Fruits Limited presented on the Floor of Parliament as a matter of national importance.

    2. To examine the contribution of UDC as a government enterprise in propelling the Government agenda of doing business on behalf of Government, and yet helping the public access services required for socio-economic development.

    3. To scrutinise the utilisation of funds provided by the Government of Uganda to UDC enterprise, the accountability for the revenue that accrues from the project and the business at Soroti Fruits Limited.

    4. To propose recommendations to enable efficiency and effectiveness in resource and the office management of Soroti Fruits Limited in a bid to support it in the achievement of its objectives, and also ensure the creation of a positive impact on the people of Teso and Uganda as a whole.

The scope 

The committee concerns itself with the whole of Teso Region in eastern Uganda and the report takes a close look at the affairs of UDC.

Methodology

It is on page 6. The committee carried out field visits to Soroti Fruits Limited found in Soroti City and sampled farmers in Gweri Subcounty located in Gweri County, Soroti District. 

We also had meetings with key stakeholders. The witnesses included leadership of Soroti District, the cooperatives, TEFCU leadership and the management and workers; some of the board members and the local populace. 

Apart from a memoranda received from the above stakeholders, the committee also received written presentations from the following:

    1. Hon. Ebwalu Jonathan – the petitioner;
    2. Uganda Investment Authority;
    3. Uganda National Bureau of Standards;
    4. Uganda Development Corporation, and
    5. Some of the area Members of Parliament. 

The committee also carried out desk research. 

On page 7, we have the committee's observations and analysis.

Alleged gross abuse of office and resources

An allegation of gross abuse of office by SOFTE management was brought to the attention of Parliament by Hon. Jonathan Ebwalu, MP Soroti West Division, Soroti City. In his submission, he informed Parliament that there was evidence that the perimeter wall of the SOFTE factory was estimated to have cost Shs 2.5 billion and a kilometre of road was estimated to have been constructed at a cost of Shs 5.5 billion. 

The committee reviewed the procurement documents for both the construction of the road and perimeter wall and the following are its findings:

Procurement of the construction of a perimeter wall 

It is the finding of the committee that the contract for the procurement of the construction of perimeter wall as proposed for Soroti Fruits Limited in Arapai Subcounty, Soroti District was undertaken between Uganda Development Corporation and Wills International Engineers Contractors Limited at a total contract price of Shs 734,493,659, only on 14 May 2014. 

According to the special conditions of this contract, the intended completion date for the whole of the works was four months. Accordingly, the work started on 21 May 2014 and was expected to be completed by 20 September 2014. Further still, the special conditions of the contract provided that the contract was not subject to price adjustments. 

On 12 August 2015, the project manager, a senior engineer at UDC, requested for an extension of time citing challenges with the supplier of razor wire, delayed payments from UDC and a lot of rainfall, which interrupted the works and recommended an extension of a 14-day calendar. In his loose minute to the Executive Director UDC, the project manager claimed that the contract was due to expire on 17 August 2015 and that the works were almost at 93 per cent completion. 

The committee was informed on 18 June 2015 that UDC entered into another contract for the completion of the perimeter wall fence and construction of the plot access roads for the proposed Soroti Fruits Factory in Arapai Subcounty, in Soroti District with Wills International Engineers and Construction Limited for a contract price of Shs 369,624,638 only. The duration of this contract was a period of two months from 18 July and 17 August 2015. 

I will take you to page 9. The contractor, M/s Wills International was contracted under direct procurement method because procuring another contractor would delay the road construction process as alleged by UDC. 

The committee was informed that the complete infrastructure of the boundary wall and the two first class murrum access roads, including all the variations associated with the works, cost UDC a total sum of Shs 1,104,118,297.

The committee makes the following observations. 

    1. There was no evidence of alleged reasons for extension of time and variation of the contract sum originating from the contractor, Wills International Engineers and Construction Limited.

    2. The undertaking of a fresh contract under direct procurement method for completion of the wall fence with the same contractor at a different contract price was irregular, unjustifiable and not in line with the PPDA and the same should have been queried by the Office of the Solicitor-General.

3. 	Whereas the contractor did not request for extension of time, even after failing to complete the first contract of the construction of the wall, the UDC project manager, on 12 August 2015, in a loose minute addressed to the ED of UDC was, rather, the one who requested for a 14-day calendar no-cost extension. 

4. 	The original contract did not provide for price variation. Therefore, the contractor, Wills International Engineers and Construction Limited, after failing to complete the wall contract due to alleged unavailability of razor wire and bad weather, was rather gifted with a new contract by UDC to complete the previous work and do a total new scope of work. This, therefore, implies that UDC just used the contractor to defraud Government. 

5. 	The committee, during an oversight visit to the factory, observed that even after the additional contract sums, the contractor did shoddy work, which has left the wall with cracks, sinking foundations and the plaster on the walls peeling off. It is unfortunate that that picture is not coloured, but you can see that the wall is peeling off. 

6. 	UDC did not provide sufficient evidence for the procurement process, including the minutes of the evaluation committee’s meetings and the minutes of the contract committee’s meetings approving the contracts. 

7. 	There is clear indication that UDC flouted the procurement process when they undertook a second contract for the completion of construction of a perimeter wall and construction of roads in total disregard of a previous contract for the construction of the perimeter wall, which was at 93 per cent completion. The implication is that the 7 per cent remaining works for completion could not have cost Shs 369 million, which is about 50.3 per cent of the first contract sum. 

8. 	There is need for further investigation into the matter pertaining the clearance of the contracts by the different officers in the Solicitor-General’s office, based on the following facts:

    a) The contractor neither officially requested for more money nor time. However, the Office of the Solicitor-General cleared the contracts for signing without querying. 
    b) All the three contracts were cleared by different officers from the Solicitor-General’s office. 
    c) The new contract sum does not indicate how much was going to the completion of the construction of the perimeter wall and how much was going to the works of the new contract. 
    d) Lastly, given all documents provided, the contract sum could not be justified. 

The procurement works for the road in Soroti Industrial and Business Park

The basis of the contract 

The contract in caption was established on the basis of the PPDA general conditions for the procurement works, June 2005. Pursuant to clause 11.1(b), design of the permanent works is an employer’s risk. The employer is responsible for the design and supply of the design documents, drawings, bills of quantities specifications, the accuracy of the design documents and the design liability. The contractor’s responsibility was to execute the works using the employer’s supplied design and further instructions from the project manager. I will take you straight to the delays. 

Delay by the project manager to issue the instructions for permanent works

There was a delay by the project manager to issue instructions for permanent works. This indicates that probably, the project manager did not have the design for the permanent works 

Effects/impact of the above events on the progress of the works

Pursuant to clause 32 of the conditions of the contract, the instructions with drawings, setting out data and culvert schedule for Temele Industrial Road and Pineapple Road were issued by the project manager to the contractor on 9 January 2014 – six months later from the commencement of the works on 27 May 2013. This clearly indicated that the contract was awarded without appropriate design as it should have been. 

The designs that had been issued were defective and vastly exhibited by the following features on the same drawings: 

    a) Whereas Temele Road is found in a floodplain, with almost 600 metres through a permanent swamp, no provision had been made for rock fill. 

    b) The culvert schedule issued was limited in scope. Whereas there are eight streams crossing, only three lines of culverts were included on the schedule. 

    c) In addition, the contractor would not achieve minimum cover on all culverts crossing. 

The drawings, setting out the data and culvert schedule for Temele Industrial Road and Pineapple Road, which were issued on 9 January 2014, were substantially different from that which formed part of the contract. This meant that from the onset of awarding the contract, there were wrong designs. What this means is that UDC gave someone a contract to make designs and they just sat in an office and calculated the total distance and the cost of tarmac per kilometre. They did not actually go to the ground. 

Observations of the committee 

    1. The lack of appropriate designs at the time of awarding the contract resulted into delayed completion of the project and increased the total cost of the project. 

    2. According to clause 3.1 of the memorandum of understanding between UDC and UIA, one of the conditions was to set a multidisciplinary project implementation team to manage the project and it was to be composed of representatives from UDC, UIA, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Works and Transport. However, the committee was not set up, which raised doubt on the technical compliance of the works. 

    3. Lastly, a contract of Shs 121,810,000 between UIA and M/S Aim Engineering Uganda Limited was signed for the provision of detailed engineering designs and documentation for 6.4 kilometres of road at Soroti Industrial and Business Park. The committee was, therefore, shocked that the design contractor failed to take into account the swampy nature of the road and needed rock fill, unless the design was done without physically going on the ground to take into account the above unforeseen challenges, which later cost Government another variation of Shs 269,786,475 to do the rock fill. 

In spite of that, MG Engineers and Constructors Ltd, which was supposed to execute the road works, sued UIA for delays, which attracted another cost of Shs 342,747,186 as an outstanding contract balance for the construction of Soroti Industrial and Business Park Access Road Lot 1 and Shs 20 million in damages.

Governance and management of Soroti Fruits Limited 

The ownership of Government interest in Soroti Fruits Limited

The petitioner, Hon. Jonathan Ebwalu, while appearing before the committee, alleged that UDC did not have shareholding in Soroti Fruits Limited since UDC was established in 2016, while Soroti Fruits Limited was incorporated in 2012. He pointed out that according to the second schedule of the UDC Act, 2016, Soroti Fruits Limited is not among the entities that are listed, in which the corporation acquires the interest of Government. 

The committee examined the allegation and found as follows: 

Originally, UDC was established under the UDC Act, Cap. 326 of 1952 to be a Government body responsible for investment. However, due to changes in the Government and subsequent change in the policy, Government repealed the UDC Cooperation Act, Cap. 326, under the Public Enterprise Reform and the Divestiture Act, 1993, and all the corporations that UDC Limited used to manage were listed for divestiture or transferred to the ministries for management. 

In 2003, Government incorporated the Uganda Development Company Limited, under the then Companies Act, Cap. 110 in January 2008. Cabinet resolved to revive the UDC as a development arm of Government and in 2016, Government enacted the Uganda Development Cooperation Act, 2016, wherein, it reinstated the Uganda Development Cooperation, as a statutory body, to manage Uganda’s undertakings that were listed in the second schedule of the Act. 

The committee observes that whereas it is true Soroti Fruits Limited is not among the entities listed in the second schedule of the Act, the company was incorporated under the Companies Act, 2012 with the two shareholders to it; UDC taking 80 per cent and TEFCU taking 20 per cent. 

The committee is of the considered opinion, therefore, that the non-inclusion of Soroti Fruits Limited among the listed entities under the second schedule does not preclude the company from being owned by UDC since Uganda Development Corporation is a shareholder in the company, according to the Memorandum and Articles of Association of Soroti Fruits Limited. 

Section 33(2) of the Uganda Development Act, 2016 requires the minister responsible for industrial development to list other property rights, assets, liabilities and obligations of Government to be included in schedule No.2 by Statutory Instrument. 

The findings notwithstanding, the committee is of the considered opinion that listing all the entities and undertakings in which Government has interest under the second Schedule of the Uganda Development Corporations Act, 2016 would resolve the issue of misconception and would safeguard Government interests in those undertakings and entities from being taken over by unscrupulous individuals. 

Contradiction in the Local Purchase Orders (LPOs) submitted by the factory management as opposed to those submitted by TEFCU. 

According to the LPOs submitted to the committee by the management of the factory, TEFCU has never satisfied an LPO as the union supplies less than half of the LPOs issued by the factory. This leaves the committee in a state of confusion as to how the farmers can lack fruits to supply the factory and yet, the committee visited orchards and found fruits falling off trees and rotting.

Further still, the factory claims to lack capacity. How can one justify unfulfilled LPOs? This brings the management of the factory into question since it appears that they do not know the capacity of the factory.

In fact, while appearing before the committee, the CEO could not answer questions as to the daily capacity of the factory. The fact that the factory claims to lack capacity, but issues LPOs that have never been supplied in full since 2019 by the union brings the management into question. 

Madam Speaker, we looked at all the LPOs since 2019; they always give TEFCU LPOs to supply 150 tonnes and it supplies 30,000 tonnes. They give it 90,000 and it supplies 15,000 tonnes. They have never fulfilled the LPOs, which means the factory has the capacity as opposed to what they are telling us. It is the union not supplying. However, the farmers have fruits meaning the union is hoarding the supply to only people who subscribe to it.

Committee Observations 

The failure of the unions to meet the LPOs given by the factory since 20l9 to date by even 50 per cent while fruits of individual farmers are rotting in the gardens, is a clear indication that the unions are blocking farmers from supplying their fruits in collaboration with the management of the factory (SOFTE)

Unfulfilled financial obligations of TEFCU

The petitioner while appearing before the committee alleged that TEFCU has no shares in Soroti Fruits Limited since the cooperative association, which subscribed to the Articles of Memorandum of Association is different from the cooperative union. 

Findings of the committee

The committee finds that the Memorandum of Articles of Association of Soroti Fruits Limited are subscribed to by Uganda Development Corporation and Teso Tropical Fruit Growers’ Co-operative Society. At incorporation, the share capital of Soroti Fruits Limited was Shs 10 million divided into 100 ordinary shares of Shs 100,000 only each, with the power to increase or reduce the capital. Article 6 of the shareholder's agreement requires the parties to contribute to the initial funding requirement of the company and provide letters of comfort confirming that they shall take up the offered shares equivalent to 80 and 20 per cent respectively of the share capital. 

Committee observation 

    1. According to the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Soroti Fruits Limited for the year ended 30th June 2019, as at 30th June 2019, the company had been capitalised to the tune of Shs 50.29 billion. Of this, UDC had invested Shs 20,588,019,000.

2. 	However, there is no evidence to show that TEFCU has made any payment although the union alleges to have paid Shs 2 million as their initial contribution towards the share capital of the Company. The UDC informed the committee that whereas the Memorandum of Articles of Association are subscribed to by the society, the society has since evolved into a union. 

3. 	TEFCU is not contributing their fair share in the financial requirements of management of the Soroti Fruits Factory. The committee was not availed with evidence to show that UDC has ever called upon Teso Farmers’ Cooperative Union to make their fair contribution towards the management of the fruit factory. 

4. 	Whereas the role of UDC is to hold Government interest and as the largest shareholder in the company, the corporation has failed in protecting Government’s interests when it failed to call upon TEFCU to make their fair contribution towards capitalisation of the factory. According to the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the Soroti Fruits Limited for the year ended 30th June 2019, the statement of comprehensive income indicated a deficit of Shs 2,632,653,000 billion.

	The Auditor-General noted that this has an effect of reducing the net worth of the company and may erode the initial capital injection. 

5. 	Whereas section 71 of the Companies Act, 2012 provides for the power of a company limited by shares to alter its share capital, increasing its share capital by new shares of such amount as it thinks expedient, Soroti Fruits Limited has not increased her share capital despite enormous investment by the Government through UDC into the fruit factory. 

6. 	Section 14 of the Companies Act, 2012 urges private companies to, at the time of registration of its articles or subsequently, adopt and incorporate into its articles the provisions of the code of corporate governance contained in Table F of the Act and where adopted, annex a copy of the table to its articles of association and annually file a statement of compliance with the registrar and the Capital Markets Authority. 

7. 	According to Article 11 of the Shareholder Agreement between UDC and Teso Fruit Growers’ Co-operative Society, the company shall conform to the established principles of corporate governance as published by the Institute of Corporate Governance of Uganda. 

8. 	Soroti Fruits Limited has not adopted the principles of corporate governance. The UDC on behalf of Soroti Fruits Factory Limited and Teso Tropical Fruit Cooperative Union undertook a contract to supply fresh orange and mango fruits to the Soroti Fruits Factory at Shs 600 for a kilo of oranges and Shs 700 for a kilo of mangoes. 

9. 	This contract disadvantages farmers Cooperatives, which are not members of TEFCU since TEFCU is a shareholder in the company. To supply the factory, you must be a member of TEFCU that allegedly has shares.  

10. 	The committee was astonished to discover that a shareholder UDC contracted another shareholder (TEFCU) to supply fruits to Soroti Fruits Limited Company in which they both hold interest. That is the picture of the meeting we had in Gweri Town Council.

11. During an interaction with farmers in Gweri Subcounty, the committee was informed by the community at both the plantations and in a meeting held in the trading centre with the local community and leaders that a double sack of oranges weighing about 120kgs is bought from the farmers by TEFCU at a meagre price between Shs 15,000 and Shs 20,000 without weighing. TEFCU later sells the same bag of oranges to the Fruit Factory at Shs 72,000. 

12. 	The committee observes that buying fruits from farmers without weighing them is exploitation of the highest order and could be the reason as to why some farmers have resorted to cutting down their orchards while others have neglected the fruits to fall and rot in the orchards. The farmers no longer appreciate the value of the fruits. There are pictures of the fruits rotting in the garden we visited. Unfortunately, it is not clear, but all those are orange fruits in Gweri Subcounty at one of the plantations on the ground rotting.

13. 	The local leaders such as the Soroti District LCV Chairman had begun encouraging farmers to cut down their orange fruit plantations so as to plant other food crops that would help them survive. A case in point was Gweri Subcounty where 90 per cent of the land is used for orange fruit growing.  

14. 	Whereas Government has invested Shs 44.17 billion as of the financial year ended June 202I and holds 80 per cent shares in Soroti Fruits Limited, it is shocking that TEFCU, which has invested Shs 2 million only, owns 20 per cent shares of the company. Moreover, there is no evidence to-date that has been given to us to confirm the payment of the meager Shs 2 million initial contribution capital. 

15. 	There is no clear criteria through which TEFCU was selected as the most appropriate farmers’ cooperative to represent all the farmers in Teso Subregion in the fruits factory. This phenomenon has disadvantaged farmers that do not subscribe to the TEFCU in various ways. For instance, the farmers cannot supply fruit as individuals to the factory and TEFCU supplies the lion share in the factory. The committee was informed that out of the 109 Fruit Farmers’ Cooperatives in Teso Subregion, only 59 subscribe to TEFCU, meaning that a total of 50 cooperatives are not benefitting.

Financial status of Teso Fruits Limited 

The committee was concerned that Government has so far invested in Teso Fruits Limited a total of Shs 44.1 billion, in addition to the KOICA grant of US$8 million. However, this has not yet yielded any profits and this projects towards the fact that the factory may take a longer period to sustain itself. 
The committee was informed that Teso Juice Factory is a start-up; yet capital intensive. It was certified by UNBS in October 2019 and went into the market in January 2020. Hence, it is now two years old in the market. 

Soroti Fruits Factory Limited, like any other business, is expected to go through phases of a business life cycle. Therefore, profitability may not be realised immediately in the 1st or 2nd year of operation before a break-even is reached.

The committee also reviewed audited financial statements for the Financial Year 2019/2020 and Financial Year 2020/2021 and observed the following – could you put up the graph so that I can speed up? Thank you. According to that graph -

    a) sales revenue increased from Shs 166 million by June 2020 to Shs 818 million collected by June 2021;

    b) cost of sales increased from Shs 1.35 billion by June 2020 to Shs 2.285 billion by June 2021. 

When you look at the profit, that is the loss in brackets. The loss is increasing. It was Shs 6.5 before, but as of Financial Year 2020/2021, it is now Shs 6.8 billion.

The committee observed that SOFTE was established to improve the socio-economic welfare of the people of Teso subregion. While the company has made losses in its first and second year of operation, the profit motivation should not override the social aspect as part of the objective at the core of this investment.

Teso Juice Quality Concerns

Honourable members, this was a very sensitive issue. We thought we could leave it out, but it was the basis upon which we made some recommendations. 

Manual Packaging at final stage of production

UNBS first certified SOFTE on 6 December 2019 granting it permission to sell its juice. However, during the committee visit to SOFTE – we have visited this factory twice. Let me summarise this. What they are doing is that at the final stage of production, they are using hands to seal the bottles. 

The committee observed that while SOFTE in the last two years used a manual method to package its products, this system of processing is not sustainable and slows down production including other related risks like contamination.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Including COVID-19

MR MPAKA: Inconsistency in taste

The committee noted that during the manufacturing of Teju mango fruit juice, different types of mangoes with different tastes, different perishability and different scents are mixed together without rationing. If today they get a truck of apple mangoes, it is the juice they will make; but they will brand it the same. If they get a truck of dodo or any other mango, they go with that. 

What happens is that when you drink two different bottles of the same juice, they are different tastes, but they are branded the same. 

The committee observed that there is no formula by which this is being done by SOFTE thereby causing inconsistencies in tastes of Teju juice, which could affect the market of the produced juice.

Analysis of Government’s investment in Soroti Fruit Factory

6.4.1 Provision of fruit varieties 

Some members said that the varieties they have are not being bought by the factory. We thought we would also analyse what Government has been supplying through NAADS.

The committee received allegations from Members of Parliament and leaders from Teso that SOFTE was rejecting some of the fruit varieties that were being brought by the farmers to the factory. 

The committee noted that the factory utilises orange varieties that were largely promoted by NAADS in 2001, and generally available in the Teso Subregion. These Varieties include: Valencia, Hamlin and Washington Navel. 

On the other hand, the committee was informed that the factory utilises improved mangoes varieties which are available in the eastern and northern regions of the country. These varieties include: Dodo, Kakule, Boribo, Zillet, Keith, Kent, Apple mango, Bire, Tommy Atkinson among others. 

The committee was informed that Government, through NAADS and Operation Wealth Creation interventions, has distributed a total of 30,908,094 citrus seedlings to farmers across the country in the last five years; from Financial Year 2016/2017 to Financial Year 2020/2021, at a total expenditure of Shs 102.690 billion. 

Out of the total seedlings, 5,109,258 seedlings equivalent to Shs 16.949 billion have been distributed in the 10 districts of Teso subregion. 

Similarly, Government has been buying orange and mango fruit seedlings at about Shs 3,300. Government has distributed a total of 26.642 million mangoes seedlings to farmers across the country in the last five years. A total of 3,201,632 mango seedlings have been distributed in Teso subregion at a total value of Shs 10.493 billion. 

Observations of the committee

    1. The only mango varieties not taken by the factory are the traditional mangoes, which are said to have a lot of fibre which requires several systems to clean.

    2. Mangoes are mainly sourced from outside Teso subregion because the available mango varieties in Teso contain fibre that cannot easily be processed by the current mango line. Some members said that the factory is getting fruits from as far as Kenya and Kasese.

    3. Whereas oranges are predominantly grown fruits in Teso subregion, the factory found it economically viable to invest in a mango line. We are saying that the factory invested more in a mango line yet the people of Teso are planting more oranges. This is probably why the farmers are disgruntled or discouraged. However, the factory justifies that they went into a mango line because they needed a fast-moving product and the mango juice would move faster. These were the committee’s observations. 

Provision of motorised spray pumps 

This was also raised by one of the area Members of Parliament. The Government of Uganda through Uganda Development Corporation procured and delivered 240 motorised spray pumps, specifically Knapsack spray pumps, for Soroti Fruits Limited Factory at a total contract sum of Shs 528,000,000 following a concern that farmers in Teso subregion lacked effective plant protection equipment for effective pest and disease management. 

According to the contract for the supply and delivery of 240 pieces of motorised spray pumps for the Soroti Fruits Limited between Uganda Development Corporation and N2M Company Limited _ UDC contracted a company known as N2M Company Limited – the point of delivery was Soroti Fruits Factory Limited premises.

The committee confirmed that according to a Soroti Fruits Limited gate pass of 20 September 2018, 240 motorised spray pumps were taken out of the factory premises by the leadership of the second shareholder known as TEFCU, and this makes it clear that the pumps were delivered to the factory premises as required in the contract.

The committee established that TEFCU undertook an irregular process in which the union devised a distribution plan which involved charging farmers an extra Shs 200,000 per pump payable to the board of the Teso Farmers’ Cooperative Union. 

Teso Farmers’ Cooperative Union also identified host farmers to which primary cooperatives were to pay Shs 5,000 and the host farmer was required to surrender an uncertain percentage to the leadership of the primary union. 

I will take you to the observations to save time.

Observations

1. The decision of TEFCU to charge/sell farmers a fee amounting to Shs 200,000 per pump was unjustifiable and irregular and that the pumps, which were procured by the Government of Uganda, should have been received by the farmers at no charge.

2. 	The total cost of the 240-motorised spray pumps was Shs 528 million. This means that each spray pump was valued at Shs 2.2 million which is way higher than the average market price of these knapsack spay pumps which is approximately Shs 700,000 as established by the committee during an open market survey in three different shops in container village. The committee went to container village and visited three shops and that was the average price. Some were selling them at Shs 600,000 and some at Shs 700,000. The picture of the pump is there as well. 

3. 	Whereas these pumps were supposed to benefit all the farmers, only the farmers that were registered under the union benefited, therefore, disqualifying those that are not registered by the union from benefiting from the Government facility.

4. 	The pumps were delivered at the factory premises without distribution and beneficiary guidelines. The pumps were officially handed over by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives.

5. 	The pumps were found to be defective and of poor quality. It was reported that several pumps had broken down in the first month of use.

This was during our meeting with the co-operatives.

The pumps were too few to benefit the farmers in the subregion. In some districts, it was reported that only four pumps were given.

Lastly, the impact of Soroti Fruit Factory on Teso subregion and the country: 

Some people said that the factory imports concentrates and does not buy their fruits; so, we thought we would interact with the Uganda Revenue Authority to establish the facts.
 
During the interaction with Soroti Fruits Limited, there were allegations that the factory was involved in the importation of concentrates and fruits from neighbouring countries. 

Uganda Revenue Authority informed the committee that since January 2020 to date, the factory has imported majorly sugars for industrial use with total volumes of 60,080 kilogrammes recorded. 40,080 kilogrammes were imported in 2021 and only 20,000 kilogrammes for the year 2020. 

Uganda Revenue Authority submitted the list of all those importing concentrates, but we thought that it would be unnecessary to put them here and Soroti Fruit Factory was not among those.

Observation

The information provided by Uganda Revenue Authority that Soroti Fruits Limited is not involved in the importation of concentrates and fruits in the country. 

General Observations

The committee makes the following recommendations:

1.	Teso Farmers’ Cooperative Union refunds to all the farmers the money amounting to Shs 200,000 that was charged per pump or be prosecuted for extortion, obtaining money by false pretence, corruption and theft, among others. (Applause)

2.	The supply of fruits be opened up to other organised farmer groups and individuals to eliminate the monopoly of Teso Tropical Fruits Cooperative Union (TEFCU). We recommend termination of the contract that Uganda Development Corporation gifted another shareholder to be the only supplier of the fruits.

3.	The committee recommends that a fully-constituted board of five members be appointed with immediate effect as opposed to the current interim board consisting of three members who have served over two years on interim basis. 

4.	The IGG should investigate the Chief Executive Officer, Mr Ndawula Douglas and the entire management of Soroti Fruits Limited, for possible inflation of the costs of operations and other related expenditures in Financial Year 2020/2021. 

	For instance, the public relations and advertisement costs incurred Shs 772 million to generate annual sales of Shs 818 million. This implies that he spends about Shs 60 million every month to generate Shs 68 million.

	For example, they procured a borehole at Shs 140 million and others. So, we recommend the IGG to investigate the entire management.

5.	Government should immediately avail the factory with funds to purchase a weighbridge, which has cost the farmers enormous losses as the current system takes two hours to offload a 10-tonne truck, two extra hours to do the sorting and manual weighing using 10 staff.

	Therefore, farmers whose produce goes bad as a result of this delay are forced to dispose their produce at their own cost. During our first meeting, we discovered that some fruits were dumped in the swamp.

6.	Government should provide the factory with funds to procure an orange fruit-processing line for the processing of oranges, which are predominantly grown by farmers in the Teso subregion.

7.	Uganda Development Corporation (UDC) should terminate the contract between UDC and Teso Tropical Fruits Cooperative Union (TEFCU) where a shareholder gifted another shareholder with another contract to monopolise and supply fruits. (Applause)

8.	The enforcement of separation of power so that there is a clear distinction between the management of UDC and Teso Tropical Fruits Cooperative Union (TEFCU), in order to foster good corporate governance as stated in the shareholder agreement.

9.	A forensic audit into the management and execution of the contracts for provision of the perimeter wall and road works, services and supplies to Soroti Fruits Factory.

10.	The 20 per cent shares in Soroti Fruits Factory allegedly owned by Teso Tropical Fruits Cooperative Union (TEFCU) be opened up to other farmer cooperatives and unions in Teso subregion for subscription and acquisition of interests in the company.
	We discovered that up to now, TEFCU does not have a certificate; therefore, it does not legally have the shares.

11.	The Ministry of Agriculture should provide genuine pesticides to citrus fruit farmers, provide advisory services and research focusing on disease and pest control and more improved varieties.

12.	All the staff, starting with the Chief Executive Officer, should have their contracts reviewed and given performance contracts so as to attain the strategic objectives of the establishment.

13.	Masiko Jude Benda, the Project Manager in charge of the contract for completion of a perimeter wall and construction of the murram road, be investigated with a view of prosecution on allegation of causing financial loss.

14.	The National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) should carry out a census in regards to the seedlings they have distributed throughout the country with the view of ascertaining the impact of NAADs contribution to the agricultural sector.

15.	The Auditor-General should carry out a value-for-money audit into the management of Soroti Fruits Limited and report back to Parliament.  

16.	The second schedule of the Uganda Development Corporation Act, 2016 is amended to list all entities and undertakings, in which Government interest is held by Uganda Development Corporation. 

17.	The nomenclature of the shareholders in Soroti Fruits Limited should be clarified to avoid any ambiguity in prescribing for liabilities and assets of the company, as well as understanding the actual subscribers to the articles and memorandum of association of the company.

18.	In order to grow the company and ensure that Soroti Fruits Limited meets the demand of the farmers, all the shareholders should make their fair contribution towards the capitalisation and administration costs of the company.

19.	Uganda Development Corporation, being the major shareholder in Soroti Fruits Limited, should incorporate corporate governance in the management of the company so as to ensure that Government commercial interests in the company are secured.

20.	Soroti Fruits Limited should be given funds to procure a fully-mechanised packaging line to improve efficiency and effectiveness of production. This packaging line will save the issue of manual packing and sorting.

21.	Lastly, the various officers from the office of the Solicitor-General who cleared the contracts in contention - believed to have caused financial loss - be investigated with a view of prosecution. There were four different officers from the Office of the Solicitor-General clearing contracts for the same work, but at different times.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who are they? The Hansard is capturing; I want the names to be mentioned.

MR MPAKA: I am going to provide those names.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as he looks for the names, in the VIP Gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from the Parliament of Zimbabwe.  

We have Hon. Pupurai, Government Chief Whip of Zimbabwean Parliament, Hon. Mpara, Opposition Chief Whip of the National Assembly, Hon. Tsitsi, Government Chief Whip for the Senate, Hon. Choletta Deputy Government Chief Whip, National Assembly.

Mrs Lucia, Assistant Clerk, Ms Eveline Masara, Committee Clerk and Mr Munogwa ADC to the Chief Whip. You are most welcome. (Applause)  

This is the Parliament of Uganda and while here, feel at home.

Still in the VIP Gallery this afternoon, we have the Rt Rev Raphael P’Mony Wokorach, Bishop of Nebbi Catholic Diocese. (Applause) Papa Bishop, you are most welcome and thank you for coming. He is the main celebrant in today’s Ash Wednesday Mass that is ushering in the parliamentary community into the Lenten Season. You are most welcome. He is accompanied by Rev. Fr Kennedy Onoba and Brother Ochan from the Comboni Missionaries. (Applause) 

We also have Ms Gillian, who has accompanied a team and our own, Rev. Fr Ponsiano Kaweesa, the Chaplain of the Catholic Chaplaincy. (Applause) You are most welcome and thank you for coming to observe our proceedings. Welcome to your Parliament. Thank you and thank you for always praying for us. Yes, Hon. Nathan?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a procedural issue. 

Madam Speaker, this report is very good, but our chairperson never read all parts. The procedural point I am raising is: wouldn’t it be procedurally right that as the chairperson is looking for the names – because the report which was lent to me by my Amuran has the names. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that the entire report –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have the names?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, I have the names, but I do not want to –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Even the chairperson has got the names. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: What I am trying to raise is that the whole report be a record on the Hansard because there were times when we told him, “Just go to the observations”. If you look at the entire report, it is a very interesting one which will really need to be diagnosed. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The report is uploaded and let it be part and parcel of the Hansard of Parliament. (Applause) We are only waiting for the names. 

MR MPAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The first officer was Mrs Nanziri F., signed for and on behalf of the Solicitor-General. The second officer was Ms Namagembe E., signed on behalf of the Solicitor-General. The third officer was Ms Nantongo H., who also signed on behalf of the Solicitor-General for the same contract. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In conclusion – 
MR LUMU: Madam Speaker, when the chairperson was reading the names – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You said there were four.

MR LUMU: He did not say the second name. I think, Madam Speaker, it would be proper if both names are read, for the record. I thank you.

MR MPAKA: Madam Speaker, those were the initials on the signed documents so we do not have the other names.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you said there were four officers.

MR MPAKA: There is another officer for the road works. He is called Byamukama, who also signed for and on behalf of the Solicitor-General. We have all the supporting documents here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. So, can you conclude?

MR MPAKA: In conclusion, Soroti Fruits Limited was incorporated to add value to fruits that were abundantly under utilised, to address the high post-harvest losses, provide market for the farmers’ produce and create employment opportunities along the value chain, thus increased and diversified household incomes within the greater Teso Subregion. This objective is yet to be achieved and the establishment should, therefore, be supported by all concerned stakeholders to ensure that the objectives of its establishment are achieved in their entirety. I beg to submit. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and members of the committee. This has been a very elaborate report and very enriching. (Applause) I did not know that some things are still happening. From what I have heard from the report, I think there is a problem.

Honourable members, you have heard the report. Yes – and I am not going to allow any shoddy debate on this report. Whatever has been recommended, action must be taken. Let these people be accountable. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to pick from your last statement, that you do not want any shoddy debate. (Interjections). Okay, whatever! 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, haphazard debate. It should be a conclusive debate.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Half-baked. Two, you said you had not known that these things happen in this country –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are still happening -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: And still happening. For us who come from Teso Subregion, me and my Amuran here and this Amuran - if you come there, we shall also call you Amuran. We want to request – wouldn’t it be procedurally right that this report is given thorough time to be debated so that we can analyse it? Madam Speaker, you could give us a whole day because UDC has so many issues?

Recently, we gave them Shs 150 billion; we must deal with them. So, wouldn’t it be procedurally right, Madam Speaker, that we defer this debate up to Wednesday next week since on Tuesday, we are going for Women’s Day celebrations and we want peace. Otherwise, the names they have been reading are for women? We do not want them to have a bad Women’s Day; we want them to finish Women’s Day and then we deal with the matter. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. First of all, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, before you speak, I want to thank you very much for coming to the House. (Applause) It gives us energy to debate and do everything in this House when the Government is here. Thank you very much, Gen. Ali for coming and please, can you respond to the request made by Hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi?

5.01
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I want to also thank you for being on top of the issues in the House. Since I came and sat here, I have really enjoyed the debate. 

I also heard you say, Madam Speaker, that you are going to close at exactly 5.00 p.m. I do not know whether I am guessing, but I heard. Therefore, with regards to your statement, may I advise that we debate this report on Tuesday? I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Tuesday, is Women’s Day – Wednesday.

GEN.(RTD) MOSES ALI: Wednesday. (Applause) We will debate it on Wednesday, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: General, thank you. Is it seconded?  

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas, I agree with the proposal, however, procedurally, wouldn’t it be right for us, as this Parliament, after the presentation of the report by the chairperson of the committee, to listen to the petitioner who is in the House so that we go with a mind to debate the report on Wednesday, when we have consensus with each other?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Commissioner, the –

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, I am still driving my procedural matter – but I can sit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Commissioner, the petitioner raised his issue. He went and presented his issue in the committee. Everything has been accommodated. It is no longer the petitioner’s issue. This is a report of the House now. It is now our report. (Applause) We only want to thank the petitioner for bringing it on board, but it is going to be a report of the House that we will debate.

The amendment we can have is that the ministers of trade, tourism and finance must be in the House when we are debating. 

MR SILWANY: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Members, we will debate the report exhaustively on Wednesday.

5.04
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Save for the statements and the reports, we do not have those attachments and authorities. It would be better if we would be furnished with the attachments so that we debate from a point of knowledge. It could be uploaded since it is now a public document.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Sseki, that is the problem of coming in late -(Laughter)- That is what we agreed; that we upload.  Honourable members, we have papers to be laid. Can you just lay your papers – it is not borrowing. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

5.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the reports on:

    1. The Semi-annual Budget Performance for Financial Year 2021/2022, and 

    2. The Half-year Macroeconomic and Fiscal Performance for Financial Year 2021/2022. 

I beg to lay, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  They are referred to the relevant committee. 

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As Jajja comes to present another report, we are concerned that there are reports that have taken ages and failed to see the surface of the Floor. Everybody has demanded for the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, but it has failed to come out. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, could you, kindly, ask the chairperson of that committee to get a date and present that report? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I have also demanded for that report and not seen it. Hon. Nyakikongoro, please, in the next sitting, we should have the report.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Madam Speaker, most obliged. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE DELEGATION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS TO THE 21ST EAST AFRICAN MICRO SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES EXHIBITION IN MWANZA, TANZANIA

5.08
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Ms Noeline Kisembo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table a report of the Delegation of the Committee on East African Community Affairs to the 21st East African Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Exhibition, held in Mwanza, Tanzania. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please lay. We will study the report.

MS KISEMBO: Madam Speaker, allow me to make two statements on the report in two minutes. The report that I have just laid is on micro, small and medium enterprises trade fair, an activity of the EAC that is held annually and on a rotational basis among the East African Community partner states –(Interruption) 

MS AISHA KABANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since we started today’s, sitting, Hon. Kibalya has been standing whether he is deliberating or not. Is it in order for him to be standing throughout?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He has a medical problem; that is why he cannot sit. (Laughter)

MS KISEMBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. I was informing the House that this trade fair is held on an annual basis within the partner states of the EAC and the last one, the 21st one, was held in Mwanza, Tanzania.

In December 2022, Uganda is expected to host the same exhibition. However, a serious concern is that when we interacted with the Ministry of EAC Affairs and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives – the two MDAs that are supposed to co-host the event – it is an unplanned activity that would require funding. 

The delegation that participated in this exhibition reported to the committee that the arrangement in Mwanza was of a high-level standard. However, when it is our time to host, we have it as an unplanned and unfunded priority. 

So, it is a concern of the committee that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides the required funding, which is already put in the recommendation of the report, so that the activity is held successfully in December. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister for Finance, have you heard the request from the committee?

5.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I have heard the request and I have had an engagement with the Committee on East African Affairs and we are progressing very well.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you know why I am asking you that? We are not progressing well. Stop having side meetings with committees. This House needs to be funded. I will still remind you – I have this and I will lay it on the Table; it is about how you have written to the President saying, “We should not fund Parliament”. This is the letter which came today.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, I needed to clarify one point. The Committee on East African Community Affairs -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us handle all committees together and not selectively. It is about Parliament. It is just one that is saying, “We need money”. Yes, my sick man. (Laughter)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our rules are clear. The Speaker is listened to in silence. The minister is still on the microphone as you are presenting and defending the House. 

Is the minister in order, Madam Speaker, to continue arguing with you, holding another microphone, when you are speaking? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, Hon. Musasizi used to be my chairman at a committee. So, I think he is imagining that we are still in a committee. (Laughter) 

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of funding to Parliament – I recall last year, in November, when this matter was raised on the Floor, the Minister of Finance, Hon. Matia Kasaija, was here. Madam Speaker, you made it categorically clear to the Ministry of Finance that Parliament’s other major function, other than legislation, is oversight. Now, if you cut the Parliament’s budget, how do you expect us to oversee what you are doing as the Executive?

Therefore, is the honourable minister in order to even waste time here talking about this matter? They should go and either retract their letter or come back to this House and tell us about funding to Parliament because we are an oversight committee; unless they want to tell us that Parliament is not necessary during this time.

Madam Speaker, is it in order for the minister to get to the microphone – you have said you are going to lay the letter on the Table - it is written in black and white. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable ministers of finance, stop spoiling the name of our good President. You are spoiling his name by writing to him not to fund us. You should know we are the other Arm of Government. If you have issues, let us discuss them as Arms of Government, but do not mislead our President – and he is a Member of the Commission; why wouldn’t he raise it in the Commission meeting?

Honourable members, since we are going to debate those other papers on Wednesday and we have other documents to handle tomorrow – I know everybody is tired, especially Gen. Ali. I want to thank you for coming. I, therefore, adjourn the House to 2 o’clock tomorrow. Thank you.

(The House rose at 5.16 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 3 March 2022, at 2.00 p.m.) 

