Thursday, 18 March 2010

Parliament met at 10.17 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)
 
The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. Again it is my daily prayer that I need your commitment to parliamentary work this month, next month and maybe part of May, so that we can be able to clear some key issues, especially with regard to Bills connected with the reform of the electoral laws. Please, bear with me and then after that those who want to go to campaign will go for campaigns, but let us really concentrate on parliamentary work. Thank you very much.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE INSURANCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010


10.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT)(Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Insurance (Amendment) Bill, 2010” be read the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Well, it is seconded.

MR KAJARA: The Bill is accompanied by a certificate of financial implications. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill is committed to an appropriate committee of Parliament for scrutiny and subsequent report to the House.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UA 80 MILLION (EQUIVALENT TO US$ 120 MILLION) FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND OF THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP FOR FINANCING THE ROAD SECTOR SUPPORT PROJECT 3 – THE UPGRADING OF NYAKAHITA – IBANDA – KAMWENGE ROAD

10.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT)(Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, Government laid a proposal to borrow 80 million Units of Account from the African Development Bank Group to finance the Road Sector Support Project 3, and this was to do with upgrading of Nyakahita–Ibanda–Kamwenge Road, covering 143 kms. 

This proposal was laid before Parliament and passed on to the Committee on National Economy, and the Committee did consider this proposal, made consultations on it and they generated a report, which is supposed to be presented before the House this morning. 

MS BINTU: Mr Speaker, the honourable minister is reporting on behalf of the committee and we do not even see the chairman of the committee here and neither do we have any reports. Can I be guided?

THE SPEAKER: This matter was on the Order Paper yesterday, but we did not reach it because of the business that we had. But the chairman is now here though he is late.

10.23
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the Committee on National Economy, I now present the committee’s report on the request by Government to borrow Units of Accounts 80 million, equivalent to US$ 120 million, from the African Development Bank Group for financing the Road Sector Support Project 3 that includes the upgrading of the Nyakahita–Ibanda–Kamwenge Road. 

The request was presented to this House by the honourable minister of finance –(Interjection)

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We are aware that the Committee on National Economy did present a report on the performance of the economy and about two weeks ago, the shadow minister of finance made a response. I remember the Minister of Finance prayed for some time to be able to crystallise issues raised by the shadow minister of finance on the performance of the economy, and indeed, a timeframe was given to the Minister of Finance that she ought to come here with the report by Tuesday this week. 

We have not yet tackled issues that were raised by the two reports. We have not had any response from the Minister of Finance and we are now starting on another programme. I thought that it would be better for Members to follow consistently what is obtaining in Finance rather than us starting a programme and leaving it half done, and then starting on another one. I have fears that proceeding the way we are attempting to do, might pre-empt some of the issues that Members could have raised on the debate on the performance of the national economy, because one of the issues that was cited is the overzealous borrowing. 

So, Mr Speaker, may I know whether it is proper for us to proceed to again borrow even before we hear responses from Finance regarding the performance of the economy? I beg to seek your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: What I know is that there is business which is pending that has not been disposed of, I think, the report on the state of the economy. I do not remember the year, but what do we do? This is a different business. It may be related, but what do we do? I understand there is a timeframe within which we have to finalise the authorisation of this Bill. Definitely there is no way we are going to escape borrowing simply because we have been borrowing, because that is our economy. (Laughter) I do not envisage a situation when we shall say, “Let us stop borrowing.” We shall continue borrowing, but it is also important to complete that business. But if that business is not completed, what should we do? Should we just say that we do not handle this?

MR ODUMAN: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue raised by my colleague is a very salient one. As we said, the two reports presented earlier on tackled the economy and debt sustainability. In those reports, we actually challenge, very vigorously, Government’s continued borrowing. We also make a case that this is the time to look back and ask for a way forward in respect to borrowing and financing Government programmes. 

In our report, we say that this country can move on without borrowing. As the Member has raised, I would like to say that first things should come first, and that should have been in that report.

THE SPEAKER: But it was not listed. We cannot handle business that has not been listed. Please proceed. 

Maybe before you proceed, in the gallery, we have members of Amuria District Council. (Applause) You are welcome to Parliament.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Can you summarise your report?

MR MUKITALE: Yes, I will. Mr Speaker, the committee has considered and scrutinised the request and now begs to report as follows:

Methodology

We did interface with Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Works and Transport, UNRA, and went for field tours jointly with the Committee on Physical Infrastructure.

The committee further studied and made reference to the following documents: 

    • The project appraisal document,
    • the project implantation plan, and
    • the draft loan financing agreement.

Mr Speaker, allow me to now lay on Table the appraisal and implementation plans for the project together with the financing agreement.

The committee also found it important to get an assessment of the performance of the earlier loans in the sector since 2000. I would like to report that we have got some copies and I request that they be circulated.

Mr Speaker, allow me lay on Table, UNRA’s report on the performance of loans under the national roads since 2000. 

We also looked at the road development and maintenance programme status report updated as per January 2010. May I also be allowed to lay on Table a copy of this report?

We as well looked at the minister’s brief on the loan request, which we all got here. The status I just laid on Table has road programmes along Kampala-Kafu-Kigumba-Karuma, Pakwach-Arua-Oraba, and Masindi-Hoima-Kampala routes.

Background

Uganda has been implementing the Ten-Year Road Sector Development Programme developed in 1997 for the national roads. This programme was later updated in 2001 to form the Road Sector Development Programme II, running from the financial 2001/02 to the financial year 2010/11.

The objectives were as follows:

    a) Provision of an efficient, safe and sustainable road network in support of market integration and poverty eradication.

    b) Improvement of a managerial and operational efficiency of road administration.

    c) Development of the domestic construction industry.

The upgrading of the Nyakahita-Ibanda-Kamwenge Road is, therefore, fully in line with the objectives of the DRSDP; it will support the efforts of Government in poverty reduction through the improvement of the road infrastructure.

Furthermore, the Road Sector Support Project is in line with Uganda’s Poverty Eradication Action Plan, which is to be succeeded by the National Development Plan for the next five years 2010/11 to 2014/15. The PEAP identifies and accords high priority to infrastructure development and maintenance and a pillar to enhance production, competitiveness and income, as one of the five themes to eradicate poverty.

The PEAP further identifies transport infrastructure development and maintenance as one of the ten priority areas.

Infrastructure development is also identified as a key growth driver in Chapter 5 of the UNDP, hence the Road Sector Development Programme too, which puts emphasis on the expansion and improvement of the road network.

Rationale for the bank involvement

The bank intervention is consistent with the country’s aspirations to improve transport services. In regard to this, the bank is already involved in the financing of Fort Portal-Bundibugyo-Lamya Road of 103 Kilometres, which is part of the Kampala-Nyakahita-Fort Portal-Lamya East, linking the western part of Uganda to eastern Democratic Republic of Congo.

The 143-Kilometre road project is an important part of the missing link of the 2009 kilometres of the spine. The road has been identified as one of the priority road links, and has been conceived under the RSDP II, which is within the framework of the sector investment programme.

The bank financed the study and a detailed engineering design. Therefore, its continued support is logical.

Project overview

The Nyakahita-Ibanda-Kamwenge Road upgrading starts at Nyakahita on the Masaka-Mbarara Highway, traversing the districts of Kiruhura, Ibanda, and Kamwenge. The terrain is a plateau with flat undulating plains.

Expected outputs of the project are a 143-kilometre new bitumen road with a six-metre carriage way and 1.5 metres of shoulders on either sides between Nyakahita, Ibanda and Kamwenge. Education on road safety will also be carried out. A weighbridge will further be installed at an appropriate location to control vehicle balance. 

The project will also produce feasibility and detailed engineering design studies for Kayunga-Galiraaya – 83 kilometres, and Hoima-Butuaba-Wanseko – 111 kilometres. 

The project will be implemented over a five-year period for a total financial requirement Of UA  110.2 million of which UA 80 million will be financed through the ADB.

The project objective

The sector goal is to contribute to poverty reduction by improving sustainable road access to all rural and urban areas of the country, while the specific objective is to improve the road access in the rural areas of Kiruhura, Ibanda and Kamwenge, and western Uganda in general, by upgrading the Nyakahita-Ibanda-Kamwenge Road from gravel to bitumen standard, and additionally assess the feasibility of investing in the Kayunga-Galiraaya and Hoima-Butiaba-Wasenko roads.

We did request the Ministry of Works, through UNRA, to furnish Parliament with the map showing the scope of work they are doing - how they are targeting the whole country - and I would like to request that those maps are also given to Members for further illustration.

Project beneficiaries

The direct beneficiaries of the project outputs are an estimated 0.8 million people of Kiruhura, Ibanda and Kamwenge living within the project zone of influence and those of western Uganda. The majority of road users are people involved in agricultural activities, animal husbandry and trading, those seeking social services such as education and medical services, and tourists to Kibaale National Park. Administrators and social workers will also make use of the road to provide extension and outreach services. 

Further benefits will also include: 
    • improved transport services with reductions in transport costs;
    • travel time and improved road safety; and
    • ultimately improved standards of living among the communities in the zone of influence.

    • The project will largely contribute to poverty reduction by improving household income and well-being through increased access to markets and social services. 

    • Additional benefits too will emanate from jobs created during construction, sub-contracts for supply of goods and services, and roadside socio-economic activities.

    •  The communities along the road will also benefit from HIV/AIDS/sexually transmitted infections awareness and prevention campaigns.

The project components

    • RSSP 3 project component one, is civil works for upgrading of the 143 kilometres of gravel to bitumen.
 
    • Component two is the design review pre-contract and supervision exercise. 

    • Component three is the road safety.

    • Component four, on page 7, is compensation and resettlement.

    • Component five is feasibility and detailed engineering design studies and

    • Component six is the audit.


I am trying to summarise since we have two reports to make.

Project implementation

UNRA, which was established by the Act of Parliament and mandated to manage the national road network on behalf of the Government of Uganda, will be the implementing agency for this project. UNRA, through the nominated project coordinator, will be responsible for the overall coordination of activities under the project, and will serve as the contact person for all the parties involved in the project. 

The civil works will be implemented in two contracts over the 36-months contract period, and the feasibility and detailed engineering studies over the 18 months. The contractor will be responsible for implementing environmental and social management plan measures, while resettlement and compensation will be a responsibility of UNRA.

UNRA, through the resident engineer, will supervise all environmental and social aspects on site, while NEMA will monitor compliance with environmental laws and regulations both at national and district levels. UNRA will further sub-contract a service provider to execute the settlement and compensation in accordance with the resettlement action plan. 

UNRA will further be responsible for the procurement of activities for the project. All procurement of goods, works and related services and acquisition of consulting services financed by the ADF will be in accordance with bank rules and procedures for the procurement of goods and works, and rules and procedures for consultants. 

In order to ensure sustainability, Government has taken measures to ensure a steady and regular flow of maintenance funds, and in 2007/08, increased the allocation to the maintenance by about 100 percent over 2006/07. Furthermore, in order to ring fence financing for maintenance, a second generation road fund is scheduled to be fully operational beginning July 2010. In addition, the transfer of the maintenance function from the Ministry of Works and Transport to UNRA has improved planning, programming and execution of maintenance works.

Finally, after completion, UNRA will be responsible for maintenance of roads through financing from the Road Fund.

The loan terms and conditions are largely concessional, the amount being UA 80,000,000 equivalent of US$ 120,000,000. The borrower shall repay the principal of the loan over a period of 40 years after a 10 year grace period from the date of this agreement, at a rate of one percent per annum from the 11th to the 20th year inclusive, and at the rate of three percent per annum thereafter.

The borrower shall pay a service charge at a rate of three quarters of one percent that is 0.75 per annum on the principal amount of the loan disbursed. We shall also pay the commitment charge at 0.5 per annum on the undisbursed portion of the loan, which shall begin to accrue 120 days after signature of this agreement. 

The principal of the loan shall be repaid in equal and consecutive semi-annual instalments, the first of which shall be payable on 1st May or 1st November, whichever immediately follows the expiry of the grace period. The service charge and the commitment charge shall be payable semi-annually on the same dates. This is largely a concession facility.

Conditions attached to the financing

The obligation of the fund to make the first disbursement of the loan shall be conditional upon the entry into force of agreement and the fulfilment by the borrower of the following condition:

    • The borrower shall provide evidence in form and substance satisfactory to the fund that UNRA has approved all sections of the project and the project works schedule.

The legal right of way in respect to land required for the first section of each of the Nyakahita-Kazo section of the road, Lot one and then Kazo-Kamwenge section which is Lot two, in each case as determined in accordance with the approved project works schedule, referred to in section one above.

Prior to the commencement of the construction works, all project affected persons in sections of Lot one and two will have been fully and adequately compensated in accordance with the resettlement action plan.

Observations and recommendations

The committee noted with concern the high rate at which newly constructed roads were wearing down due to the impact of heavily loaded trucks like on Jinja-Malaba and Kampala-Kafu-West Nile roads. 

The committee recommends that alternative forms of transport - and here we are specifically emphasising that the rail transport needs to be revamped so that the heavy loads which are now wearing the roads, could actually use the cheaper rail transport; and we are also recommending that computerised weighbridges should be introduced in order to reduce on the road strain.

The committee also urges Government not to only construct traditional roads. We need to look into other catalytic developmental roads like the tourism circuits, the lakeside roads, which could even help in the settlement challenges of this country, the park roads and the ring roads. This will go a long way in boosting tourism.

The committee noted the poor road designs provided by some consultants and this affected the implementation phase for instance the Kabala-Kisoro-Bunagana Road. When we went there we found the initial design did not envisage drainage throughout and yet this is a mountainous area. We find this very dangerous and we think the standards of the roads must be given by the ministry and not depend on the donor financing. We should know what we need as our road standard but not just to fit in the wallets of the development partners.

The ministry should come up with procedures to ensure compliance and enforcement of terms and conditions as outlined in the contract. 

Further still, Government should endeavour to come up with a strategy whereby the road designs are drawn before seeking for funds, and assess their suitability to the terrain in question in order to avoid cases of redesigning after commencement of construction. Actually this leads to cost overrun as this impacts too on the finances available.

At least we found out that the ministry is now embarking on doing the design work prior to getting the donor support. So, we would like to request the Committee of Infrastructure to follow up this and make sure that we have designs of national standard and then whoever wants to finance us should finance Uganda’s design and Uganda’s need.

It was noted that the component of road safety sensitisation is still lacking with only public awareness campaigns and the media broadcasting the planned activities. This component is also poorly funded by only Units of Accounts 0.08 million. That is just about US $0.12. So, an improved strategy encompassing various sensitisation activities on road safety should be developed.

Furthermore, Government is urged to fast track the drafting of the Road Safety Policy and Strategy and a law for the creation of a national road safety authority. The committee noted that the funds provided for the National Roads Authority for the management of national roads is insufficient. The government should consider increasing the budgetary provision for UNRA. In the next financial year, UNRA too should build capacity in order to solve the problem of absorption capacity caused by the delayed implementation of certain projects.

The committee did observe that it takes designs and procurement takes a lot of time for our roads to be ready for works. We find this very dangerous. We hope that when they do the designs earlier and possibly do some engineering in making sure that some component of tendering could be done if it does not go to the details of committing the contractors to try and reduce the delay.

It was further noted that a specific formula for sharing of the Road Fund is lacking. Government should fast track the development of a scientific formula to ensure equal distribution of funds to both district and the central users because there seems now to be hegemony between the ministry central roads and the district roads. We think the district roads should equally be maintained and enough resources should be availed. So, I hope in the next budget Parliament will make sure that DUCAR is not starved of resources because these are the roads, which keep our people moving.

The committee noted the lack of maintenance on roads taken over by the central government. Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, you are aware that the ministry took over a lot of roads recently and these roads are not in a very good state. The committee recommends that Government makes effort to keep the roads under their jurisdiction well maintained. 

Further still, Government should also consider working on constructing roads in phases and do a good job other than constructing long but poor roads. 

The committee further noted that Government plans to put in place a national construction company. We found this was long overdue. Government should endeavour to set up a national road construction company and further build capacity of its human resource component through vast training in order to cut down on costs associated with hire of private contractors. Further still, attainment of its own equipment should also be looked at as an option to cutting down on associated construction costs. 

Honourable colleagues, for a long time in this Parliament we have been complaining about shoddy work by contractors and very high cost contractors and we do not have a comparative rate, which we can rely on as a nation. So, we think it is important that Government should have a construction company.

It was further noted that most of Uganda’s roads are constructed with a six-metre width instead of the internationally accepted seven metre width and for low density traffic not taking into account the heavy build up of traffic thus endangering the road users. Government should consider changing its strategy. Actually, we are saying that as Parliament we should adopt a seven plus two not six plus 1 1/2 because it is very dangerous when these roads are made narrow -(Interjections)- exactly. So, that will be plus three. I am happy the minister seems to be in agreement with that. 

The committee observed that some roads under construction lack diversionary roads and road signs while some were being used while undergoing construction. There is a very big problem. Our members of the infrastructure and economy committee who went to the Soroti-Lira Road had a problem of driving a kilometre without a diversion or without any safety message. You have to reach somewhere, the road is blocked and you drive backwards. We find that is recklessness on the side of the contractor and the consultant.

The committee recommends that Government and resident engineers should ensure compliance to construction of diversionary roads including maintenance because you find there is a diversion road and tractors stuck there and yet the contractor should be able to make sure that this diversionary road is well maintained and in case of any problem, they should be able to make sure that traffic continues flowing. 

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the committee has noted and appreciates that the transport sector plays a major role in the socio-economic development of our country by promoting the development of the productive sector of the economy and improving social services coverage and that the road infrastructure has been identified in Uganda as a priority for the development of the economy. It is in this respect therefore, that the committee supports and recommends this House to approve the request by Government to borrow Units of Account, 80 million, equivalent to US $120 million from the African Development Fund of the ADB for financing the road sector support project III, the upgrading of Nyakahita-Ibanda-Kamwenge Road. I beg to submit.

10.57
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. I thank the chairman for the report. When I look at this map, I get problems whether I should support the borrowing of this loan or just keep quiet; but I cannot keep quiet. I think really national issues should be brought in the open. 

The road for which we are proposing to get the loan to construct is the road, which leads to my village, therefore, I would have been the first person to say we need the money to work on it. But colleagues, when you look at the concentration of tarmac roads in our villages from the west, it is too much -(Interjections)- Look at the map and study it properly. I know I will debate this against all odds and I request that you wait and get my submission. I would have been the first person to support this if I were very selfish and motivated by personal gains - I would – because it is going to my village! It is a question of extending it from Kamwenge to Rwenzori and to Bundibugyo and I am at home.

Hon. Speaker and hon. Members, I want you to look at the whole of the Eastern region on the map especially the Karamoja region. There is nothing like a “black road.” Look at the whole of the Teso region; look at the whole of West Nile and go back to the tip of the south west towards Rwanda and see the concentration of tarmac roads within villages. (Applause) You cannot run a country like that -(Interjections)- you cannot! 

The chairman of this committee should save us and divert this loan to another region. Why not Karamoja?  Why not the Eastern region? Why not West Nile? (Applause) Mr Speaker, Government is right now working on Masaka-Mbarara Road; it is illogical and not in the interests of the country to have another loan to take a tarmac road to the village within the Western region. Does it make sense? I submit that we get the loan but let us at least allocate it to another region. I am requesting the chairman and this House to see logic. Thank you very much. (Applause)

11.01
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My colleague has already touched on one of the issues I wanted to raise to do with equity. We are glad that even the Uganda National Roads Authority put up a report on the performance of loans under UNRA since 2000. And in the entire report, I think even UNRA may have even forgotten the spelling of the word “Karamoja.” You can look at the report and see that there is nothing mentioning roads in the East especially beginning from Soroti. This has been mentioned several times by His Excellency the President that he would consider Soroti-Katakwi-Moroto up to Kotido. At a certain stage, they changed it and said, “From Sironko to Kabong” but shame; thank God that this map exists. 

In my opinion, whereas the intention of getting the money sounds good for the socio-economic development of our country, I think we should bear in mind the principle of equity.   

I would like to touch on the matter of priorities. We have many times argued about Government having to focus on areas that can help save life. Earlier on as the chairman of the committee was starting off this report, I made an observation about the report on the performance of the national economy that has not been fully debated by this House and which is closely linked to the issue of borrowing. Where do our priorities lie? 

We have argued that mothers in Uganda die in thousands every year and that the maternal health sector requires a bold intervention from Government in order to help save our dear mothers and babies. But there seems to be dilly dallying on the side of Government. There is even another very big problem that we are having as a country; we need just about US $10 million to fix issues to do with Cancer - the screening and treatment of Cancer in Uganda; we need just a bout US $10 million. We are going for US $120 million ostensibly to tarmac a road as the privileged Ugandans get out of the country to handle their Cancer ailments outside the country while the majority die here. We keep lamenting that we are sorry the health sector is not doing very well; the doctors tried but the doctors are not well equipped and are poorly remunerated. So, we are demanding that we must put our priorities right in order to save lives.

I am even surprised that on page 13 of the report there is a proposal to set up a national road construction company; I am wondering whether this is a parastatal and if so, how are we moving? It looks like we are whirling around in circles; you privatise government parastatals and you want to create more? So, I think recommendation No. 7 of Government’s plan to set up a national roads construction company should be reviewed. That is my submission otherwise the principles of priorities and equity ought to be addressed. I am very reluctant to support this loan request. 

11.06
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Charles Oduman): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Members, when we borrow, it must be absolutely necessary to borrow. When we borrow it must be for a purpose that is related to infrastructure development. When we borrow, it must be unavoidable. As we have argued in the past, it must be an action of last resort. By that we mean that we must look within our resources to see whether an activity cannot be financed. 

We cannot borrow to feed this current generation. We must borrow to build the country for the next generation rather than for this generation. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I have a concern that I need to raise to the hon. Minister and colleagues because my observation is that we are being driven by what I would call “herd instinct”. You know when cows move together, they do not question where they are going. So, I think that we need to deal with that. 

First of all, hon. Minister, at the time of the Budget Speech when we were debating this budget, I do not seem to see in the section of infrastructure; road transport, where this road featured as one of the priority roads -(Interjection)- yes, I have the Budget Speech here and that particular section and in that section you say, “I wish to highlight the road projects that will be undertaken this financial year and shall include the following ….” This is page 17 of the Budget Speech and across. 

I want to know at what stage this road came on board. The lists of the roads are all here. How did it come on board? Even if it is not all of them, these are key priorities if you want to put it that way. These are key priorities for this financial year. How did this road come on board? I am now questioning your planning -(Interruption)

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: If you re-named that road, you would call it Nyakahita-Rwakitura-Kazo road and if you look at the personalities that pass along that road, you would see how important the road is. Reading from what was in the press last week, His Excellency asked for this road and it has to be worked on. That is the level where it came in. The Budget Speech was given to us and nobody is telling us how far we have gone.

MR NASASIRA: First of all, Rwakitura is not on this road project. Secondly, although I don’t have a copy of the Budget Speech, normally the Budget Speech says that details will be given in the ministry’s policy statement. This road has been in the ministry’s policy statement year after year for the last five or eight years. It is just a rumour.

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker and Members, every year has a budget and priorities. This year the priorities in the road sector did not include that one and the priorities are here. Hon. Minister, I invite you to go to pages 17 and 18 where the Minister of Finance mentions roads for example Soroti-Dokolo-Lira, Kabale-Kisoro-Kyanika, Mbarara-Ntungamo-Kabale-Katuna, Kampala-Mukono-Lira, Fort Portal-Bundibugyo-Ramya, Mbale-Mwagale-Rwakaka, Gulu-Atiak-Bibia highway. Here it is -(Interruption)

MRS BARUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is hon. Sam Njuba in order to be reading newspapers when we are debating very important issues? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think what happened at Kasubi is still on his mind and he is trying to find out the details.

MR ODUMAN: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Minister, as you can see in the budget that I have just passed on to you, you cannot see that road on pages 17 and 18. I beg that the Minister takes note of our issues and responds to them at the end of our submissions.

Regarding the planning, when did that road come on board? Mr Speaker, the committee should have given us a breakdown of what this money is going to do exactly. This is because in the report it mentions the various things the money is going to be used for but what money is going to be used for what? I don’t know whether that information is not useful and in summary, it should have been captured. This is the cheque for us to sign. This motion to borrow is a cheque and what we have in the cheque is the sum to be borrowed. We don’t have a detailed breakdown, even if it is a quarter a page, to show what that money is going to do.

Incidentally, I have a copy which Members should have been provided with during this debate because we are going to sign a cheque. I have a copy of the brief to Parliament that was presented some time ago by the minister. You will be shocked to look at the things that are there. We said we must borrow for infrastructure and activities that secure the future of this country and the interests of the next generation but when you look at this - Members I really want to invite you to take responsibility and I will tell you a few things, which are here; HIV/AIDS mitigation, public awareness campaigns, media broadcasting, reporting. We need a loan to be paid for by our children for financial audits? Who is going to audit? We have the Audit Act and the auditor of this country is well known. Who is going to come and audit these projects again?

Mr Speaker, when you look at the breakdown again, I cannot take responsibility as being part of the people who approved this loan. My suggestion is that in future, in fact starting from today when we borrow especially for a road for infrastructure, we must say how many kilometres we want to construct and how much we are going to pay per kilometre. If it is 100 kilometres, what is the average rate for each kilometre to be constructed then we multiply that. The loan we should borrow should end there. Reporting, audits, public awareness, HIV/AIDS - we are wasting public funds and wasting money that doesn’t belong to us! We are here on behalf of the people who sent us here but we are spending money as if we don’t care about their stake.

I would have loved, honourable chairman for you to reproduce this for Members to see upfront as they sign this cheque, but you have not. In the instant case, how do they take responsibility for the details of what this money is going to do? That includes what I have not brought upfront -(Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you, shadow Minister of Finance, hon. Oduman. The clarification I want to ask hon. Oduman is if you look at page 8 of the report on audit and since you are our Shadow Minister of Finance, they have only put there one audit. Do you think that is the only audit that is needed, well knowing that we have already passed trillions of monies to resurface and repair other roads for the users and they are full of potholes? Do you think it is the only financial audit that is needed and no other audits? Thank you.

MR ODUMAN: Thank you for that very good question. I think the Minister should really guide us on this because we are concerned. It is not for the sake of it, we take responsibility, hon. Minister. What we sign for must be for a unit of a road and it should end there. We should not bring in administrative costs, publicity or audits because there is money elsewhere. The Auditor-General is there. Where do you want to take that money for audits? 

I also want the minister to explain to me the economics for borrowing for roads using loans whose term is in the range of 40 years. Some time back you were here and we asked you how long these roads last, and you said it is in the range of 15 to 20 years. I want to understand the economics; you borrow a loan whose term is 40 years and the road is going to last half that time. So, before you pay up that loan, you will need to rebuild that road. Now, can you explain to us whether –(Applause)- that is not creating a vicious cycle of indebtedness or whether it is not the transport sector that is actually tying this country to debt? We really need to know, because it is bothering us. We borrow and borrow for roads - if it were your money, would you go to a bank to get a loan for UShs 4 million to build a house which is going to take only two years, and yet the loan is to be repaid over four years? The house that you are going to build is a grass thatched house that should last two years. What will you do? You cannot do that if it is your money. (Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you Mr Speaker, and my colleague for giving way. The committee here further observes that the roads you are constructing are not up to standard. They are six metres wide yet the ordinary and international standards are supposed to be seven metres. In addition to the question he is raising about the viability of this loan, surely, if we are going to construct a road of six metres wide and then in a few years to come we need to redo it - not even expanding it because you will have to reconstruct it - if we are to comply with international standards and yet the loan is still standing for 40 years, and in about three to four years we shall say, “No, this road is not up to standard. We need a new one which is seven metres wide.” Does it really make sense?

MR EPETAIT: Thank you very much for giving way. We are told this road is a 143 kilometres stretch. We need US$ 120 million to cover that road. A quick computation is that we will be spending US$ 839,160. At an exchange rate of UShs 2,000 per dollar, we would be spending UShs 1,678 billion per kilometre.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Oduman, can you conclude?

MR ODUMAN: Thank you very much for that information. As I conclude, Mr Speaker, this is to our colleagues on that side. A picture is being painted that we need to borrow for roads; we need to borrow for projects. If we do not borrow, where shall we get money? This country can move on without borrowing, I want to assure you. The onus, Members, - because I am aware that many times these loans are tabled in the caucus to enable Government to get consensus from the caucus - you need to question these loans along these principles. Borrowing must be for infrastructure, and it must end there. I am really talking to our colleagues on that side. 

Secondly, if we do not borrow, where shall we get money for development? That argument should never arise. I want to ask you a question: We passed a budget a few years back and for the previous two years, we have been passing budgets. Now, midway, we get a supplementary for CHOGM and we passed the supplementary and money was found. I want to challenge you; where was that money found? Where did we get that money from? We passed UShs 270 billion but finally, UShs 500 billion was found; as we have discovered. Where did that money come from? So, you must question whoever tells you that we must borrow because we need this development project, to paint the picture that if we do not borrow then there will be no development. You are going to be personally responsible, because as far as we know, there is enough money in Uganda now to even deal with this project here. As long as we determine that we have the will to do this project, we can. CHOGM could have done two of such roads –(Interjections)– yes, but we know how it was spent. 

Mr Speaker, I wish to end here. I cannot add my stamp on this because I know it is a waste of public money and I invite my colleagues to reject this loan. 

11.25
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for giving me an opportunity to also express my view. I would like to thank the chairman of the committee and his members for the report. With due respect to the views of my colleagues, I think it is important and fair that as members of parliament representing different constituencies, we appreciate and be fair to the social ills and social problems of our respective constituencies and respect them. Just like we are always here approving funds for PRDP to mitigate the special conditions of that part, I think other sectors for other regions should also be looked at fairly. 

I am so passionate about this, not because I come from Kamwenge. Kamwenge District is a post conflict district; it was hit by the ADF. It lies down in the Rwenzori region belt –(Interjections)- can I be heard, Mr Speaker? Can I be protected from the honourable members on the other side, who are very enthusiastic to spoil this idea? 

Kamwenge District, not until last year when the Ministry of Works indicated to take over more kilometres of murram, only had one murram road from Ibanda Town to Fort Portal called a central government road. Ever since the railway collapsed, our maize produce has been bought cheaply, not because it is a reflection of the market prices, but because of being cut off completely from the entire country. When my colleague from Kasese, with due respect, who lives a long the highway says, “…taking roads to villages” I feel offended, but I will forgive him when we meet in the corridors. Even districts which are considered villages need to be served; they do not need to be excluded because they are in the villages. Just as I would support another loan tomorrow to pacify Karamoja, just as I would support another loan tomorrow to link West Nile to the neighbouring area, should be the same spirit of supporting the road to Kamwenge. 

In fact, I even want to know from the committee and the minister, why this road has been on for years and years. The last Budget Speech did not mention this road because this road has been on and on. I am even not comfortable because the report is not showing how the Kamwenge - Fort Portal stretch is going to be done. 

MR KALIBA: Thank you very much, hon. Tumwebaze, for giving way. The information I want to give is that it is true this road has been on for a long time, and in fact, it was supposed to reach Fort Portal. I am surprised that we are now talking of Ibanda; it was supposed to stop in Fort Portal.

MR TUMWEBAZE: I am only appealing to our colleagues to be fair. Kamwenge has no road linking it to Kyenjojo, the neigbouring district. Whenever it rains, we walk on foot. So, when we are looking at these social problems, let us only be fair. Let us not tag politics to it because it is going through Rushere.

Let us not politicise a road that is going to liberate millions of Ugandans who have for 20 years been selling their produce at UShs 100, not because they cannot produce much.

MR ONDONGA-OTTO: I would personally later support the loan to upgrade the road, but the point we members of Opposition are raising is, every time there is loan approval or a loan request for roads in this Parliament, there is either only a road from western Uganda or a road from western Uganda with roads from other regions.  That is what bothers us; we formally complained in this Parliament; when loans are brought, other regions are brought to accompany others. I will personally ask myself, why haven’t the ministers included this road with another road from the central so that we have a national outlook to the loan approval? You see, these are the issues that make us feel that hon. Nasasira has been in that position for too long. You cannot be a minister in one department for 23 years. There must be something that the appointing authority is hiding.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you hon. Otto for your information. The information hon. Otto is giving, as far as I know, apart from the road from here to Katuna and the road through Kasese to Mubende, and the road to Masindi which links to the North, I am not aware of any other tarmac road that branches to all these other districts say Kiruhura, Kamwenge, Kyaka or Kyenjojo.

While you are concerned that more roads from the North and East should come, it is my prayer to our colleagues that even the rural underserved districts of western Uganda should not continue to be marginalised because of the wrong perception. In management, it is called ‘perceptions err’, because of the wrong perception err that the West has it all. It is my prayer that we support this loan that opens the underserved districts to the rest of Uganda. 

I further seek clarification from the minister whether the Kamwenge - Kabalore part which was supposed to be part of this will be there. We do not want to come here again and be accused of trying to favour the West. The road was originally supposed to be Nyakahita-Kazo-Kamwenge-Fort Portal Road. That is when it will make sense; it will link Kamwenge to Fort portal to Bundibugyo and then we shall continue to persevere on our impassable roads. It was our only road if worked on for Kamwenge.
It is my prayer and request honourable members that you support this road, your other issues notwithstanding.

11.28 
STEVEN KASAIJA KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you hon. Speaker. I rise to support the loan, because this road is important and it has been in our budget year in, year out. So, it is not true to say that it was smuggled in. If you look at the previous budget it was there, and if you look at this year’s budget, it is there. Colleagues, I beg you to support the loan.

MR BYANYIMA: Let me give you this information. This road has been appearing in the ministerial policy statements. I have been a chairperson for 7 years and you know the work I did. Patrick Amuriat is a shadow minister he is definitely a witness to this.

MR KAGWERA: Thank you colleague for that information. I add my voice to my colleague’s that the Fort Portal part be added because initially, it was supposed to be 208 kilometres, but currently the loan is for only 143 kilometres. So, we should not again come here to seek for another loan. Let us do it at once and thereafter we go to the East and North as colleagues are saying.

The salient issues that we should be raising actually, other than complaining about the many roads, should be the shoddy work on these roads. Colleagues, we are borrowing money; money that is almost doing nothing. You construct a road, and within two years, this road is off. This is a salient issue that we should look at and the honourable minister should really explain.

You remember during the CHOGM period, we gave a lot of money, but later we were told that the roads were for the occasion. I remember the minister explaining this issue here and I felt bitter. Other than talking about the many roads that are being constructed, let us look at the quality.

On the issue of the heavy trucks on our roads that spoil them, the committee observed it, and the minister should come up and tell us what type of vehicles should move on what type of roads. I remember in trying to control this, along the Fort Portal-Mubende Road there was a weighbridge, but it was used to cheat the citizens. The people who were manning it were just extorting money, not until we complained and it was removed. I think the honourable minister should pronounce himself on this.

They talked about the designs; we have engineers in UNRA. Why should we have defective designs and continue to pay these people? If we are to make designs, let us make designs that are suitable for this country. The procurement process takes many years. If we passed money, let the procurement process be quick and then we move on. I have a case in point; one of the roads that is supposed to be worked on by UNRA, the Fort Portal-Kijura-Mubende Road. I have been over the radio many times explaining to citizens that the following month we are going to work on this road; the public relations office of UNRA is almost ineffective. It should not be a Member of Parliament to go on radio to explain, because at times you do not have the expertise, but these people are quiet when we are being bashed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You are right on the issue of procurement, which increases costs. For example, if you started to procure today, when the dollar is UShs 2000, and you contract when the dollar is 2200, I think you are already in a big loss. 
The information I wanted to give you is, when you say that you want to get a loan of US$ 120 million to work on a road from one point to another, you have already given the people who are supposed to contract the information that this road has this budget.

Given that we have given them information, they can either bid above or bid the exact amount factoring in inefficiency, loss of time and many others. Don’t you think that it will be better that this business of giving amounts on each road in public like now, when the contractors may be sitting somewhere here or on their TVs listening and they have the figures –(Interruption)

MS MUHANGA: Thank you for giving way, on the Kijura-Fort Portal Road, we have been told that a contract was awarded many months ago, but the contractor has done nothing on that road, and in the event that we reach the next budget, the money is returned to the National Treasury. This is the same thing that happened in the last budget. UShs 500 billion was returned to the National Treasury from roads;    that is quite a big scandal. Why can’t people take up contracts and work on the road? 

MR KAGWERA: As I conclude, a colleague raised the issue of break down. This honourable House is comprised of Members who really understand what they are doing. So, to just come and say, “We need so much money,” without giving us the breakdown is actually taking this House for a ride –(Applause)- let us be in the know. What are these people hiding? Give us the breakdown, we debate and we pass the loan. But when you just give flat figures like this, we become suspicious. 

Finally, we want value-for-money in this country. We are really tired - you have been seeing how people have been appearing before the Public Accounts Committee bashing one another saying, “You are the one who did this, you are the one who did that -” surely, what logic is there? Can’t we have a systematic way of doing things? You find the PS complaining, you find the minister complaining. Now, what are we really doing? Remember colleagues that this money will be paid by us, our children and grand children. Let us hold these people accountable. I thank you very much.

11.40
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti):  I thank you very much. I got up so that I can be helped to understand why I should support further borrowing. I do appreciate the concerns of my colleagues, especially those whose constituencies this road passes through. I am inclined to ask at this moment whether this Government understands the National Objective and Directive Principles of State Policy, because looking at our Constitution under Democratic Principle XII – Balanced and Equitable Development, the Constitution says, i) “The State shall take necessary measures to bring about balanced development of the different areas of Uganda and between the rural and urban areas; iii) the State shall take special measures in favour of the development of the least developed areas.” 

I would like to ask the minister who has asked for this loan, whether he knows that these principles should apply to planning for the development of this country. Whether he knows that there is a part of this country, the Northern part of this country without a single tarmac road. If you leave Soroti heading to Karamoja, there is no tarmac road and the furthest you go is up to a school called Teso College. 

Every year for the last many years I have been in this Parliament, all the minister comes to do is to promise to us in that part of the country, design and design and design! When you look at this map - thank God for the chairperson of the committee who has given us a good map to help us - this map is a good thing; the best thing that has befallen this House in a while. Kampala-Mityana Road, repairs are ongoing; Kabale-Kisoro Road is being worked on. Fort Portal-Bundibugyo Road, is being worked on; Masaka-Mbarara Road, is being rehabilitated. I do understand -(Interjections)- [Mr Nasasira: “Soroti – Lira”] - yes, that is the only one for the last 10 years – Soroti-Lira- (Laughter)- for the last 23 years of the NRM rule, that is the only road you can mention in that part of the country. In the whole of Nebbi, West Nile and Pader, there are no roads. I am bothered -(Interjections)-  I will give the chairman a chance because it is very important that I give him, but not after Members have shouted, but after they have all kept quiet and realised that I am in charge of the microphone because the Speaker has given it to me. 

Let me finish my submission. What I want to say is that it is important that we understand the criteria. What is the criteria for which a road is selected? Is it selected because milk passes through it everyday? (Laughter) Thank you; in that case, because the transport minister has said it is because of milk, I would like the Karamoja milk to also have a road everyday if that is the criteria. (Applause) We cannot go on borrowing money for roads and we do not understand the criteria for selecting which road shall be worked on. 

I also want the minister to tell me what he did with the UShs 1.1 trillion - people have come here and said that this road was on the budget. Last financial year, hon. minister, we gave you UShs 1.1 trillion. Why didn’t you work on this road? This financial year we have given you UShs 1.1 trillion, why haven’t you worked on this road? Why are you coming here to borrow additional money for a road which should have been covered in your budget, because this is how we have given you over UShs 3 trillion by now. So, it is important you become honest to this country and tell us why you do not want to abide by the Constitution which provides for balanced and equitable development?

Mr Speaker, I have problems with these loans - when you keep borrowing for one village, we all pay. The children of Karamoja who do not go to school will have to pay. They will pay with their lives and ignorance; but they will pay this loan. With the children who go wherever, whether this loan goes – we continue borrowing loans for only one village; whether it goes to the President’s home or minister’s home, we are all supposed to pay. Can’t you be fair enough to the children of this country so that you invest in them? I imagine that Karamoja would be more developed. I imagine that Northern Uganda would be a better place –(Interruption)

MS BAKO: Thank you very much hon. Alaso for giving way. What my sister hon. Alaso is saying is actually a critical situation. Assuming we are growing at a rate of one million people per year for the next 40 years, which is the time period of this loan, by then Ugandans will be 70 million people and we are borrowing US$ 120 million. When you divide $120 million by a population of 70 million people, in 40 years time, each individual whether living or dead, will be paying US$ 1.7 and that implies that both the living, the dead and the current unborn are going to suffer as a consequence of a loan unjustly brought, eternally defined. (Laughter)

MR MUKITALE: I thank you very much hon. Alaso for giving way. It is the Committee on National Economy which is tasked with this responsibility, which demanded for this map –(Interjections)- and we did it because we want to know the criteria, the deficit and the areas that have a gap. I thought I would be unfair if I allowed the debate to continue without reminding Members that if you check on your Order Paper, the next item is a loan for Gulu-Atiak,  [hon. Odonga-Otto: “We start with that one”] (Laughter) Vurra-Arua-Oraba Road. (Applause) Tororo-Soroti-Lira-Kamdini Road. I thought that for us not to turn the debate into a nationalistic one, the next report of US $190 million is actually about the North and the East. 

The second information -(Interjections)- I thought it is important. The second information, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, is that before the committee -  

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me; you said there is also a loan for which area? Can you repeat areas that the loan is meant for?

MR MUKITALE: The next report handles Vurra-Arua to Oraba Road; Gulu-Atiak Road; Tororo-Soroti and Lira Road. Actually, it is for US $190 million. (Applause)

The second information, which is also very important because it has been coming up, is that the first document you received before the committee report is a brief to Parliament from the minister. Page 5 gives us details of how this project is going to be placed. Actually, US $110 million out US $120 million is to go to civil works, designs and compensation; so it is also not very true that we are spending a lot of money. You have this report, honourable colleagues. 

MS ALASO: I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for that information. Actually, the chairperson helped me further because I am looking at the distances you are referring to, if you want us to be pre-emptive with the next loan. What is the total distance of new roads you are going to set up in Northern Uganda? There are very short stretches compared to what you are asking for. 

I also want to tell you that the Tororo-Soroti Road has existed for a long time. What you have done has been to ignore it until there are potholes so deep that they have embarrassed you; otherwise if you were not totally embarrassed, you wouldn’t come. The road is in a terrible shape; it should have come earlier than this one.

I want to give you the criteria for choosing the Gulu-Juba Road – what is it called -(Interjections)- Atiak. The reason for the criteria makes sense; you want to access the Southern Sudan market in Juba. I know it and you should know it -(Interjections)- let me make my final submission. I have laboured here, asking you to give this country the credible criteria for selecting roads so that whether it goes to my village in Serere-Obulini, at least I would understand if it fits in the criteria. 

But most importantly, as we borrow, I would like to invite the House to reflect on the absorptive capacity of this Government. We have so many loans; we have literally mortgaged the country and our children will have a very difficult time paying for loans whose absorption capacity the Government knows is very low. You are not using the money, but we are paying interest and commitment fees. All those commitments we make and do not use the monies; the loans go bad and you come again and continue borrowing? 

I think it is important for you to worry about who you are loading these loans with besides the corruption. You load them on very poor people and you want to mortgage them for a very long, long time. I am praying that the minister lays on Table credible criteria for selecting or prioritising roads in this country. Thank you.

11.53
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to make an appeal, because if the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy was being fair; whenever you are considering a loan, you should have the courtesy of sitting with a sessional committee. You never sat with us; you just called us to go and look at the roads. That was mistake number one.

I want you to really help me. I had been a chairperson of the committee for seven years. One day, one Member of this House who is no longer with us told the minister, “Stop being shy; make a road through Rwakitura.” That was Okulo-Epak. Hon. Arumadri you were there; hon. Patrick Amuriat, you were there. The policy has always been that we connect one district to another. 

I am happy that in 2001 when we came here, together with hon. Nandala-Mafabi, we went with the minister and found the road between Nebbi and Arua being launched. Later, it was from Arua, Nebbi, Pakwach, Olwiyo; it was covered and nobody complained. If it is talking about value for money, I entirely agree with you but for the regions, no.

First and foremost, when this Government came in, they had to rehabilitate the original roads, the corridors and it was done. I am happy when I see Soroti-Dokolo-Lira Road. I am extremely happy because it has been done. Mr Speaker, I want to appeal –(Interjections)- no, give me time. When I look at the calendar and the way the roads are being done now, I find it extremely difficult.

The most important road we have been thinking about is Kapchorwa-Suam. Today, if one of you took a step and went there and saw what is being done there, you can’t believe it; it is a wonderful job. I entirely agree. Then there is upgrading of Atiak-Moyo Road, 104 kilometres;  upgrading of the Gulu-Atiak-Nimule, 104 kilometres and design of  Muyembe-Moroto-Kotido Road 290 kilometres.

We are concerned about those roads -(Interjections)- no, wait! Most of you have got excited about this road but go and read your policy statements. The roads are well scattered all over the country. One person here abused me that, “Byanyima you have been a Member of Parliament and you never got your road tarmacked.” I have never thought of it. In Kazo, the Minister has been there for a number of years -(Interjections)- kindly Members, let us be fair to each other. When I see Kapchorwa Road done, what shall we do? We are all happy about it. If anything, we blamed hon. Ssendaula to have thought of it immediately.

When we talk of Moyo-Road, we are all together except that this Kamwenge Road has come so fast -(Interjections)- No, I think you gave Members a lot of time to talk, allow me to educate this House about it.  I can complain about the six metres; to the minister, it is no longer fashionable. We cannot build roads and improve them later. Let us have 7-metre roads done. It would be futile for us to stop the road at Kamwenge. Let us continue with the road up to Fort-Portal so that the policy of connecting districts –(Applause)

MRS BARUMBA: Thank you my colleague for allowing me to give this information - 

THE SPEAKER: You mean you have finished?

MRS BARUMBA: Thank you very much my colleague for allowing me to give this information. I think the assumption of where the road goes is not important; what is important is what that road brings and how it benefits the whole country because at the end of the day, everybody will pay that loan –(Interjections)– protect me, Mr Speaker. When that road is repaired, a lot of coffee from Ibanda will benefit the whole country as an export. A lot of milk is being poured away in Rushere. As I talk now, all the maize that should be providing food for our children cannot come here from Kamwenge. 

Therefore, this assumption of favoured districts should get out of our minds because I represent Kiruhura, but what favour is there. The other day, I was travelling to Gulu and my colleagues were saying, “For us, we vote by ten percent, but our schools are better”. I was with hon. Gutomoi. 

MR BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker, I would like to appeal to the Minister of Works to ensure that as we take on the new roads the original roads in the corridors are rehabilitated, like Kamudin Corner up to Lira, Gulu and the rest of them. 

I am extremely happy and I would want other roads to come in very fast, and the chairman should have included that in his report. Otherwise, I feel this House should stop trivialising this issue and support this loan for the sake of this road. When you go back and read your policy statements, you will find that the roads are spread all over the country and the only thing we need to improve is, I think, the speed and the efficiency to ensure that roads are spread all over the country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise to seek your guidance. A year ago, on the Floor of this House, I raised a concern on how resources were not being divided equally and fairly in this country; and the roads are just one of them. You directed that a select committee of Parliament be constituted to investigate how resources were being distributed in this country. Hon. Okecho William was appointed to chair that committee; up to today, the report has not yet come back. Probably, we would not be talking about unequal sharing of roads because there are other areas like permanent secretaries. 

So, I seek your guidance, how can this Parliament be aided to conclusively discuss how money is being divided unequally among the different districts of Uganda, so that next time, we can talk with a more national outlook after we have disposed of the excess baggage? 

THE SPEAKER: Where is the person who was appointed to chair that committee?

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I remember we were discussing the 2007/08 Budget Speech allocations and you directed that I chair that committee. But the resistance I found from the NRM Whip, hon. Princess Kabakumba – she fought tooth and nail to ensure that we do not succeed. When we left for India, she came to the House and deceived the Deputy Speaker who was in the Chair that I did not constitute the committee, and requested to be allowed to present the list on her side. She presented a list of members which was contrary to what she had presented to me. 

When I came back here – I had left hon. Oduman in charge of the committee – she had written to the Deputy Speaker saying there were leadership wrangles in this committee and that the committee should not proceed. We exchanged letters; hon. Wadri, my Chief Whip, was involved in that process. So, hon. Kabakumba ensured that the committee does not do its work. We wonder, why was she doing so; was it for the good or bad reasons? How can a single person in this House sabotage something that the honourable Speaker had directed to be done?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I recall I was the acting Leader of the Opposition at that time. You asked us to nominate and our side nominated quickly. In your wisdom, you said, hon. Elijah Okupa, who is competent in figures, should be able to chair this committee.  If you ruled that hon. Okupa should chair this committee, I do not know at what time you changed that decision, because when the Speaker makes a decision, there must be a substantive motion to alter it. I never heard of the substantive motion to remove hon. Okupa from the committee. But hon. Kabakumba Masiko, as usual, single headedly removed hon. Okupa from the committee. Mr Speaker, is that really right?

THE SPEAKER: This is a matter which I need to personally investigate. I cannot say off-cuff what happened; it would be unfair on my part to do so. I need time to study it and then report back after having some interaction with the people concerned. 

But what I see in this is that this particular subject of roads will need us to get certain details. We need to know what has been done and what is being done, so that our minds are settled. I do not know what the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Works want to say about it.

MR OKUPA: I am in total support of this loan. My problem is that they seem to take the people of Tororo and Kabarole for granted; you cannot build half a road. Let the minister take back this loan request and bring it back including all the roads up to Fort Portal; we cannot handle things like that. I want to appeal to colleagues to be fair to the people of Tororo as well.

THE SPEAKER: My assessment is that we need some more details.

12.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INVESTMENT (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The details of this loan, including the costs and the components of this loan, were provided to this Parliament in a brief to Parliament which was provided by the Minister of Finance. I have here a copy, and it was circulated to the members; not only for this loan but also for the loan that is going to follow. 

Page 5 of this paper provides not only the purpose of the brief, but also the project is explained in detail. No. 9 provides detailed project components; there is even a table showing how this money is going to be spent. Actually, there are many schedules to this brief. Now in respect of the extension of this road from Kamwenge to Fort Portal – 

THE SPEAKER: No, I think there are more details other than what you are saying. I do not know when that was given to the Members but my assessment is that they need some kind of details in form of what has been done in other parts of the country in as far as roads are concerned. In my assessment, we need that to settle their minds. I wouldn’t mind - if I were them - but my assessment is this, hon. Minister, why don’t you come, not very far from today but on Tuesday, or Wednesday; you come so that we conclude it? Otherwise, I see a problem.

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, I just wanted to know the exact details that maybe the honourable members might want that we have not given. I wanted to appeal to Members – you know there used to be a man who was very difficult to his wife. He once bought a piece of meat and told the wife that, “I am going to have a drink but do not roast the meat or fry it or even boil it but I want to find it cooked.” And the wife was in a dilemma. How would this meat be cooked? She was not to roast it, boil it or fry it and yet the husband wanted to find it cooked.

Everyday in the House, the Government, the ministry and the minister is bashed for bad roads, for lack of absorption – we brought these loans about a month ago. The Minister of Finance presented a resolution which was supported; we know the details of the loan. We took them to the committee and Members actively participated. We have also been requested for the details of what we are doing all over the country. 

We have a policy statement; we have a three year development plan, which is now turning into a five-year development plan. We also showed all the roads and how we are absorbing the money with another document - we have distributed that copy and we have shown how we are utilising the money. We have got the policy statement; Ministry of Finance has provided all the necessary – even the mid term development strategy. I need to exactly know those other details that Members might want -(Interjections)– please, let me finish, hon. Odonga Otto, and then you give me information; just this sentence. The development of Uganda did not start today; it started when colonialists came and made us one country. We know very well how many tarmac roads were there at independence in each region. We know how many tarmac roads were there by the time this Government came to power and we know our programme now. If anything, this Government is trying to correct that imbalance. That is why you see more roads in the North than before. So I really would want to appeal –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, I rise to give a concern and a point of order to the hon. Minister. We are discussing very pertinent factors of development and poverty eradication. We are debating the activities of a sitting Government which has been in government for more than 23 years. The minister who is in charge of this sector is being asked how he is making it equitable. What is the programme that is there to ensure that development and poverty eradication cuts across the country. The Minister, instead of giving us the way forward, as you have even rightly directed, Mr Speaker, is drawing the House to the past governments and is going defensive. Is he in order not to give us the way forward and instead lament about what other governments failed to do? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are certain details, which the Minister should bring to us, and I suggest that we adjourn and this matter is continued on Tuesday when those details have been brought by the Minister. The House is adjourned. 

(The House rose at 12.13 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 23 March 2010 at 2.30 p.m.) 

