


Wednesday, 11 March 2020

Parliament met at 2.38 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I have just three issues to communicate.

Last Friday, I was in Arua and one of the things that the citizens complained about was the Oraba Border Post, a major crossing point where there is no facility for management of Coronavirus. They are worried because it is a very busy crossing point. They asked me to inform the Minister of Health to ensure that the border is secured. 

I am sure they were speaking for other border areas to make sure that all of them are being attended to. Apparently, the situation is getting very serious; you can see what is happening around the world. We need to help our citizens.

The second issue has to do with a complaint, which was raised here on behalf of the dairy farmers in Western Uganda. A letter was tabled here whereby the Secretary to the Office of the President was directing the farmers to handover the cooling plants, which belong to the people of Uganda. They were being directed to hand them over to a private individual without going through the Public Procurement and Disposal of public Assets (PPDA). If you are disposing of Government property, you must go through the PPDA. 

We asked the Government to come and explain to us why this is happening. We are waiting for the minister – is it the Minister for Presidency or the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development? We want an answer. It is now more than four weeks.

The third issue is to inform the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives that the Sugar Bill will be back on the Order Paper next week. So, they should get ready for us to complete it.

 2.42
Mr roland mugume (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have read from social media that a case of coronavirus has been confirmed in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). I would like to hear from the minister whether the World Health Organisation (WHO) has confirmed that since they are our neighbours.

2.43
The Minister of State for Health (Primary Health Care) (Ms Joyce Moriku): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for raising the fact that some of our border entry points are not yet strengthened. We have taken note and we will ensure that we do strengthen them.

Concerning the issue of coronavirus that has been confirmed in the neighbouring country - DRC, it is true that when one of the travellers from Belgium came to DRC, he was confirmed to be Coronavirus positive. Already, we are so much concerned about our border with DRC. We would like to reinstate the same measures we previously put in place for Ebola. 

For Tanzania, it has not been confirmed. It has been a rumour on social media; so it is not true. However, I would like to say that from the East African countries, we have not got any true report. The only news that came and was confirmed was yesterday for DRC. 

Social media is entitled to their opinion but I would like to appeal to colleagues and Ugandans to wait for the right communication channels from the mandated ministry; that is, the Ministry of Health or the Government of Uganda. 

2.45
Mr benard atiku (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in regard to the situation of the students that are trapped in Wuhan. 

If honourable members can recall, four weeks ago, the Minister of Health presented a joint statement on behalf of Government, stating that Government was doing to address the plight of students who are trapped in China. We debated that statement thoroughly here.

In that statement, the minister presented a figure of $61,800 that was being prepared to be sent to China, through the Embassy of China, to the students to help them during this moment of hardship.

As that may be, few weeks later, a document from Bank of Uganda leaked on social media. Later it was confirmed that the document was authentic, confirming that $600,000 was transferred to the Embassy of China. 

When we got this information, through the parents’ representatives, we contacted the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to try to ask for clarification; whether it was $61,800 that was transferred or indeed it is true that it was $600,000 and what that would translate in terms of the students benefiting from this money. 

The fear of the parents was that there could be a ploy to defraud the Uganda Government of close to $535,000. The official communication that was made on the Floor of Parliament indicated $61,000 yet what was actually transferred to China was far more than what had been pronounced here, officially. 

Therefore, the parents were scared that the plight of their children was going to be used to benefit a few individuals fraudulently. The information indicated the Secretary to the Treasury directing the accounting officer of the Uganda Embassy in Beijing to send back $538,200, which he said was in excess of what had been approved by Parliament and what was supposed to be sent there.

From what we got from the students who received part of this money, they said they received $618. If you multiply that by 105 students that the minister presented here, that would translate to $64,890, which is slightly above what the minister presented. 

All these figures do not add up because it will distort the record of Parliament and the information that had officially been communicated. The students have also indicated that not all of them have received this money.

Therefore, there seems to be some thick cloud over this particular transaction, which the students deserve on merit. If you have been following the stories, the cost of living in Wuhan has gone up. Even the $618 is not enough.

Can the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Health or the Prime Minister’s office - who is in charge of this particular situation; come to Parliament with clear information on how they are handling the situation of these students. 

First of all, it took the students time to receive this money and secondly, not all of them have received the money –

The Speaker: Honourable member, you have said it very many times. You are repeating the same thing. We would like to know how much money was sent and whether it has been received.

2.51
The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, we sent $600,000, which is an equivalent of Shs 2.2 billion to our Embassy in Beijing, on account of the request we had earlier received on this issue. However, when we crosschecked with the amount approved by Cabinet, it was $61,000. 

Yesterday, our Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury (PSST) wrote to our Embassy in Beijing to return the difference between $600,000 and $61,000. We are on top of the situation and I do not think there will be any money that will be lost. It was just some incoordination and we are handling it but the students are getting what they were supposed to get. 

MR ISIAGI: We request the honourable minister to clarify to this House; first of all, how did you just remit such a huge amount of money, which does not have any relation to the figure that was presented?  

When you externalise money, there are transactional costs. Can you clarify to the House what we have lost from foreign exchange and remittance fees? Then, tell us who is supposed to meet that because that is a nugatory expenditure. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please answer. 

MR BAHATI: This matter is being handled by inter-ministerial arrangement; the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs are all handling certain aspects. 

Madam Speaker, there was poor coordination to begin with and we are correcting the matter. We received a request from the Ministry of Education and Sports of $600,000 but Cabinet approved $61,000; we were supposed to have gone with the Cabinet approval. That is the situation we are sorting out. The issue is who pays the costs of transfer since it is Government that transferred it? It is Government that is transferring it and it will be Government. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if you say there was a ministerial committee working on this issue, how do you cause a request from different ministries for the same thing? Who finally cleared it?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we were in a situation where we needed to rescue our students in China so the first request we received of $600,000 - according to the information I have – is what we immediately processed. Eventually, we got the approval of Cabinet of $61,000. 

Therefore, this is what we have clarified and that was the situation. However, no money will be lost. Our students will also get the money that they deserve to get. 

MR ILUKOR: Madam Speaker, hon. Isiagi raised one important thing in financial issue; that this transfer became nugatory. Nugatory means it happened as a result of negligence. If it is negligence of the senders, without following instructions, which the minister seems to be saying, then there was lack of coordination. The person, who sends the money, rather than Government, must pay that money. Thank you.

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek further clarification from the minister. This kind of transfer is very frequent in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Even locally here in districts, monies are transferred and eventually are asked to remit it back.

However, in the process of remitting this money back, it goes elsewhere. I would like to get clarification from the minister on who requested for that $600,000 and who prepared that voucher? Was it presented before Cabinet, approved before you came to Parliament or you had prepared the voucher earlier? If you had prepared it earlier, why didn’t you send the money earlier before the approval because in every money transaction, vouchers are involved? It cannot just be a mistake. A human being must have an interest in order to feed the computer which direction such a transaction should take. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, this is a common occurrence with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, that there is frequent remittance of funds. Even locally here, there are dubious accounting officers. In the process, these accounting officers always ask to remit the money back but this money will never go back to the treasury. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, please, answer quickly. We want to do other things. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we had a crisis to rescue our students so a request of $600,000 came, which was processed fast. Eventually, Cabinet approved $61,000; so, we have requested our embassy in Beijing to refund the difference. However, if there is any suspicion of any dubious dealings, we have an officer called the Auditor-General. We can employ him and he can do some work now and we find out. That is the best we can do now. 

Nevertheless, the facts on the ground are that our students have received the money and we have also discovered that we should have sent $61,000. We have requested for the difference and that is the fact.  

2.58
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of public importance. You directed hon. Ssempijja, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, to present a statement on the Floor of this House, arising out of a matter of public importance by hon. Medard Sseggona of the slaughter of the 17 breeding bulls from Lusanja that were ordered by the minister. 

Madam Speaker, whereas we could still await the response, the minister and the ministry have gone ahead to discuss the same in the press. In the New vision, the NAGRIC boss is quoted to say, “We gave Ssempijja the bulls…” 

This is a worrisome trend where, for matters being raised here, the responsible ministers choose to go to the Uganda Media Centre. They choose to address the press to render this Parliament a laughing stock. Why should we raise matters that, after all, are not being answered here on the Floor but are answered elsewhere in the press and the media? 

Madam Speaker, we are grappling with a crisis of acaricides and lack of the best breeds for farmers in the livestock sector. You remember bulls being bought at Shs 6 billion from South Africa. These particular ones were bought at Shs 100 million but someone just picks them for slaughter, yet locally, you get bulls at Shs 2 million and at worst, three million. The bulls bought at Shs. 100 million are being slaughtered for consumption. That is taxpayers’ money, Madam Speaker. The matter is so serious that we deserve a response, as people’s representatives.

The disregard and holding of this Parliament in contempt – this is what happened with hon. Muloni sometime back. Again, it is the same thing happening. You do not answer to the queries raised by Parliament but choose to go in the press and you render the whole matter - 

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, my prayers are that:  

    1. The honourable Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries be directed to report to this House tomorrow. 
    2. Concrete measures be taken to rescue the livestock sector and the animal industry in this country.

Short of that, Madam Speaker, this industry is going to the dogs. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had already directed the Minister for Agriculture to come and respond. His going to the Media Centre does not absolve him from the responsibility to come here and report. So, he is directed to come here and report tomorrow, Thursday, to respond to the issues raised by hon. Ssekikubo.

3.02
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance concerning the road that has cut off one of the major landing sites in the country due to the water levels rising.

Kasenyi Landing Site is one of the major landing sites in this country that has been cut off after the road has been eaten up by the lake and there is no alternative gateway to the market for the fish, which is destined for both export and the local markets.

I, therefore, pray that since the district does not have the technical competence and capacity to handle this, the Ministry of Works and Transport should intervene to help our people in this emergency. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether the Minister of Works and Transport has any solution in the meantime.

3.04
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true we are facing this big challenge. It is not only the side of Buikwe; we have Kasensero and other areas. The information we are getting is that actually, the lake is going to continue rising because we are likely to receive more rains in this period. 

In addition, it is not actually practically possible for us to intervene – in the area where the road has been washed away -until the waters have subsided. It will be a waste of resources and we shall not be able to achieve anything practical. I request that we continue advising our communities and those around the shores of Lake Kyoga to put a distance between them and the shores until the water behaves otherwise.

It is a phenomenon, which we cannot control as a ministry. We cannot have a solution to the increasing rains. In Kasensero, we have tried to intervene. What we may come up with is that most of those roads - which are low lying - when we get back to them in terms of repair, we may have to raise the levels so that we cater for this kind of thing.

MR DAVID MUTEBI: Probably the honourable minister may consider sending there a team to consider a diversion because there are some hard places which are a little bit raised where those roads can be diverted. This is one, and if it continues for another three months, it means people will have no livelihood because there is no alternative.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please send a team to visit and see whether you can design alternative strategies for people to reach the market.

GEN. KATUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will do that. I will send a team on the ground and see what intervention we can do.

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Nsereko comes, join me in welcoming students of Uganda Martyrs University Mbale Campus, represented by hon. Wamanga Wamai and hon. Nakayenze. You are welcome.

3.06
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central, Kampala): Madam Speaker, I would like to request for your indulgence to add me two extra minutes.

THE SPEAKER: No, no.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, you all witnessed a sad scene when you saw one of the daughters of this country who was shot in the mouth and she lost seven teeth at Ben Kiwanuka Street by officers of the Uganda Police Force who were conducting an operation alongside the KCCA enforcement officers.

Lowell Nankya who was one of the best performers in Senior Four two years ago and is a student at Lugazi Secondary School. She is one of the daughters of a single mother who takes care of about seven children, who had gone to fend for them food and school fees. Yesterday, as they pursued vendors, they shot randomly injuring six and deforming this young girl and her mother.

Honourable members, in a space of two weeks, two people have been killed; a one Nabukenya and Kyeyune. The Minister in charge of Internal Affairs and the police must tell us what is happening. Why are these people becoming so trigger-happy that every situation must be resolved by the use of might and bullets? It has cost us lives.

Madam Speaker, today, I went and interacted with them at Mulago Hospital. They do not even have money to pay for the first bill of about Shs 1.5 million. She had gone back home to look for school fees to be taken back by her mum and they were shot. We must be empathetic. Imagine you have sent your child to school only to be returned with a deformed face. I wonder how members of Parliament and leaders of our calibre would react if this happened to any of our children.

Madam Speaker, what is ensuing at the moment is that they cannot even take care of their own bill and the Government must pay and compensate these people; but also, they must immediately stop the use of excessive force because it is indiscriminate.

The father of Dan Kyeyune belongs to the National Resistance Movement. Nabukenya belonged to the Opposition but that is life. One life is too much to be lost in this country. We are talking about coronavirus and fending ourselves from the scourge that is coming from without but what about the scourge that is coming from our own?

There is a lot of extortion downtown, Madam Speaker. The matter is that the enforcement officers go on collecting money from vendors and the day they do not pay this mafia-run group, they come, embedded with police and either maim or shoot these people.

Therefore, how shall we run a city and a country based on such scenarios? This is unacceptable. At the moment, the young girl cannot eat because she lost seven teeth. She is traumatized and she needs reconstructive surgery. The Government must pay for this surgery.

Madam Speaker, every time we ask for CCTV footage when people have been hurt, either the cameras do not function or they are faulty. They should come out openly and tell this country that these cameras do not function.

For Nabukenya, the cameras were not functioning because of a road construction. For the murder in Nansana of Dan Kyeyune, it was dark and night and no one could see –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: No, I think you made your point. What are your prayers?

MR NSEREKO: When it happened in Nansana to a woman who was running a mobile money shop, the cameras were not working. Where is value for money?

What signals does it send to criminals when they are made aware that at whatever stage, the cameras do not work? The same happened to Nagirinya. Up to now, people are asking questions and there are no answers. We demand to know the officers who shot this girl and her mother, and they should be individually held liable.

My prayer is that the Government should meet the entire costs and compensation to this family and all those that were injured in yesterday’s skirmish. The enforcement officers and the police who are carrying out enforcement in Kampala should be fully investigated and a report be brought to this Parliament to ascertain who caused these injuries and such skirmishes be halted so that we do not get more of such injuries in the future. Thank you, Madam Speaker.   

THE SPEAKER: Can the responsible minister respond to that issue?

3.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, this morning when I got the report about the lady who was injured in that operation, I asked the Inspector General of Police (IGP) to give me a report regarding the people who were in the operation and why they had to use live bullets.

I also asked the IGP to find where that lady is, visit her and see what support, if any, they should give her. I have not got the report. As you are aware, sir, this morning, after that, I had other meetings but immediately after here, I will find out and give a report to the House. 

We obviously apologise that an innocent person – presumed at the moment innocent – was injured in an operation, where probably she had no role to play.

Secondly, regarding the issue of Nabukenya and Kyeyune and the cameras which were not working at that particular time, I would like to inform this House that the IGP has already ordered an investigation into that matter because it appears – to the IGP and to us – that it is not true that the cameras were not working. However, if it is found that they were not working, then we will be able to inform the House; but it does not appear to us that they were not working. 

Therefore, an investigation will be done and we will give you a report. Thank you.
  
THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we do appreciate that you are sending someone to visit the young lady but there have been instances where people have been shot in similar circumstances and they have been abandoned in hospital. Many have come to my office to help them find the Inspector General of Police to pay their bills. So, I would like you to assign a dedicated officer to closely monitor until that child recovers because she has got to go back to school. If you do not assign a particular person, nobody is going to take it up.

MR OBIGA: Madam Speaker, I would like to promise that we will take our responsibility where we have not taken it before. I thank you. 

3.15
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Kania Obiga, if you pay a visit to that family, I think that it would add a lot to the image of the police. 

Many times we have raised issues on why we fail to get jobs at international organisations; we have an opportunity now because one of our own, Rt Hon. Dan Kidega, has been shortlisted for the position of Assistant Secretary General of the ACP. 

The deadline is 15 March 2020 for Uganda to be up to date with its subscription. Failure by our Government to pay the subscription for the two years, hon. Dan Kidega will not sit for the interviews. I do not know why hon. Bahati has run away. This time we have our own and for the last 45 years, Uganda has not held a position in ACP at that level. This is the only opportunity we have. 

It is unfortunate that the ambassador wrote to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development but up to this morning, money has not been sent. What Uganda owes is €144,000 for the last two years. We do not want to act in panic like we did for the issue of locusts. When the locusts hit, we had also not paid to Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) and we had to run very fast to pay the debts in order to benefit from FAO. Why are we perpetual defaulters on the organisations that we are going to benefit from?

Madam Speaker, we would like you to direct the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to pay for this such that our own gets this opportunity to get this job. Once he is there, maybe we will have the opportunity to get more people go to work in the ACP Secretariat. That is the matter I felt that should be done because the deadline is 15 March 2020, which falls on Sunday. We only have tomorrow and Friday. Let us save our country and colleague. Thank you.         

THE SPEAKER: We have some money which is flying in the air; the money which is excess from China. They could use that to pay and it can cover the €140,000. We will get commitment from the minister and we need to have that money paid so that we can access those offices.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON DECENTRALISATION OF SERVICES OF THE NATIONAL INFORMATION AND REGISTRATION AUTHORITY (NIRA)

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we owe money to the ACP and we are vying for a position of Assistant Secretary General by a distinguished Ugandan, hon. Dan Kidega. The deadline for submission is 15 March 2020, which is Sunday. They require €144,000 but we know that there is some money floating from China and at least that one is somewhere there. You commit there.

MR OKUPA: Hon. Bahati, the communication has already come to your office; our ambassador to the EU has written and also hon. Kidega himself has asked. So, we only have up to 15 March 2020. If you do not pay by 15 March 2020, the Rt Hon. Dan Kidega will not get the job.   

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we commit that we are going to work with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and then transfer the money to clear our arrears. (Interjection) – No, the House has informed us that the deadline is 15 March 2020, isn’t it? So, it has to be done before 15 March 2020. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Just to adjust briefly to lay a paper and then the Minister of Internal Affairs can come.

LAYING OF PAPERS

PROPOSAL TO BORROW UP TO $229.47 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (ADB) AND €90 MILLION (EQUIVALENT TO $105 MILLION) FROM AGENCE FRANÇAISE DE DÉVELOPMENT (AFD) TO FINANCE THE CONSTRUCTION OF KAMPALA–JINJA EXPRESSWAY (EJE) PROJECT

3.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Government proposal to borrow up to $229.47 million from the African Development Bank and Euros 90 million, equivalent to $105 million, from AFD to finance the construction of Kampala-Jinja Express Project. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: This is for laying. It is not for debate. 

MR NZOGHU: I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister on whether he should emphasise to this House that it will be a toll-free road. 

THE SPEAKER: We do not normally discuss that here. The request is sent to the Committee on National Economy to consider and report back. 

3.23
MR PATRICK OPOLOT (NRM, Kachumbala County, Bukedea): Madam Speaker, I would like to propose that you suspend the rules and we approve this loan straight away. (Laughter)

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I need your indulgence. I had previously made a request for a loan to finance the oil roads but you suspended its being referred to the Committee on National Economy. 

I request that now that the condition has been fulfilled –(Laughter)– could that one also be forwarded to the Committee on National Economy? I beg to request. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House had set a condition that no loan would be considered until the issue of the Jinja Express Highway has been handled. Now they have responded by presenting the proposal. We shall now allow the other request to go and they are handled together. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON DECENTRALISATION OF SERVICES OF THE NATIONAL INFORMATION AND REGISTRATION AUTHORITY (NIRA)

3.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 3rd March when I presented a statement on the centralisation and/or decentralisation of NIRA services, members at the end expressed a view that some issues, which they had raised and were on the Hansard, had not been adequately answered. 

Particularly, hon. Abdu Katuntu raised that matter and I promised that I would go through the Hansard and present some of the answers to complete my view to allow debate to take off.  

Therefore, I wish to present my addendum to that statement and thereafter Members can proceed. I hope this addendum is now on your iPads. It is not a very long statement. You will see some items in italics. Those are the items, which were reproduced from the Hansard record and which I am trying to answer. 

Madam Speaker, the major issue was the delay in replacing national identity cards. 

The Authority recognises that there are many people who have failed to have their national IDs replaced within the three-month timeframe that is communicated to clients when they apply for replacement. Some of the reasons are as follows:

    a) In the original system design, the provision on Citizenship Verification (CV) processes a CV query on a child's application. This automatically reflects on the citizenship of the parent, especially for a single parent and no further transaction is possible on such a record until the matter is resolved. This has caused a lot of system delay; 
    b) The big number of persons that received national IDs during the mass registration exercise in 2014/15 did not complete the issuance process. 

You will recall that that mass registration was essentially done for elections. By the time the cards were issued around October/November, everybody wanted the cards quickly yet the machines at the districts and sub county levels had not been tuned to record the issuance process complete. This means that they received the physical IDs but without capture of biometrics before the cards were released from the system and activated to be on the server.

This, therefore, means that the card status in the system remains at pending issuance. In case such a card is lost, the applicant must first complete the issuance process in the district where they originally registered before they can proceed to replace the lost card. 

The module for replacement of national IDs was only completed in June 2019 to enable district offices handle the replacement process and the process of decentralising this service to the districts for purposes of replacement commenced in August 2019. 
There are many cards, which got lost. There are many cards, which have not gone through the complete issuance process.

    c) The NIRA management completed a business process review in January 2020 and has come up with proposals to improve efficiency and shorten the turn-around times. This includes a proposal to prioritise replacement of IDs. 

Under the new arrangement, we will give the application the option to print the original card, which takes a shorter time or produce the updated one. Both at the districts and Kololo offices, there will be two systems, which an applicant can choose from. We think this should be able to speed up the process of replacement. 

In addition, the NIRA district offices are in position to offer some national ID card replacement services because at the moment, final printing, particularly, has to be done at Kololo. The changes in the business processes are expected to be complete and take effective measure on 1 June 2020.

There was also an issue of payment for replacement of National IDs and confirmation of information. In the last statement, I said confirmation information is when an entity or an individual wants to confirm the particulars of an applicant as stored in the server in Kololo.

Section 7(b) of the Registration of Persons Act (ROPA) 2015 provides for NIRA to charge fees. In this regard, under Section 8(2) (i), the Minister of Internal Affairs is mandated to make regulations prescribing the fees for services rendered by the authority. The Minister of Internal Affairs drafted and gazetted the Registration of Persons (fees) Regulation 2016. All fees charged by NIRA are, therefore, provided in the said regulations and are remitted to the Consolidated Fund. 

All fees for NIRA services are paid to URA through banks designated by URA. These fees and payment processes will be reviewed in consultation with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Under the Finance Act and regulations, no entity charges fees except in consultation with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We hope to review this and if the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development agrees that we remove them, the ministry will be pleasantly do so.

Letters of confirmation 

Currently, letters of confirmation of information are issued within the day that such a request is lodged at NIRA. The requests have been mainly by corporates, ministries, departments and other agencies. Individuals who have either newly registered or are seeking to replace national IDs may request for letters of confirmation of information as an interim measure, pending production of their IDs.

The current arrangement is that when an individual is given the physical letter, for instance, to help reactivate a SIM card, electronic copies of the same letters issued during a particular day are sent by NIRA to the Uganda Communication Commission (UCC) and onward transmission made to the telecom companies. This means that the respective telecoms are only able to reactivate a SIM card when they have received the electronic copy of the letter against which they corroborate the physical letter presented by the client. This arrangement was agreed upon between NIRA, UCC and the telecoms to mitigate forgery of such letters. 

NIRA recognises that there have been delays in activating the confirmation letters at the various points of service where these letters are presented, usually due to delays in transmission of the electronic copies to the telecoms due to the fact that this is an emerging issue and there was no dedicated human resource within the NIRA structure. There is a desk to provide for that dedicated person.

NIRA working hours

The NIRA Kololo office currently receives an average of 700 persons daily. NIRA is able to serve up to 400 persons per day on a first-come-first-served basis. This compels clients to move to Kololo as early as 4:00 a.m. – which is of course very risky – to be able to be the first people on the line. As we said at the beginning, the solution to this is our process of beginning to decentralise the service so that people do not have to come to Kololo.

Use of the National ID as a primary form of identification 

Colleagues also raised this matter, that the National ID is the primary source of information and therefore other IDs should be used. However, Section 66 of ROPA, 2015 stipulates that a Ministry, Department or Agency of Government or any other institution providing a public service shall require a person accessing the services to provide a National Identification Number (NIN) of a National Identity Card (NID). This, therefore, establishes the National ID as the primary identification document in the country. 

NIRA had prioritised a mass registration this year to beat this weakness by wanting to register 11 million Ugandans, based on the UBOS population projections for the Financial Year 2020/2021 but this remains an unfunded priority. 

While ROPA 2015 provides that an individual may provide a NIN for verification and not necessarily the physical ID, this can only be applied where the various MDAs and private institutions have integrated with NIRA through the Third Party Interface (TPI). Last time I told you of something called “Third Party Interface”. It is a computer interface where they can access information on the server in Kololo from their premises. A few organisations, including ministries, have done this. Many of them are trying to do it manually. While NIRA has had a live interface in place since May 2018, most MDAs are yet to develop their technologies to be able to interface with NIRA, hence the requirement for physical national IDs. 

Once they have that interface, they will not need to look for the physical ID because they would be able to log onto the server and do it online. We, therefore, urge these ministries to budget for the provision of those facilities.

Validity of NIRA letters

The telecom companies have determined that NIRA letters are valid for a period of one month from the date of issue to avoid misuse. This is a condition of the telecom companies and after that they will require the physical ID. NIRA is undertaking a process to sensitise the population about this.
 
There was also an issue raised about what NIRA will do once the National IDs expire. It is true that the current national ID cards will expire after 10 years from the date of production. However, not all will expire at the same time but from the date of printing as per section 69 of the ROPA, Regulation 19 of the Registration of Persons Regulations. 

The bulk of the cards printed in 2014. That was when we printed the bulk of the cards, which will expire in 2024.

NIRA has already initiated plans for this exercise as provided for in the Public Investment Plan, with the intention to upgrade from the current bar code card to the eCard. When we upgrade to the eCard, the upgrading and replacement of these cards in 2024 onwards will be done online at the district level. People will go to the district. 

Hopefully, if we have funds, we shall be at the subcounties but for the time being, we shall remain at the district level. For the cards that would have expired, people will approach the district and submit their requirements for replacement. This will be done from Kampala without people having to come to the capital city.

Need to access identity card access services 

On the issue of need for an identity card to gain recruitment and access to other Government services – as you all know, in the last statement, I said many Government departments require a national identity card. In this respect, we are encouraging Government Ministries and Agencies to develop their systems to link up with NIRA under the third party interface, in order to automatically validate information on an individual in the NIRA without necessarily requiring the card or the person moving from one office to another. We think this is the shortest period. May be, Members could have other ideas that we shall buy.

There was also the issue of requirement for registration of persons whose one parent is non- Ugandan. Many of them have been having a lot of problems. 

Madam Speaker, the citizenship of Uganda is categorised under Article 10 of the Constitution, where one is either a citizen by birth, by registration, by naturalisation, dual citizenship, which is by application and citizenship acquired before the 1995 Constitution, provided for during the colonial time and the time of Independence in 1962.

In order to register a person, one of whose parents is a non-Ugandan, what is required is a national identity card of Ugandan parent and any other valid identification of the other parent since this other parent may be from outside the country. In case the other person is not there, our system would have recorded that individual’s identity either in the village or wherever, as long as there is an authentic identification whether by the person or not, that will be recognised. It is only those two requirements. If someone requires another identification, that is beyond what NIRA requires for citizenship identification 

There was also an issue particularly raised by the Rt Hon. Speaker about how the elderly will be helped in order to access registration with regard to the Social Assistance Programme to the Elderly (SAGE)

Access to SAGE funds/registration of the elderly

In compliance with the provisions of Regulation 13 of the Registration of Persons Regulations, 2015, NIRA has been actively working with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to register the elderly. Recently, we conducted an outreach exercise to register the elderly in a number of districts. This exercise will continue to make sure that no elderly persons are disenfranchised from the process. NIRA will do everything possible wherever they are identified to make sure that they are registered and they get their services.

There was an issue about the data for persons who have been registered vis-a-vis the electoral process, the people that will be making the age of 18 and will be registered later or not registered. Will they have the opportunity to vote? Our answer is that all data on persons eligible to vote under the electoral roadmap was handed over to the Electoral Commission by NIRA. 

Further management of this information for election purposes is within the jurisdiction of the Electoral Commission. However, people will continue to turn 18 years every hour, every day and NIRA will continue to register persons on a daily basis. Therefore, such persons may not make it to the voters' register. This is not the responsibility of NIRA since our mandate is to register. Given the constitutional provisions on the management of elections, that other aspect is beyond NIRA.

The national registrar is meant to be a live register of persons that is continuously updated throughout the year using births, deaths and issuance of national identity cards. These events happen every day.

There was another question about verification of persons using only the national identity cards, which I have already answered that.

Hon. Nsereko asked the question about the payment or replacement of lost identity cards. The first national identity cards were issued free but replacement of a lost identity card attracts the said fees as provided for in the law. I have already said that these fees are provided in the principal Act.

The identity card is not just an identity card but it can be used as a travel document and required to meet the International Convention on Civil Aviation (ICAO) standards. In keeping with the international standards, section 64 of the Act establishes the requirement for continuous update of information and stipulates that any transaction that takes place after months, on the record of an individual, which changes the identity of that person must include updated biometrics. In other words, as long as there is a transaction, which you want to do after six months of getting identity cards that involves change on particulars of the identity cards, then the biometrics must be taken.

NIRA has also reviewed the business process to prioritise replacement of identity cards. Under the new arrangement, we will give the applicant the option to print the original card, which takes a shorter time or produce the updated one.

Madam Speaker, the current national identity card has security features and therefore, it has met the international standards and machine readable. Obviously, presenting it requires expenses.

There was a question raised by hon. Jack Wamanga-Wamai about where his card is and I would like to inform him that his application was received for purposes of correcting errors at Kololo, on the 26th June 2019. The application was processed and the new identity card was produced in October, 2019 which was relatively within the three months’ period that we give and is pending issuance at the NIRA Kampala Central Division Office on Lumumba Avenue. The honourable member may proceed to pick his national identity card from that office.

In conclusion, I acknowledge that there are significant weaknesses in the provision of services at NIRA; some of which are systemic, while others are managerial and budgetary.

As I stated in my statement on the 3rd March, 2020 a new Board has been appointed and tasked to address these challenges expeditiously at a very close range and improvement should be seen shortly.

Therefore, I plead for this Board and NIRA that we give them time within which this new Board should be able to do some work. It is a very competent team and some time for them would help.

I propose that Parliament, if you so wish, organise a further general interaction with NIRA, the Board, management and technical staff in an open area other than the Chamber. 

This could be done under the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and the Board, management and technical staff would avail themselves so that we have direct answers and queries in some of your issues, which may not have been adequately answered in this statement. This was the addendum, which we thought we should make at this stage. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for both the main statement and the addendum. We shall allow a few comments.

5.53
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just as a follow-up to the Minister in charge of Internal Affairs, I would like to lay on the Table the picture of the young girl whose face was disfigured and today, she cannot speak anymore; she is traumatised.

That is the mother, whose hand was broken as a result of that fracas. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your intervention and kind heart. I would like to ask Parliament to permit me lay this on the Table.

The pictures are a record and I would like to urge the Minister of Internal Affairs not to just direct Members but go there personally for political accountability to these persons. That is what the call for leadership is in the country.

3.55
MR CHARLES ILUKOR (NRM, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Whereas I thank the minister for the addendum about NIRA, I would like to bring the attention of this House to the following:

Information available to us states that the system currently being used by NIRA is old, obsolete and needs a complete overhaul. It constantly hangs and needs constant attention of technical people. That is why if you get there, one person can take two hours being attended to. If two hours can be taken on one person, how many people would be worked on in 8 hours, in a day, on about 10 computers that are operating there?

The minister is not telling us the truth; he needs money to overhaul the system, which was deployed in 2013/2014 during the mass registration exercise and up to now, it has never been overhauled.

We are also being told that at the time of procuring this system, these people procured a system of second generation when at that time, there was already a fourth Generation System.

As such, the technicality in working on this second generation system is not here. Let them come out and tell us the technicality; even if they decentralised the system, we would be decentralising more problems.

Whereas even in the headquarters, there are very few technical people who can work on the system, how about in our areas? [Text expunged on the Speaker’s directive]

3.57
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga County East, Kagadi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the addendum and report that we had but more specifically, to add on what a colleague said. There is a lot of system failure at NIRA.

How I wish you could get a day to find out what is happening. What you have just given us in your addendum seems to just be from an Act. For instance, what does the Act say about this and that but what is happening in the community is different.

You, as a minister, get the real truth; you would find out a different figure. In 2018, I also lost my national identification card but it took me about three months to get a replacement. If a member of Parliament can take that long, how about a person who is deep in Kagadi? Travelling from Kagadi to Kampala costs the local person about Shs 100,000 in order for him to get a replacement of his or her national identification card. 

I welcome decentralising. Accessing a national identification card should not be a difficult thing. Please, create regional centres; it would be much easier, just like the honourable member talked about system failure. The computer jams and that is a whole day and at lunch time, the staff say that they are going for lunch. People are camped there and nothing is being done but you are giving us confidence that all is well and NIRA is doing everything possible. This is quite absurd.

Lastly, the exercise that NIRA took in secondary and primary schools is not complete; schools are wondering what went wrong.

NIRA has said that they shall handle; logistics are not enough and the system is failing but we are just here as if Parliament is lamenting. The minister is also telling us that they are handling the matter. Where is the help? Thank you.

4.01
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, on page nine of your original document, you quoted staffing – as of 31 January 2020 – to be at 433 out of 865 staff, which translates into 50.2 per cent of staffing levels at NIRA offices. I appeal to colleagues that we support the request of the Shs 18.3 billion, as indicated in the Budget Framework Paper of 2020/2021. If that can help our people to get the services quicker and if the increase in staffing will help our people access better services, we support it. I personally support this and I am sure it should help us.

Secondly, on page 12 of the original statement, the minister says that they have NIRA offices in 87 out of 117 districts. However, you did not indicate those districts. Which are these districts? You needed to give us an annex; we need to know the districts and the gaps.

Thirdly, you talked about issuing the national identity cards at sub county level and you plan this for 20 days. You are commencing the exercise by recruiting issuance officers. Why don’t we tap into the existing Government systems where you have parish chiefs and LC III’s? Why do we have to recruit? Why can’t we train, for instance, the LC III’s or parish chiefs to carry on, instead of even spending into recruitment and then train, yet, we have existing Government structures that can do so?

Finally, on page 15, about the registration of learners in schools, you indicated in Table Four that 361,521 students out of 9,888,551 were issued with cards. Those above 16 should be having their cards. I am wondering what happens to those below 18. Are we only issuing cards to those who have attained 16 years and above? Thank you.

4.03
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Madam Speaker, you recall that we had proposals that we needed to do much deeper investigation into NIRA. From what the minister has presented, you can easily see the huge gaps that are in NIRA.

The genesis of this identity card has been fraught with corruption right from the beginning. I am not surprised, Madam Speaker, that the team that procured the equipment had to make deals and give this country a fake system that we are grappling with right now. This is a fact. I saw one honourable member who really used an un-parliamentary word. The situation is so disgusting.

Actually, it is very shameful that for a whole system, after capturing my data, when I go back to that system, it cannot even remember me. (Laughter) This is something I cannot understand. We have seen systems everywhere, where you have fingerprints. Look at our system here in Parliament. I simply come and check in, it recognises my name and even thanks me and I go away with good customer care. (Laughter) 

However, imagine the system of NIRA, given all this amount of money that we sank in. This deserves an investigation. We should not let it off like that, where they are simply going to come and they tell us stories here. I know from an insider that they have serious managerial issues. There are very many clashes among the staff of NIRA.

In addition to the managerial issues, if you look at what they have done in schools, you cannot even get that data; it is not there. Madam Speaker, these are serious issues, which we are talking about here. When I stood and requested that we have a select committee to look into this matter, I was very serious. 

I would like us to save this country by digging deeper and we will find very many problems in NIRA. This is going to cause security problems. Remember that this was meant to capture data of all Ugandans. Every Ugandan is supposed to be captured and this data would now be effectively used by all the systems in the country. This would make the economy move much faster.

We are not simply talking about something small. This is something at the heart of the country and the Parliament, in our rightful sense, must conduct an investigation. That is the only way suffering Ugandans out there will be satisfied.

4.07
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha County East, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister, who is also my elder brother from West Nile, for bringing out a very comprehensive statement. He has even tried to respond to all the concerns raised by members of Parliament by referring to the Hansard. I think we should applaud him. (Applause) It is simply coincidence that the Minister of State for Internal Affairs comes from West Nile. If he is doing well, why don’t I appreciate? (Laughter) 

We have raised critical issues about NIRA. The minister has also brought out critical gaps. We all know that the late Gen. Aronda, who initially spearheaded this project, would not wish for it to go in this direction. Based on institutional memory, the effort he made to make sure this project was up and running in a very efficient and effective manner is documented. 

We also know that this is not the first project that has suffered ill-fate under the National Resistance Movement Government. There is clearly underfunding that the honourable minister has raised. There are areas that need resource allocation by Parliament. The ball is in your court to allocate money for NIRA to deliver the quality services expected of them.

Without these resources, you can continue to lament on the inefficiency and obsolete machinery. If you do not allocate resources, do not expect quality services.

I, therefore, would like to appeal to Parliament that we should prioritise NIRA in the upcoming Budget because we all know that if we streamline NIRA and get quality services, we will address corruption and sort out election programmes. We will ensure that banking is efficient. We will eventually go digital from analogue.

It is our responsibility to give NIRA more resources instead of saying, “go and investigate”. How many agencies do we have in this country that have problems? How many select committees are we going to form in order to go everywhere? It could probably be the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, which should be given the responsibility to further scrutinise this matter. Parliament should look at these issues more critically instead of going in the reverse gear.

For those who think my submission is West Nile related, I would like to assure them that NIRA delivers services to the entire country; it is not a regional organisation. It is not a West Nile affair.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you once again, for the opportunity but we must deal with NIRA in a very objective manner. This programme urgently deserves priority funding. I thank you.

4.11
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join colleagues in thanking the minister for the statement. To take it up from my colleague from West Nile, if the issue is funding, we need the minister to be clear. It is true the minister gave a statement that showed what exactly is happening but we need a solution for the suffering Ugandans.

To be clear, everybody inside here must know how Ugandans are suffering as far as getting national identity cards is concerned. Even some of the national identity cards that were produced from the beginning are lying idle at the districts on the argument that data has not reached those district records.

There are many people who cannot access any service because they do not have national identity cards. The elderly in the villages - in my area, I have a full zone where no one has a national identity cards. I went to the district to report and I was told that they could not do much but that they were trying to make sure that they get the information.

On some days, they will say the machines are coming in but on other days, they say, there is new registration. You sent tired staff to the sub county NIRA offices. They could come in the morning, stay there for one hour and go away. They would come with computers and their batteries could only last for between 15 to 30 minutes and after that, they would go away. When people lose national identity cards, they come to Kololo - the minister said that they use the formula of first come first served. They open at 6.00 a.m. and somebody comes Kamuli District. That person may be having a relative in Wakiso. He or she will sleep in Wakiso, which seems nearer but by the time they reach Kololo, the lines will have already built up. This is somebody from the village and they simply do not know where to begin from but being tossed here and there.

We must be concerned because Ugandans are suffering. We are able to plan for money to give the National Curriculum Development Centre. Also we are able to get Shs 11 billion for this and that or money for locusts in Karamoja and at times, approving Shs 15 billion for this and that. We must be clear if we have to help Ugandans to get their national identity cards, which is a very clear document that is required now.

Madam Speaker, getting a passport now takes less than a week. Getting a driving permit takes less than 14 days. How can securing such a very important document, the national identity card, take months or even seeing some people failing to get it? 

I would like to give an example of our district NRM Chairperson. This man has moved for more than nine months looking for a national identity card. He has not got –(Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: The information I would like to give my honourable colleague, hon. Kibalya, is to the effect that the honourable minister said that the Act gives him powers to levy fees for replacement. However, do you envisage that the difference between a travel document and national identity card is that one is compulsory and the other is optional? The law is very clear that you must have a national identity card; there is no option.

Therefore, when you lose it - I am talking about the regulations – and the Speaker was very elaborate one time here when she said that before you issue any Statutory Instrument, you should bring it to Parliament so that members of Parliament participate in knowing what you are going to issue.

You gazetted Shs 50,000 as replacement fee but what informed your decision? Someone is telling you that if an ordinary person from Kamuli loses a national identity card – first of all they cannot even afford food. How do you expect them to pay Shs 50,000. Let alone the fact that they have to move far distances to access banks and later move to Kampala to queue for the national identity card replacement. The information I would like to give my brother -

THE SPEAKER: You are smuggling a contribution.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you colleague for the information. Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to make it clear that we are not saying this because of anything. There are two children in my area - I even talked to the lady who is in charge of NIRA and she gave me another gentleman. Those two children failed to sit for exams because they could not access their late father’s money. The Administrator General had told them to collect all relevant documents, the national identity cards, being one of them. Although they had registered, they could not use their NIN numbers and so, they dropped out of school.

Madam Speaker, we must wake up and help Ugandans by doing something. If a national identity card is as important as we say, let us make it easily accessible by every Ugandan. The problem is not paying Shs 50,000 but someone paying their Shs 50,000 and they are made to walk to and from NIRA for months before receiving their national identification cards replacement. Why not issue it in just two days? Thank you.

4.17
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the minister for presenting this report. I would like to talk about the issue of disadvantaged people in our communities. The condition of availing the father of the child disadvantages some people. For example, women with disabilities sometimes are either raped or somebody takes advantage of them and they may not want to associate with that person any more. 

They may not know where the man is. They may not know their clan and other necessary information required by NIRA. However, NIRA keeps insisting on such people to avail the father to their children. The children who have been thrown out on streets and are now adults do not know where they came from but they are Ugandans, born here.

We need to look at certain critical areas and not to just put a blanket thing that one must identify their mother and father. We have people in society who do not know where they have come from. Imagine a woman who has been raped and got pregnant in that state. Demanding for the father of her child reminds her about that bad history.

Madam Speaker, we have people without fingers and yet, when they go to NIRA, they are denied services because the system cannot recognise them. There are people who have suffered from leprosy and those who have been amputated. Such people are being denied services of NIRA because the system demands for biometric information where someone has to have all the fingers. Really, are we sure that in Uganda, we are the same? These things should be handled critically. I would like to thank and pray that the soul of late Gen. Aronda rests in eternal peace because he understood these things better. 

We have the LC system in Uganda. If somebody cannot access the national identity card especially the old people, why don’t you let such a person get the LC letter to be recognised for services? People are getting out of the SAGE programme because they do not have national identity cards. I would suggest that the LCI letter could be critical.

Madam Speaker, in this country, we have a whole Ministry of Information, Communication and Technology but the technology for the national identity cards has become something very hard to access. It is now easy to get a passport online or to fill any other document online but for the national identity card, it is still hard. Honourable minister, I do not know why the Ministry of Internal Affairs does not work with the I.T ministry to ensure that we have technology. We would not be having people moving to Kampala. We would be getting identity cards in our localities.
 
Do we have to deny Ugandans just because of an identity card? There are those who can prove that they cannot get the identity cards because of the nature of their lifestyle or their bodies. We need to be considerate to some of these people. Thank you.

4.21
Mr rwakajara arinaitwe (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the elaborate statement. What is clear is that this organisation has a management crisis. 

I am happy that in the report, the minister has clearly indicated that we have a new Board now. I do not know how old it is but I think we need to request the Board to restructure this organisation and to have proper management of the business in that organisation. If we do not have proper management, we are heading for serious problems. The national identification card is a must and if our people do not have identity cards and are denied services, we will have a serious problem. 

My humble request to the minister is that he makes sure he works with the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, together with the new Board, to rectify existing problems before you even ask for the money. Otherwise, we will sink in more money with poor management and have another problem of procuring the systems and all that. Honourable minister, I think you need to support the Board to organise that organisation. Thank you.

4.22
Mr david abala (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. What I know is that citizenship is a right and to authenticate that, you must have an identity card. The mere fact that NIRA that is charged with that duty has not executed it is maximum failure on their side. We must agree on that.

We all know that you cannot access any medical facility or service in this country and you cannot register if you are in senior four or senior six or for whichever course without a national identity card. Right now, I am sure there are over 180,000 students who are going to sit O’ Level but they do not have identity cards. At the same time, we have over 90,000 students who are going to sit A’ Level. They are supposed to register but they do not have identification cards. This speaks volumes.

If we, members of Parliament are going to relax - In the statement, the Minister of Internal Affairs was telling us, they will continue registering daily but they may not. Those are not good words for a national leader like him. I must be open on that, as a Christian. It may not be good for a leader.

Madam Speaker, the minister also said that NIRA receives 700 but serve only 400 people per day. Assuming that the 300 who are not served every day are the people who come from very far like Ngora, Kamuli or Kotido because they reach there late, I would like the minister to know that the situation concerning identity cards in this country is no longer a joking matter. It is a matter that is very dangerous, if we do not fix this problem. 

I would like to inform the minister that even the district registration officers do not have budgets. They are just redundant. All the money is here in Kampala. The budget is being managed here. Some of them, who worked that time, have not been paid. These are existing issues but the minister comes here to give us some sugar-coating.

Finally, I would like to appeal to the ministry. As you tell us that they are going to decentralise, can you do this immediately? The problem is that people in this country are suffering. Some of them are sick and cannot go to hospital and access any service in the country without an identity card. 

Even coming to Parliament, if you do not have a national ID, you cannot go through the gates here. On the eastern gate where the people normally pass, they are told, “If you don’t have an ID, can you go back?” They are not allowed to come to the national assembly because they have no national identity card but this is not their problem but that of NIRA. 

Now the ministry is telling us stories, which are not proper. That is why we want the minister to address this matter such that Ugandans are served with a lot of diligence. Otherwise, the more they pile people in Kololo, the more corruption they will be promoting day in, day out. Remember, poverty is on the increase.

I would like to remind you that in 2011, 11 million Ugandans could not get Shs 1,000 at the end of the month. Since that time, if I was to give information, they charge them Shs 53,000 for replacing an identity card. Where are they going to get this money from? 

That is why I would like the minister to be very open to Ugandans and tell us that, “Here, we are sorry but we have fixed this problem like this.” However, it should not be after buying fake equipment and they come to tell us different stories. I do not agree with some of the stories my good minister is telling us.  

4.27
Mr john Baptist nambeshe (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. The question in Uganda has always been how long it takes a Ugandan citizen to acquire a national identity card. The minister has persuasively attributed that to staffing gaps. One would easily be persuaded but not me.

It is now very clear and it is not lost on me that it is because of the haemorrhages of corruption that they procured equipment that has failed. All the delays should be attributed to that. I am sure that even if they were to recruit to 100 per cent, with the system, which is always failing, they will not perform.

The other critical question has always been, why is it that they have been doing benchmarking, going to countries outside Africa but even within the neighbourhood like Kenya, Rwanda where these national identity cards do not expire and yet, in Uganda they do?

International best practice has it that an identity card should be issued for a lifetime. If we have, for instance, the East African Protocol, which has been signed to allow free movement of our citizens within the member state countries - You have gone to a country like Kenya or Rwanda where an identity card is issued for a lifetime but yours is limited. This means that even your citizenship is limited. Therefore, you will be stateless once it expires.

If they are grappling with the challenge of taking ages to register when the population is merely 35 million, what if when these cards are to expire in 2024, the population of Uganda is 50 million? This expiration has a cost implication for registration. If the population is that big, won’t it be like the time when we had the challenge with LC 1 elections? At that time, they said they would turn away people and say there will be registration for national identity cards because there are no funds. This has ever happened when LC1 elections could not be conducted because of cost implications. 

Madam Speaker, for the limited number of districts that have had these NIRA services decentralised, you wonder how long it will take the ministry to roll down to districts. The disaster prone district of Bududa, where I come from, has taken ages but they are only operational in 87 districts. I beg to submit. 

4.31
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Nambeshe, for your submission. 

I wish to thank the minister. Your statement was comprehensive, as much as it was mean with facts. My major concern is, what makes NIRA not print express identity cards? When we go to Face Technology to get driving permits or licenses, the cards are printed immediately. You just go with your identity card. However, you are telling us the technology you have is very good but why is it that it cannot print express identity cards? 

I have seen the national identity cards but they are not special at all. The Nasser Road people can make a very beautiful duplicate out of the original. I have used them before. I remember at the time I wanted to stand surety for hon. Robert Kyagulanyi, I was asked to produce an original identity card but I only had a duplicate. However, when the Magistrate looked at it, it looked original. 

Madam Speaker, the cards we have are not electronic; you can put them in a system and they bring up the clear information about Mbwatekamwa. Someone just looks at it and thinks it is real. Honourable minister, can’t we have express identity cards?

We have people who do not have the print. In Luganda, we can call it “Njola.” Someone goes there with a thumb, most especially old people, they try to capture it and it cannot be captured. I have seen them being chased. One time, I witnessed an old man being told to go and look for spirit, clean the place and come back. It was not even provided there but they told the old man to go away. 

We have people in villages who have completely failed to get national identity cards because they do not have that print. How are they getting the identity cards? 

Hon. Asamo talked about people with disabilities, who have been amputated. What are you going to do? Can we use the toe prints? What should they use sincerely? They do not have identity cards and you know they are very important. 

On citizenship, how long does it take to expire? If I registered as a citizen and I have an identity card, there should be no reason to tell me that in 2024, I need to renew my citizenship. Is it practical? 

If you are telling me my identity card is expiring in 2024, it means I am also expiring as a Ugandan. Is it practical if I am not dead? Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. 

Lastly, students are compelled –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude. 

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Students are compelled to bring birth certificates from NIRA. We all know that our students have been getting birth certificates from sub counties and these were not NIRA birth certificates. Are you saying these birth certificates are fake when they are also from the same Government? Or are you trying to inconvenience our students? Thank you very much.

4.36
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The importance and relevance of national identity cards, as citizens of this country, cannot be over emphasised. 

It is very disturbing when you look at the way NIRA is serving Ugandans. I can give an example. Just at the entrance, we have URA here, they only ask for a TIN, punch it in the system and information about a person is accessed. They have all the details. 

Why can’t NIRA do the same thing to make lives of Ugandans very easy? They need to activate the NIN so that if there is any institution that needs to give a service to any Ugandan, in the absence of national identity cards, just put the NIN and it will bring the particulars and somebody is given the service. This would go a long way. These are some of the areas they need to explore. 

Madam Speaker, national identity cards are becoming a very critical document or item. At the moment, the National Medical Stores are exploring. As a means of controlling the theft of drugs in health units, they want to use national identity cards as a benchmark and develop a package so that, once you go for treatment, your particulars are punched in the system. You are treated, prescribed with medicines and know what you have consumed, as a way of monitoring. What is going to happen to people who do not have national identity cards? They are going to miss the service.

Honourable minister, you have tried to explain that some districts have offices, which are not operational. They are not helping the locals. Once they visit them, the next thing, after taking the particulars, is to refer them back to Kololo. If you have an office at the district and it is not offering services, what is going to happen? They are still continuing to incur the same expenses. 

You have millions of national identity cards, which are about to expire, lying around and you give a report. We are now wondering what is going to happen with all that stock. We are asking you to find a way of delivering those national identity cards to the sub counties so that the owners can collect them very easily. It is going to be very difficult for somebody to travel all the way from West Nile, where they come from and come to Kampala just to pick a national identity card. It is a disservice to our people in the villages. They do not have these resources. The cost is going to be too high. 

I would like to implore that as we look at the ministerial policy statements - any issues that you feel this House should do for you - I hope they are in the ministerial policy statements so that we critically analyse them. We should be able to allocate resources so that we resolve this problem once and for all. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.40
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his statement. On page 2, those who have lost their national identity cards are not about to get them within the three months waiting time frame because he has clearly stated that the Authority recognises that there are many people who have failed to have their national identity cards replaced within three months.

Madam Speaker, why would NIRA give a timeframe of three months and then it does not honour it to make sure that within that time, when a citizen comes to pick the identity card, they should be in position to get it?

Madam Speaker, I think NIRA should learn to go by its assurance to the citizens because these people also need to be respected. Imagine a person who comes from rural areas, they have to transport themselves, then accommodation only to be told after the three months that the identity cards are not yet ready. Madam Speaker, this is being very unfair to Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, there are categories of Ugandans who may never get these national identity cards especially the elderly and the category that hon. Asamo talked about. 

When we were doing registration in 2014/2015, in my district, many elderly people failed to get national identity cards and they failed to access SAGE. My district was among the pioneer district for SAGE but up to now, we have elders who are not getting the grant because machines failed to capture their fingerprints.

Honourable minister, I do not know what plans you have for this category of people because now, we are told ministries and department will be requiring national identity cards from every citizen for any service that is to be rendered to them. Therefore, you should tell us what other measures you have for the people whose fingerprints cannot be captured so that they do not miss national identity cards. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.43
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I sympathise with the Minister of Internal Affairs. Deep in his heart, he knows the truth. He has asked for Shs 18 billion. Even if you give it to him tomorrow, he will still come back here for more money.

Madam Speaker, it is good I am still here when this matter has been brought. I raised this matter in 2012 that Uganda is trying to undertake a project that will not serve its purpose. Hon. Baba was there seated and he defended it. I wish he was here to listen to what the honourable minister was saying.

Problem number one, it is nothing like a problem of management in NIRA, not even the staff or the Board. The problem is technology. The system they are using. Even if you were to give them Shs 100 billion to do other things without changing the system, they will not produce anything.

Therefore, I sympathise with him. Come up and tell this country the truth thus; “we erred, let us start afresh.” The identity card that was supposed to be produced right from the beginning was an e-card. It was supposed to be multipurpose and free for every Ugandan.

Honourable minister, go back to the proposals you received from the bidders, which you later abandoned. Study the proposals they gave you. 

You are spending money in producing driving permits in a separate place, producing passports from somewhere else; spending on producing ATM cards. All the money you are spending would have been centralised to one processing system. How is India producing identity cards for 1.2 billion people? For you, in five years, you have failed to produce 9 million identity cards.

The problem is the technology. They just handpicked that technology from somebody who was operating a photo studio. (Laughter) He added in some few things to bring a system here to produce identity cards.

Madam Speaker, I would like the minister to tell us how much they have spent on this project since its inception. It is on record that Uganda and DRC have spent a lot of money on production of mere identity cards, which are not even biometric. As hon. Mbwatekamwa has said, you can produce the same on Nasser Road. If there is anything easy to produce, it is the national identity card. 

The original idea was that people were not supposed to move from their villages. They were supposed to be stationed at the sub county with a card reader. You move in at any one time and you get an update with all the information. The same identity card was going to assist people to borrow money from the banks.

You have more than 2 million identity cards and people have not picked them because they are of no use. They wanted them that time when there were roadblocks. There is now peace in Uganda. You do not need an identity card now.

The identity card that was supposed to be produced was supposed to be multipurpose, to be used in the hospital, in the bank, etcetera. In your statement, you said Government agencies should now budget and buy equipment to interface. The first thing that project was supposed to do was interface with all ministries.

If I went to Ministry of Health and said my NIN is this, when they put it in, they should be able to access my information. You are now saying the Ministry of Health should budget for the money to buy the system. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and that of Local Government should interface with agencies. Can I now go to Uganda Bureau of Statistics and get information from there? No. There is still a long way to go. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I give hon. Mawanda one more minute.

MR MAWANDA: Finally, Madam Speaker, save the taxpayers money. Let the minister go back to the drawing board. We are going to continue sinking money in that project with no results. I can assure you.

Who is the supplier of the technology? I know your hands are tied. You cannot touch him. Ugandans are suffering but you cannot touch the supplier. Let the supplier give us that technology. It is very cheap.

Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, honourable for giving way. You seem to have a lot of useful information. Can you tell us where this project went wrong and who are responsible and the way forward for Parliament to help the country?

MR MAWANDA: Honourable minister, go and read the Hansard. In 2012, I raised these things - the technology, the supplier and changing the original intention of the project. If we do not procure a proper system, as I have said, Madam Speaker, we will be wasting the taxpayers’ money. Thank you.

4.50
MS OLIVER KATWESIGYE (Independent, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the minister’s report, he talked about the decentralisation of the system. He said that 27 districts and division offices have been established and are working but those offices are not working because there are no facilities. Apart from registering birth and death certificates, there is nothing else they are doing. Even some of the schools do not accept the birth certificates they are offering, because they are just pieces of papers. I think that those offices are not doing anything; they are there but they are doing nothing. 

Madam Speaker, it is very important for the minister to accept that the whole system has a problem so that this House can find a solution. What we are doing here is a disservice to the Ugandans. I do not know whether you have ever got time to go to Kololo. One day, I went to Kololo but what I found there was really very bad; people come from all over the country to go to Kololo and you find people who have been there for three, five or six days but they cannot access the service. 

When we are talking about the decentralisation of this system, I think that it would be the best thing to do, but you are looking at it as if it will not help this country. These are people who can afford to transport and accommodate themselves in Kampala; what about those who cannot transport themselves to come here and get the service? Honourable minister, your report is wanting; you need to work hard to solve this problem. Thank you.

5.52
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I salute my brother, the honourable minister. 

I have my national ID, Parliament ID and passport here. All these identify the same person – Fungaroo. If we focus on this national ID and say that to access services, you need the national ID, what happens if the national ID system fails continuously, as is happening today? Are we going to suspend the services just because this channel is not working when you could identify me using another system? 

My submission is that largely, our country is still analogue; that is why even where we are using computers and iPads in our offices, we still use pen and paper. We have not thrown them away. 

As we experiment with the national IDs and going digital, with the risk of machine failure still with us, let us have an alternative which is analogue, so that another form of identifying the same person can work. If the national ID fails, use the passport. If the passport fails, use any ID which is authenticated and can work, for example institutional IDs. 

Madam Speaker, today, I went to register my SIM card because yesterday while in the traffic jam, I made a mistake and as I was on phone, a thief came and snatched it. Right now, I do not have a phone and I wanted to register a new SIM card but the message I received on my phone from MTN is “NIRA has refused the use of your ID”. They asked me for my national ID and I gave them and they said, “This ID cannot be used to register your phone”, yet it was the same ID I used to register the number which was stolen. 

So, should I now live without a phone when I even have a passport here? Why don’t I register my SIM card with the passport or the Parliament ID? Many people go through this kind of problem. Gen. Katumba was here, Brig. Gen Kulayigye is here; they have alternatives in the army. They use SIM cards and mobile phones but they have not thrown away the radio call. Why does the military still use analogue radio calls when there are digital ones? It is because they know that it is about survival - life and death. Now our national IDs have gone to that extent. 

Therefore, let us think about alternatives. Machine failure should not disorganise the recognition of a Ugandan as being a citizen. Let us go back to analogue because we are not moving well. 

4.55
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for his statement. Minister, I see that you are fully dejected because of the submissions that the Members have made. However, this contribution should be able to give you an appetiser to rise up and do something.

First, I get surprised that even a company like Multiplex Limited can do a better job than NIRA. I am saying so because if you want to know that they are effective, just default on paying parking fees. One day, they will come and get your number plate and punch their machine and they will immediately show you the amount that you owe to them. How come up to now, NIRA cannot be able to capture the National Identification Numbers (NINs) and get all the data? You do not have to ask somebody for a letter again once they lose an ID. There is a problem and somebody needs to act, starting with the minister.

Minister, before I take any information, I would like to tell you that even the Uganda Police Force that we always say is not efficient is doing a better job. If you have committed a traffic offence, they have a system of storing your details in their machines and they are able to tell that you have not paid for a receipt that you were given. What about NIRA with all those billions of shillings? 

I know that there is a challenge when we talk about unfunded priorities. How can you say that something is an unfunded priority yet you did not prioritise it? Those are neglected priorities not unfunded priorities, and you should delete this from the report; it is not proper. 

Madam Speaker, we would love to see the public give feedback on these processes and we should make it mandatory. Every office should provide for this feedback. Secondly, we would love to see a value-for-money audit. We have always talked about financial audits and neglected value-for-money audits. We want to see the Auditor-General bring these reports now so that we get to know what is happening down there, otherwise there is a big problem. 

People who are working with NIRA should be employed on contract. If you fail, we kick you out because there are many who qualify. We have been talking about the councillors; we discussed LC IIIs, the mayors and we raised the qualifications required for these positions because people are now qualified. I think the problem is about us getting more serious. As a Parliament, we need to get biannual reports – if the reporting has not been like that – so that we debate about what happens down there.

Honourable minister, I am aware that the Ministry of Internal Affairs does not give money to NIRA. When it comes to the distribution of the cake, you keep it within your tables; you do not give NIRA enough money. So, you make us lament, yet the problem is with you; you do not give money to NIRA. How can we change the technology that is obsolete without money? You are part of the problem.

I would like to also beg that appropriation-in-aid should now work. This money that we send as Shs 50,000 to the Consolidated Fund should be ring-fenced for production of national IDs, and that is very important. Why would we pay Shs 50,000 and in the end we are struggling to replace an ID after paying a whole Shs 50,000?

Madam Speaker, I think that penalties work for those who fail to perform. We need to strengthen our laws. If you are an officer who is supposed to do something and you fail, there should be enforcement of the penalty stipulated properly against such an officer of Government. With that, we shall see some difference. (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give is that actually, this is the only project, which has not been messed up. 

I was approached by a police officer who manages our security cameras and he informed me that because of the type of technology they installed, they have over ten screens which they monitor but at no point can they view all the screens. In other countries, the technology they have installed picks a particular incident where they have to focus on a person. 

He also told me that they must improve this technology because there are only two people in the control room looking at over 10 screens and there is no way they will see, if something happens. The technology in other countries focuses on something – 

MR AOGON: That is quite enough information. Thank you, honourable member. (Laughter)

I think that every Member will rise up here and talk about technology. The problem is about technology. It seems the contractors supplied us with something quite bogus. It seems like even the people on Nasser Road are getting better than most of our officers. That is quite discomforting; it is not okay. How can we now start praising Nasser Road people yet our people –(Member timed out.)

5.01
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister. The idea of having a national identity card is a very good one but the way it is being implemented is not good for Ugandans. As we speak, the Government has given directives to all the health centres and hospitals never to allow those without national identity cards to access medical services. 

Over the weekend, the community in Amuru was very angry; children were being denied medical services at the health centres. At Omei Health Centre II, the community wanted to beat the medical personnel because they were telling the parents not to bring their children again if they do not have national identity cards. 

This case is quite unique, especially within the Acholi subregion. As we speak, there are so many people who do not have national identity cards. A case in point, like in my district of Amuru, is the people who were abducted and are just returning. Two months ago, we received many people from Central African Republic. They just returned to Uganda. Right now, when their children go to hospitals, they are being asked never to go back again because the parents do not have national identity cards. 

During the registration process many people who were in prison did not register. Such people do not have national IDs. We have people who were hospitalised during the time of registration. They too do not have national IDs. 

I beg the honourable minister and the Government to allow those who do not have national IDs to access important services like medical services and school. Those are necessities to our people. If you deny them medical services, where else do you expect them to go? This is a very serious matter. 

Those who participated during the registration process, working with NIRA, especially those who come from our area in northern Uganda and the Acholi sub-region specifically, have never been paid their money. They are always raising concerns to Members of Parliament to liaise with the NIRA office so that their money is paid. I do not know the criteria that you normally use in your offices. 

Madam Speaker, let us take the matter of the national identity card very seriously. Let Ugandans access services even if they do not have identity cards. I beg to move. 

5.04
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The national identity card is supposed to be a security matter for this country. When you see our bona fide citizens, whom we always try to give transport and upkeep when they are in Kampala, struggling to get their entitlement as citizens, yet recently, we had some hostile neighbours involved in espionage getting these IDs so easily - you have just heard of the exchange programme we have been having - you start wondering if this is still the national security safeguard we intended to have.

I am even worried because those of us who look at the bigger picture have been talking of the possibility of printing our own money. I hope we do not get mafia tomorrow who want to print money for Uganda. How can we fail to print national IDs! If Burundi, a fragile state, can have dependable national IDs, how do we fail to do such a simple task? 

I would like to emphasise the point of regional offices as an entitlement. Uganda is a republic by the 1962 consensus. We should always abide by this consensus, on top of the provision in Article 178 of the Constitution, so that these regions should – The advantage is that already in the other entities of Government, there is coordination. Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) is working with lands and other Government entities. Many entities are now operating together. So why then does this national ID still operate unilaterally?

I would like to emphasise the point of going back to the drawing board. We had a board for procurement but we have decided to adapt ourselves to the wrong technology. That is the whole mistake. You remember seven years ago when this equipment was lying idle and the debate was whether it was appropriate or not? Instead of abandoning it all together, we decided to do positive living and this is what we are suffering from. 

As far as I know, from a statistics angle, the intention of a national identification system is to give us a national register. A national register starts from birth. Data is picked from birth up to when someone dies. It can actually help you generate birth and death certificates. 

All other secondary users derive information from the national register. If one is of school-going age, they derive that information from the national register. If one is a voter, that information is derived from the national register. If NRM and other parties want to make a voter’s register, they have to use that national register. If one wants to open a bank account and they are citizens, their information is derived from a national register. If a person wants a driving permit, that information is derived from a national register. 

Why then are we doing things upside down? This is not an accident; this is deliberate. This can only be deliberate. Therefore, it is our responsibility as Parliament to check and do oversight to make sure that this haemorrhage is stopped. We are wasting money on a project, which will never help us. That is why the schools identification exercise has failed. 

Ideally, to go to hospital and school, you should have a NIN, if the national register had been achieved by now. For a person to retire, it should be known because the national register already exists. So in statistical terms, you derive – UBOS knows what is supposed to be done but people are silent because they possibly think the person involved is too big and there is no way they can shake them. By now, we should have forgotten this old system and gone for what should be the right thing to do. 

You can imagine, the intention we had was to deal with the fraudsters in banks. We now cannot; until this system is dependable, the other agencies like banks, the one that issues driving permits, cannot access this information. The moment they cannot, then it is no longer a national identification system. This is where we must invest all our time because if we do not do that, we are not being relevant to the expectations of this country.

Madam Speaker, I pray that everything should be done – it should have been done yesterday. Of course, these are matters, which clearly show that the national dialogue was required yesterday. This is common sense. How come we cannot see what is very obvious? I am happy the investors’ roundtable has also pleaded. Even the investment climate is becoming hostile without national dialogue. I pray that this matter is attended to so that we stop these forgeries.

Madam Speaker, the other problem is corruption. The moment we clean up the national register, a lot of air supply will stop. Some people are benefitting by hiding this information but we must take leadership and make sure that the criminals who are involved are checked and the country takes the right path. Thank you.

5.11
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the minister for the statement. 

There is one aspect that the minister did not address, which we did address on the Floor - requiring citizens to pay for ID replacements where errors were made by NIRA itself. You go to Kololo or any of these centres, give data to the registration officers, they enter the wrong data, and eventually produce an ID with wrong information, such as misspelt names and wrong dates of birth. When you go back to make a complaint, they require you to pay for a replacement, yet the error was occasioned by NIRA itself. Why is this happening? Honourable minister, this is the matter you have not addressed.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, whereas there are challenges in the entire process, the Government or NIRA have not done their part. Under the law, for example, the minister is required, through the Gazette, to issue different dates for different categories of people to register. This has not happened. 

Hon. Asamo was talking about people with disabilities. If you had issued different dates in the Gazette, the country would know who registers on what dates. Even if you did it on the basis of regions and said, for example, that people from Busoga sub-region will be registering on these particular dates, that can also work because the law envisages that. This has not happened.

The other aspect is that under the law, the minister is supposed to establish what is called a registration and identification committee. That committee is supposed to adjudicate disputes. As we speak, if you have grievances under the Act, you have nowhere to go. The law says, if you are dissatisfied with the decision of that committee, you appeal to the High Court. You cannot go to the High Court directly in the absence of that committee. There are commands under the law that are not being fulfilled by the minister.

Madam Speaker, the law also requires that NIRA works in conjunction with the Electoral Commission for purposes of decentralising registration. They say you can actually use polling stations established by the Electoral Commission. The Electoral Commission already has certain facilities in place. I do not know how much you are doing to coordinate with the Electoral Commission for purposes of decentralising these processes. 

This congestion you are seeing in Kololo and these other places is as a result of no coordination. The law requires you to coordinate with other agencies. Once this is done, we hope that part of these challenges that are being faced now will not be faced again. Thank you.

5.14
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like Members to take this seriously. If the minister does not help us, some people are going to miss nominations. If you lose your ID a month or two months to nomination day and replacement takes all this time - This is why I am saying that we should take this matter seriously.

Madam Speaker, in this age of technology, if even now I can store my photos on the iCloud, can’t this information be stored that way? Why is it so difficult for NIRA to store this data in space? Is it because we bought old technology?

Madam Speaker, it goes back to the issue of corruption. People have come to me to say that foreigners get our national IDs in Kololo at US$ 3000. If you are a national and you want your ID very fast, you pay Shs 1 million. For the birth certificate, which is supposed to be Shs 5000, you pay Shs 120,000 in Kololo. This week, the IGG is in NIRA doing investigations. It so happens that there were staff of NIRA who were arrested but because they are connected, they have been left to continue working. I would like the minister to take this seriously and follow it up. 

Madam Speaker, this goes back to the company that was given the job to provide the technology. Hon. Mawanda, I do not know why you feared to name the company. This company is highly connected and it is called Muhlbauer. It is a German company owned by a Ugandan and a German. The German is the husband while the Ugandan is the wife. They are highly connected and related. This is where the problem is. These are the same people who have been given the printing press in Entebbe. The agreement was that they were going to do this and that but they have failed. They have mortgaged the title to look for money.

We have been praising Face Technologies, which has been doing a wonderful job. This Parliament, I think in October last year, said the contract for Face Technologies has come to an end, please, let this revert to the Ministry of Works and Transport. I would like to thank Gen. Katumba here. He tried to do whatever it takes to say this thing stays but he has been defeated. The contract has gone to the same group of people. By the end of this year, you will take three or six months to get a new driving permit because of this. 

This has all been happening because of corruption, because the companies that want to do business have no knowledge. They are just gamblers. They just want to make money, to the detriment of Ugandans. If those are not identified - my brother here will not do anything because he is very innocent and powerless. He is not even “eating” money while people are “eating” but he comes here to defend with courage. (Laughter) He is not the problem; the problem is beyond him. Unless these people who are doing these things are got out, they cannot do anything. I have told you those who own Muhlbauer are highly connected. If they have defeated the General, do you think this civilian will manage? He will not. 

Madam Speaker, those are the issues that we need to sort out. When we were proposing this, we wanted it to be a national identification system that was all encompassing - if you want NSSF, insurance or a driving permit. However, because people wanted to make money, they decided to bring us ad hoc, old fashioned and ancient technology to mess up these things.

Madam Speaker, this is the information I needed to bring to the attention of this House. Honourable minister, if you have the guts, you should have these people prosecuted. Why is the IGG in NIRA? What are they investigating? They are investigating these issues. However, they will also not do much because of the connection of the people who are involved in this matter.

Madam Speaker, NIRA held interviews but people were not given jobs. They asked for money to be given but along the way, other people came in. In fact, some of them do not even have the required qualifications. There are senior managers in NIRA who are disgusted with the authority and they want to resign. They are just looking for where to go since they cannot operate under that kind of system.

Honourable minister, I am surprised today that your senior managers are not here. The last time you were making a statement here, they were present. I think they should listen to these things. Where is the Brigadier and the executive director? Why are they not here today, yet they know that you are here? I really do not think you came here without informing them. So, why are they not here? It is either they do not own the report or the minister is powerless to summon them to come. Maybe they have resigned due to issues of corruption and tribalism. However much money you will give, if the same conditions persist, nothing will change.

5.21
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Actually, I am also a victim and I am worried because I do not know if I am going to be nominated since the national identity card, which I used during the previous elections – 

I was lucky that the telecom companies issued a directive for us to go and re-register SIM cards. When I went to re-register my SIM cards, my identity card was not synchronising with the system. They said it was not valid. Last year in June, I had to go to NIRA offices in Kololo and they captured all my data and told me to go to Wandegeya to pick my identity card after three months. Since I know how inefficient Ugandan systems are, I went after the fourth month but I was told that the identity card would be ready in two and half months. Madam Speaker, I added another month and I went back last month but they told me it was not ready.

Madam Speaker, when we were debating this matter, I gave my details to the executive director who was seated on the technical bench. She said they were going to call me to ascertain whether my card is ready or not. It is now two weeks and I have not received a call. This means that the card is not yet ready.

When you go to Lumumba Avenue, you find many people seated there waiting for national identity cards. They tell you that if you come after midday, you are not going to be allowed to access the premises since they would have already taken in enough people. When you go to Kololo, you find hundreds of people. In fact, I need to investigate the minister to find out whether he does not own any restaurant at Kololo because it is ready market. People sit there from 4.00 a.m. and they eat breakfast and lunch. I think some of them have even started lodging there. We need to investigate this very well. Otherwise, there is going to be a problem emanating from that kind of thing.

I would like to ask the minister, if I have a national identity card that was issued by Government and it is not valid, why should you make me pay money to replace that identity card? Madam Speaker, it is not my fault. Why should I revalidate? I am not even sure whether the one they are going to issue to me is going to be valid. Otherwise, I may end up revalidating. It may even become a trick for some of you to deny us an opportunity to participate in the elections, considering our opposition status.

Madam Speaker, if I am not able to have a national identity card replaced in the mandatory – In fact, it is NIRA that set the time. They told me to go back after three months. If you are not able to deliver in the three months, how sure am I that even after eight months, I will be able to receive my identity card?

5.24
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for having raised this matter. Many people had reached out to your distinguished office. I would like to also thank the honourable minister for having laboured to come up with a statement. Indeed, you have tried your best. Otherwise, what would you have done?

Honourable minister, you stated that over 700 persons appear daily in the office of NIRA requesting for different services, amongst others fresh registration and replacement, which is only done in Kololo. However, you did not tell us how many employees NIRA has, to help us know the ratio of those that come for service vis-à-vis those that are meant to serve them. Are they five, 10, 20, 30, 40 or 50?

Secondly, hon. Mawanda talked about the issue of technology. This goes back to the parent issue of failure to advertise during procurement services of this company. You went for single sourcing of this company. It is wrong. Just because these companies have people they know, you ignored your local technology that is developed here since you want to choose people that come from outside to take these contracts.

We talked about the matter regarding Uganda Revenue Authority tax stamps. Why should people walk to the President and he decides who has to offer services to our countrymen? It is because an investor has walked to him and told him, “I can do this service better”. This is the matter of tax  stamps and Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS).

Madam Speaker, Ugandans invested in various technologies but what happened? Because certain people came from somewhere and they are hugely connected, they walked to the President who issued a directive to single source a company and money is collected from Ugandans and repatriated out of this country. Where is Buy Uganda, Build Uganda (BUBU)? Where is that spirit? Ugandans are great innovators. 

The technology we procured was obsolete, fake and very expensive. The cost of printing a national identity card here is valued at about $45. This is why the issue is not about who prints. That is why they are telling you that every 10 years, we shall print new ones. The issue is that it is a money-making venture here - $450 million. Madam Speaker, I will submit more on how this is a money-making venture here when you give me time.

We have so far spent more than $400 million on this company to print identity cards and yet after 10 years, they will come back. That is why they are walking to every single thing that is deemed to have a technological background; it is a network. It will move from there to the driving licences and from the driving licences to anything that touches printing. 

Sorry, honourable minister; you are just here to present a statement. Even those working within NIRA cannot address this issue currently. Why? It is because the backup data that you retrieved from the people initially does not exist. Madam Speaker, this is why, when you asked as to whether they still have the data of the people, the answer was not there. When you go back for replacement of a lost identity card, it should be printed not in three months since the role of printing is very small. You captured my biometrics; I have put my fingerprints and you can see that I am Obiga Kania, born here and this is my face, you should print the identity card instantly. Why should it take three months?

The issue of a NIN is to give me a rare number that is unique to me alone. As long as I possess it, issuing me with an identity card does not matter. What matters is carrying the rare number. You copied this from the social security numbers that are used by people in the United States of America. It is a number that is unique to you. When you are born, you are given this rare number and at certain age, you can request that an identification card be printed for you; it is not even mandatory. 

Madam Speaker, the people have very many problems. The other time, MTN said that Shs 20 billion worth of mobile money is being kept because people cannot access it. To claim for this money, you must have a national identity card and yet very many have lost their cards. Very many mobile money operators are waylaid and beaten, their property taken and they cannot get their national identity cards in order to claim for that money. Their business stock is in form of cash but they do not have it instantly because they take three months to get a national identity card replacement.

In the office of the Administrator-General, if you do not produce a national identification card of the deceased and the death certificate, which also takes three months, they cannot attend to you. By the time you get to retrieve these letters of probate and any other document, it takes so long and impedes a lot of work. 

What happened to the data of the children that you registered at schools? We were required to give copies of our national identification cards so that you could register all our children from their schools. We have reliable information that it is lost. If you have it, where are their national identification cards, because we appropriated money for you to print them?

There is a problem with people with colour, that is why they have come up to demand for a tribe. There are certain people who were sired by parents of different nationalities – the mothers are Ugandans and probably the fathers were not. As they appear to claim for their national identification cards, they are told that they are no longer nationals because they do not have a tribe. At the end of the day, these people are suffering and they are in great numbers. Some got national IDs but they were denied passports. 

We have to take into consideration that these are also citizens of Uganda and the law clearly stipulates how someone becomes a citizen, in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. Therefore, if these people are being tossed every other day and being called hence and forth, assuming someone is in Soroti and they have to come to Kololo every two weeks, how much money do they spend? The productivity of the people is also curtailed by our inefficiency. 

Honourable minister, let not the inefficiency of the people working in NIRA inconvenience our country. Come back with a better answer; the issue is not about facilitation but you procured obsolete technology and you did not invite as many companies to compete fairly. That is why we are procuring everything expensively.

The same happened with the matter of cameras. We warned you and right now, you are back to single sourcing. Let people compete. There are very many service providers. What is so special with that machine that prints identity cards? It is an ordinary printer that you can put everywhere. The issue is what you capture in the computer and the ability to store people’s biometric data. Therefore, replacement should be instant.

In any case, I was arguing with you about the Shs 50,000 because of the directive the Speaker gave here. She said that for any statutory instrument that you come up with, please come and inform Parliament because it is part of legislation, so that if you levy fees we can be able to explain to our people that this was the rationale the minister used to arrive at these fees. Imagine, you levied Shs 50,000 for replacement in a country where people do not even earn Shs 1,000 per day-

THE SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your kindness and for having presented this matter. I hope the minister decentralises, because your issue was about decentralisation of replacement and distribution of national IDs. 

We urge the honourable minister, our counterpart, that even with the deficiency that you have at the moment, please try as much as possible to encourage NIRA. If it is talking about decentralisation, and during this campaign time, let them take back the printing services to the district level and then relax the fees of Shs 50,000 to probably Shs 3,000 for ID replacement. Thank you.

5.35
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My work has been made easy by the previous speakers. In view of the arguments that have been made in regard to the statement that the minister presented, I propose that we suspend the condition that citizens present valid national identification cards in order to access services from Government institutions.

One of the effects of the implementation of this strict measure is that it has cost us lives and has made life unbearable for Ugandans. It will be important for this House to pronounce itself in regard to the condition of using national identification cards to access services except for where the identification card is valid.

When we talk about obsolete systems or technology, it is important that we provide a position in regard to what should be done because it has become a money-making initiative. It is important that we move from this obsolete technology to the latest. As somebody said, it is very cheap. If you go to MTN or these telecom companies, they are using much more advanced technologies to capture our data. These days, you do not need to write your account number; you just put your figure print and your details come up and they give you your money. So, if a bank like Centenary Bank can put in place the latest technology and use biometrics to do business, what about the Government.

The National Identification and Registration Authority hosts many agencies. Actually, it is the Ministry of Internal Affairs that chairs that inter-ministerial committee where you have the National Information Technology Authority, which is the technical agency now leading the issue of registration; we also have Face Technologies as part of the beneficiaries to be, and the Electoral Commission. 

These agencies form that apex, but they work efficiently independently. One example is the passport control office; when you put your fingerprint, all the information about you comes up. When you recommend somebody and they call you, you put your fingerprint and information comes up. There seems to be a hidden agenda in the Ministry of Internal Affairs not to coordinate effectively the input of these other agencies to be able to help citizens of this country.

Therefore, it would be very important for us to come out clear on the position of this obsolete technology, which we should do away with, and agree on when we will employ the latest technology, to be able to give Ugandans the latest IDs with all the features that will enable us to have access to multiple services. Madam Speaker, I would like to submit. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I had pledged to give one and a half hours for this debate but it has taken two hours. I had to allow Members to speak because of the importance of the subject. Minister, do you want to respond, very briefly?

MR OBIGA KANIA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank you and my colleagues for this debate. It has been extremely informative. It has enabled us learn a lot of things and at the ministerial level, it has also enabled us appreciate some of our shortcomings better. Where those shortcomings have inconvenienced Ugandans, as I have said before, I must say we are sorry but this is a learning process and we are going to put the lessons we have learnt here to use. 

Let me say a few things –(Interjections)– I am not a spoiler and I have never known myself to be a spoiler. (Laughter) I would like to refer to what hon. Bernard Atiku said about suspending the requirement of identity cards for Government services. Since we are colleagues, before Parliament takes that decision, you may wish to look at section 66 of the Registration of Persons Act, 2015, which clearly stipulates thus: 

“66 (1) A ministry, department or agency of Government or any other institution providing a public service shall require a person accessing the service to produce a national identification number or national identification card or alien’s identification number or alien’s identification card.”

Maybe in the process of suspending, you may want to look at whether the process involves amending that law and so forth. I have absolutely no problem on how you proceed but that is entirely for you – (Interjection) – I am simply saying this because hon. Atiku said Parliament should suspend; he did not say the Executive should initiate, but I am just saying that.

Secondly, I am happy that hon. Atiku praised the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control, that we are now able to get things simply by putting a finger there. He said that there is collusion in the ministry not to harmonise these departments so that they work smoothly. I would like to inform him that actually, the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control is also one of the departments under the Ministry of Internal Affairs. So, I thank him very much for that appreciation. There are also other departments like Uganda Prisons Service, the NGO Board, the police. I thank you for the appreciation and guidance.

Having said all that, there is also another one which probably would require me to say something immediately. We are in the process of appointing the adjudication committee, and I would like to thank my colleague for reminding us once more.

Madam Speaker, I spoke about the data for the school children in my last statement and I think it is on record. I just want to say that it is available. The data was given to the Ministry of Education and Sports but as far as the NINs are concerned, they were given to the districts and the schools for them to collect. For those children who at the time of registration were 16 years and above, identity cards have been printed for them. National identity cards were printed and those cards are available, not at the schools but at the districts where the schools are located.

If – (Interjections) – That is the information I would like to find out, that they are not there or that you went there with a name and you did not get it. It is then that I can know that they are not there. I will be very grateful, Madam Speaker, to get the names of those students whose IDs were printed and they are said to be at the district but they are not there. I will definitely act on that.

Having said that, I would like to summarise your advice in this form: Just like we said in our statement, there are managerial and systemic issues. Managerial issues relate to the personnel and operational issues. Systemic issues refer to the technical issues, the processes and the budgetary issues. Colleagues have also noted them there. When you read both our addendum and the original documents, we have not differed.

We have also not differed on the importance of this service continuing. However, what we have done is to identify the weaknesses on which we must work on as a team. On our part, we shall do it. I still reiterate my position, which I put across here for your consideration, that at the end of the day, we are available to have regular, open interactions, where members of the entire body of Parliament can come and have interactions with us, under the guidance of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs.

There was a question about the 87 districts. I do not know whether I should read them or table this handwritten document. Some Member asked which districts they were, and they were right. It does not take very long to read them. They are: Nebbi, Arua, Kole, Gulu, Mbarara, Budaka, Mayuge, Kawempe Division, Rubaga Division, Kampala Central, Nakawa Division, Makindye Division, Bukwo, Kabarole, Lira, Luweero, Kiryandongo, Serere, Soroti, Buyende, Butaleja, Iganga, Buikwe, Nakaseke, Zombo, Ngora, Bukedea, Katakwi, Amolatar, Amudat, Kaberamaido, Alebtong, Nakapiripirit, Kapchorwa, Lwengo, Buhweju, Isingiro, Kaliro, Kisoro, Kibuku, Kamuli, Busia, Kabale, Kibaale, Mityana, Kasese, Ntungamo, Lyantonde, Buliisa, Masindi, Manafwa, Mitooma, Kyegegwa, Ntoroko, Koboko, Apac, Lamwo, Otuke, Yumbe, Maracha, Kitgum, Amuru, Oyam, Pader, Gomba, Moyo, Mpigi, Kayunga, Mukono, Buvuma, Butambala, Bukomansimbi, Serere, Nwoya – (Interjection) – Did I read Serere before? My technical people have made a repetition but we shall correct that. The others are: Kiboga, Bundibugyo, Hoima, Kalangala, Namutumba, Kiruhura, Tororo, Namayingo, Sironko, Bududa, Luuka, Rakai and Sheema. These are the districts for the time being; we shall make the correction.

Madam Speaker, I want to thank you. We have gained immensely. For any other issues which require immediate action, we shall do so. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you, honourable minister. The presumption in section 66 of the Registration of Persons Act was that by 2016, everybody eligible would have had a card. This is now 2020 and there are many Ugandans who do not have identity cards. Therefore, I do not think we should insist on implementing section 66 without exceptions. It is five years since we started and Ugandans still do not have cards. Therefore, you may want to make some exceptions. If I have my passport, surely it is an identity document. Otherwise, there are people who are suffering because they do not have national identity cards.

The second issue, honourable minister, concerns the students. I understand you were told to - This man owns schools, let him explain. 

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, on the issue of students, they were registered at schools. While some indicated their schools as their home villages, others mentioned their home villages where they come from. However, when it came to picking the national identity cards - When you go to NIRA offices in Mukono, for example, they tell you to go to Kololo. However, when you go to Kololo, they tell you to go to your home district. Some people will advise you to go to the area where the students come from. So, the process is not very clear. As such, many of them have not managed to access their national identity cards as of today. 

In my case, I have 300 students who registered to even vote from my area because they were coming from within, but they have never got their cards - (Interjection) – They are not Islanders but even those are my voters because they belong to that constituency.

Madam Speaker, what I would like to say is that it is not true that the cards were taken to the districts. Let the minister interest himself in this and we see how to help our children. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. Honourable minister, finally, the country would like to know why we cannot have an integrated system. There are some pieces of information in UBOS, some in NIRA, some in NITA-U and others I do not know where but all about Ugandans - the same 40 million people. Why can’t we integrate that system? You cannot tell me that I am in UBOS and these are my details but I cannot share them. How?

MR OBIGA KANIA: Madam Speaker, that is the whole purpose of having what we call a third party interface system. Although a colleague said I was telling them that they should buy some - I do not know how he said it but he said that I was telling them to buy their own systems. No! What we are saying is that data is available at NIRA. It is like a server or a big computer. To access that, you need certain interface equipment at your premises. 

The Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control and also the Electoral Commission do have that equipment. When Electoral Commission wants to change your particulars, for example, they no longer go to Kololo; they use a machine that will show them the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga’s details and her card; all of them will be there. That is the interface we are talking about. 

Now, the establishment of that is not the responsibility of NIRA. That is not what we are saying. We are saying that our mouths are open in NIRA, come and get the food that we have chewed in our months; just take it and eat it. This is the integration we are talking about for the whole Government. 

Yes, I entirely agree that at Government level, we need to address it faster and make it mandatory that at Government, departmental and public levels, we need to do it quickly and then the private sector, in their own time, should also be able to get that.

The principle is that the entire system should be integrated and you do not need to keep your own data. Whereas the operational arm of this integration is NIRA, the technical arm will be NITA-U. These will be talking about the kind of machinery, which we need to have in the whole Government system, the kind of upgrades that all the systems need to do; the technical people will do this. That is, in principle, what is being done.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on that note, the Committee on Information Communication Technology is directed to invite the NITA-U team and find out when this will be done; we cannot continue like this.

MR OBIGA KANIA: Madam Speaker, you had asked me to say a few things - (Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Honourable minister, this is very important clarification; it is of a security nature. The national identification system is a security system. It is in the interest of Government that even a banker can check on who is who. Therefore, I would like us not to say that the aspect of interface by others is entirely an interest of the third party. The first interest is national interest. Therefore, it would even be in Government interest that we make it available to check the fraudsters, criminals and other people. 

I would not be comfortable that Government leaves it laissez-faire. You can charge them a user cost to acquire. That can be debated.

MR OBIGA KANIA: Okay; I entirely agree. The last information -

THE SPEAKER: No, we need to do other things, please. I want you to address the issue of section 16 on the mandatory -

MR OBIGA KANIA: I am coming to that. Madam Speaker, on section 16 of the Registration of Persons Act, we will consult with the Attorney-General in the circumstances. It is good that he has been here throughout the debate and he has appreciated. We shall take it at an appropriate level and see how we handle that matter.

Finally, the information I have got from my technical people is that, as I said, for the students, the district I am referring to is the district where the school is located - (Interjection) - This is what I am saying; they are supposed to be there but if they are not there, I will find out more and we shall be able to furnish the students and be able to solve their problems immediately. 
 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON HARMONISING WITH THE ELECTORAL COMMISSION TO REOPEN THE UPDATE OF THE NATIONAL VOTERS’ REGISTER TO ALLOW CITIZENS OF UGANDA WHO WILL BE TURNING EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE TO REGISTER AS VOTERS FOR THE FORTHCOMING GENERAL ELECTIONS

5.59
The attorney-general (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, as I said yesterday, the minister who was expected to be here today or tomorrow is not yet here. I again request that he comes tomorrow to make that statement.

He is upcountry opening a Justice, Law and Order Sector (JLOS) project that has been sponsored by our development partners. They have been opening four JLOS houses upcountry. That is where he is.

The Speaker: The matter is adjourned to tomorrow.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE JUDICIARY BILL, 2018

6.00 
Clause 21

The attorney-general (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When we adjourned yesterday, the issue was that the amendments had not been uploaded. We proceeded to have them uploaded yesterday. For the record, the paper had actually been uploaded on 18th February. In any case, it was re-loaded yesterday.

Madam Chair, I would like to propose an insertion of the following new clauses, immediately after the Title, to Part VIII. Under clause 21, I would like to propose as follows:

“Application

    1) The provisions of this part apply to -
    a) a Chief Justice, Deputy Chief Justice, Justice of the Supreme Court,  Justice of the Court of Appeal, Principal Judge, Judge of the High Court, Chief Registrar, Registrar and Magistrate who retires after the commencement of this Act; and 
    b)  a retired Chief Justice, Deputy Chief Justice, Justice of the Supreme Court, Justice of the Court of Appeal, Principal Judge, Judge of the High Court, Chief Registrar, Registrar and Magistrate who retired before the commencement of this Act and who, on the commencement of this Act, is receiving a pension in respect of his or her service under the Pensions Act.”   

Mr nzoghu: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have no problem with clause 21(1)(a) but I have a problem with clause 21(1)(b). I see an element of retrospective application of this Act when we pass it yet I know very well that those who have already retired should retire under the terms and conditions that are obtaining right now. This will help Government to budget appropriately for only those who will retire after the passing of this law. 

Mr niwagaba: Madam Chairperson, I would like to implore my friends, especially from this side, that we look at this Bill in a holistic way. 

I would have agreed that it caters for only those who are serving now but if you look at the condition of our retired Justices and Judges of the High Court, it is deplorable. If you look at the former Chief Justice Masika or Wambuzi or the former Principal Judge Ntabgoba earning the pension as is of now, the situation is deplorable. 

Therefore, I implore my friends that if we are to consider, let us consider the proposed retirement benefits but let this particular section apply to those who retired and those who are going to retire after passing this Act. I beg you, my colleagues, to support this particular provision.

The Chairperson: I would like to add that I think there are only two former Chief Justices and one former Deputy Chief Justice. You can count them, these people are very few.

Mr waluswaka: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to agree with the minister on the people who retired. Honourable minister, remember that you were only looking at these ones because they were putting pressure on you since they are going to retire. With this, I would like to agree with the minister so that we also cater for the others.

However, what I would like to ask the minister is whether the Director of Public Prosecution (DPP) is under the Judiciary. It is not? I am raising this because if this passes – and I would like to be on record – people in the DPP’s office are going to lay down their tools. Remember they are all lawyers. We do not know whether the judges will work by themselves. 

Members of Parliament –(Interruption)– I will receive that information before I sit.

Mr nandala-mafabi: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank my brother, Eng. Waluswaka, for giving way. The information I would like to give is, we should not look at Judiciary from one side. I do not know when the Attorney-General wants to propose or bring the law for even your office. Those state attorneys are officers of the Judiciary. Maybe the minister will make a consideration.

The information I would like to give is, if we go by section (b), which you have brought, it will only be good if it is about monthly retirement benefits. However, if you say that you also want to re-compute the gratuity at that time and the lump sum, it will be a complication. We should qualify this to monthly payments. If you want it to go back, you will have a problem.

Mr waluswaka: Finally, Madam Chairperson, I think you will guide in this. Honourable members, you can see the complexity of this Bill and the nature in which it was brought; just to benefit a few people. Now that the Speaker raised this, that is why they are trying to put in the people who retired and it is becoming complex. As we go down, it is good they even brought a formula. I would like the whole country to watch and see the formula that the minister has brought. Thank you.

The Chairperson: I see no fundamental objection to this issue.

Mr ariko: Madam Chairperson, there is a small matter that I wanted to comment on. When the learned Shadow Attorney-General was giving clarification, he addressed the chairperson and said this is the exception of the former chief justices –(Interjection)- that is what we heard here. Madam Chairperson, now that he has said no while seated, then, I can properly clarify. Let us go into the details of the proposed clause here, which talks about the retired Chief Justice, Deputy Chief Justice, Justice of the Supreme Court, Justice of the Court of Appeal, Principal Judge, Judge of the High Court, Chief Registrar, Registrar, Magistrate, name it. That is exactly what I would like to address. 

I had the privilege of working in the Ministry of Public Service, particularly in the department of human resource, which was also superintending the issues of pension. Revalidation and review of pension of previously retired officers was done in 2002. At that time, because of revalidating the pension, we accrued pension arrears in huge numbers. 

Madam Chairperson, from last year’s ministerial policy statement - my colleague, the honourable Minister of Public Service is there - we had over Shs 100 billion in pension arrears; most of it as a consequence of review of pension entitlements. 

Madam Chairperson, it is okay for us to look into enhancement of retirement benefits but we must be very careful of the multiplier effect of attempting to change it retrospectively. We can have a starting point of the law because for everything else, a law starts at a certain point and then those that are behind in that period - that is what happens. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this law will have a commencement date. 

MR MUKITALE: Madam Chairperson, I would just like to give a solution. I appreciate that we started the spirit of leaders in the Eighth Parliament; a gratitude to leaders. This is such that when they do a good service, they get a gratitude and decent life.

When we were passing the URBRA law, the issues of pensions and gratuity - I think the Attorney-General can help us by now updating the parent law. The way to go to avoid this stress of the financial implications of such gratuity is in ceasing to have the provident schemes and go into contributory schemes. 

The Government schemes have not yet been transformed into contributory schemes. Therefore, I would like to request that as we discuss – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, how does that relate to this amendment? 

MR MUKITALE: Madam Chairperson, I am just saying can the Attorney-General help us? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 21 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 23

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, we have a Bill that has the same clauses and he has not officially withdrawn it. We are going to get confused because clause 21 still remains, “The Administration of Judiciary.” He has not deleted it and neither has he moved to amend it. He is just saying, “Insert a new clause” instead of replacing it. Please look at the Bill. 

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, under clause 22 the general rule on payment of retirement benefits:
“22 (1) For the purposes of this Act, service in the judiciary –”

THE CHAIRPERSON: We did not speak about it. We did not present the old clause 21. 

MR BYARUHANGA: Clause 22 is general rule on the payment of retirement benefits. 
“(1) 	For the purposes of this Act, service in the Judiciary service shall include the period of service in other service in Government, provided that service was on full pay. 
(2) 	A judicial officer shall not draw any retirement benefits, other than the retirement benefits prescribed under this Act.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, now, I think this is a new clause. If you read through it, it says the moment you are in service anywhere and you join the Bench or become a judicial officer, then you will earn salary, as if you are a judicial officer.

Madam Chairperson, this is very dangerous. If I have been teaching in Makerere, for example, which is civil service, and I decide to join the judiciary service, then my pension should start accruing the day I joined the judiciary service. Where I left – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, this section is dealing with the judicial officer who is already appointed; going to serve in another institution. That is what it is about. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It reads: 

“22 (1) For the purposes of this Act, service in the judiciary service shall include the period of service in other service in Government, provided that service was on full pay.”

If I go to teach in Makerere, that is other service – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable Nandala-Mafabi. It reads:
“Where a judicial officer or a person in the judicial service is appointed, seconded or assigned.”  

Read the whole part together. We are talking about people who are in the judiciary and have been assigned duties outside the judiciary. 

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, I just have some information. You are now reading the original Bill as it was in clause 20. We are now considering the amendments by the Attorney-General. The amendment the Attorney-General has brought is what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is commenting about. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: This relates to a judicial officer who is in service and then goes to work outside. 

MR NIWAGABA: That one was considered yesterday. This particular provision now is in respect of retirement benefits to a judicial officer but in terms of computing the retirement benefit. The amendment is proposing that the service of that officer in other Government agencies or departments, before he or she became a judicial officer; that time will be considered. 

I think that is what the member, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, is talking about. Maybe the Attorney-General should give you the amendments and you look at them clearly. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from the mover. 

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, the general rule that I am referring to on clause 22 is: 

(1) For the purposes of this Act, service in the judiciary service shall include the period of service in other service in Government, provided that service was on full pay. 

Yes, it is intended to include the service that he or she had from the other department because the rationale is that officer shall now draw only one retirement benefit. We are saying that officer should not lose the benefit of his prior employment. That is what we are saying. He should not lose the advantage of his prior employment in the service of the Government. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Attorney-General, for example, I have come from teaching in Makerere and I have worked for 25 years, it means I am entitled to my retirement benefit or gratuity from Makerere University. 

What will happen is that it will be computed for me in Makerere and now I am going to join the Judicial Service Commission. The moment you do that - I will give an example; I am in the Parliamentary Service Commission. I have been here and I have got my pension. I pick it for gratuity and then I go and become a Supreme Court judge, work there for two years and retire. I will be paid fully yet I have come from where I have got all my entitlements. 

Madam Chairperson, to avoid these problem, this will bring us double issues. This will also bring the political appointees. It is going to be a disservice to those who have been in the service from day one. We must protect judicial service officers who joined service from the day they left school. They should be compensated for their time and not somebody coming today and he/she says, “Since I have come in the Judiciary, I should earn this”.

Madam Chairperson, we should be careful with this one-

THE CHAIRPERSON: What are you proposing?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like to propose that, “For purposes of this section, service in Judicial Service shall be the service of judicial officers who were appointed under the Judicial Service Commission” and that is the period, which will start running, not for those who have freshly come from Makerere –
The justification is that you can only get your pension or gratuity according to the time you have served in the Judicial Service.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So that means we would remove the proviso and stop at Government?

MR BYARUHANGA: No, Madam Chairperson. The position here - hon. Nandala gave a lopsided example. The example that he gave arrives at a wrong result. If you talk about the person, having served for a period at the end of which he or she would be entitled to a benefit - the example you gave was 25 years, then you would be right in saying that it could amount to a double payment. I suppose that is what you were saying. Then he would come here; when he has already received the benefit there and then still claim it here. 

The purpose of the section is that service in the Judiciary Service Commission shall include the period of service in other service in Government. If that person has served for three or five years in a previous Government service, all we are saying is that after that when the person serves in the Judicial Service, that period of time of that service should be included in that computation -(Interjection)- here is my justification. 

If the period surpasses the time at which that person is supposed to receive a retirement benefit, of course, we would not support an amendment that allows this person to get a benefit twice.

All we are saying is that if you are, for example, a lecturer of law in Makerere for five years, and then they find that you are such a good lecturer like we have a former lecturer who is in the Supreme Court, and then they take you to the Bench, all we are saying is that we do not want you to lose that five year period for which you lectured in Makerere. Just to add that one -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Oh, no. You are saying that my five years in Makerere should now be added to this?

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, my issue is; were that person to have completed their service in the university, all their years would have been computed at the end of their service for their retirement benefit. Therefore, we are saying for time that that person –(Interjection)– please, I listened to you hon. Mafabi, just listen to me.

Madam Chairperson, all we are saying simply is that such people must not lose the benefit of their service in the Government as long as they have not received that retirement benefit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from Public Service.

MR MUKASA MURULI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Actually that period, as long as that person has not enjoyed the pension, that is normally counted as reckonable service. In other words let us say somebody has worked for five years in a Government entity and then joins the Bench, maybe stays there for another two three years before retirement, when you are computing the benefits, you do not make that person suffer because of the other five years. It becomes reckonable service, then you add the five plus the two or three and then pension is computed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, what will happen, the true story will be that I have worked five years in Makerere and 20 years in the Judiciary and now I have retired, this should be the computation. 

The five years will apply to the computation of pension at the place I was, then the 20 will apply to the rate when I was in the Judiciary. However, you cannot say that you add it on this. This five is applicable at that rate and the other on this rate.

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, we must accept. This is the practice in Government and it has been happening. That period when somebody was working in another capacity, that person has a right to add all that as his years of service as long as it was not broken.

It continues as long as it is continuation of service, you are serving the same Government; the years are brought in and are calculated according to that period.

MR ONZIMA: Madam Chairperson, I think we should look at this issue from the point of service. When somebody works in Government in a particular department and decides to shift to another, this is transfer of the same service. 

Therefore, when this service is transferred, normally the issue to do with gratuity and pension are calculated using the latest payslip. Therefore, in this case, there is no way you can say let us go for the other payslip for the other one and then we come for the payslip for this one. You use the latest payslip unless we want to change it.

In a way, my submission is in line with the Attorney-General-

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, they would be calculating the whole service?

MR ONZIMA: It is the whole service you offer to Government. Normally, they consider the time you join Government service and time you exit Government service. If I join Government service, for example, as a medical doctor, but late on I decide to shift and become a lecturer in the medical service, by the time I retire as a lecturer they will consider my title at retirement and latest payslip at retirement. Therefore, there is no way you can take the other one for a moment.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think both arguments of the learned Attorney-General and hon. Nandala-Mafabi, appear contradictory but they are correct.
 
Madam Chairperson, if we enact this provision as it is, it leads to absurdity and to both interpretations. Let us give the example of what hon. Nandala-Mafabi was raising: If somebody has been a state attorney and has worked for 12 years and in those 12 years, he has had retirement benefits accruing; then if he is appointed as a judge or as a judicial officer, what happens? Does he withdraw the retirement benefits or does he continue to earn the retirement benefit as a state attorney? Or –(Interjection)– just listen, we are talking about realistic cases.

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you. You have correctly said that if we go to the conclusion or if we interrogate the clause to its conclusion, you were saying that whereas both are correct, they may lead to absurdities. The reason why I am giving a point of information is that we interrogate your preposition as you are making it. Now, to answer your question, the information is that the person does not earn the retirement benefits upon the transfer. The person earns the retirement benefit at the end of their term of service.

MR KATUNTU: Let me make my point. If this particular officer is now appointed to the Judiciary, when does he start earning his retirement benefits from and how are they computed? Do you have two computations or one formula of computation? We do not have to be emotional about this; we have to be realistic. Is it true that you have got people who have been serving as government officers in other departments who have been appointed to the Judiciary? If it is true, how do you want their retirement benefits at the end of their service in the Judiciary to be computed having worked in government?

That does not take away what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is saying – that assuming this particular officer, for example, worked – the word used is “service in governance”; what is service in government? That has to be defined. There are other services in government, for example, somebody was working in Bank of Uganda as a legal officer that is a government service; when you retire, your benefits do accrue and there is a different legal regime that governs retirement benefits. I think that is the point he was trying to make. 

What we have to do, therefore, is to reconcile both positions and what the Attorney-General is saying is correct but we do not want, as it is here, to lead to some – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I wish you could really propose the prepositions that we can consider.

Secondly, honourable members, Public Service is Public Service; at the end of it, the retirement benefits computed are one from the beginning to the end. 

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, if you look at sub-clause (2) of this particular clause, it settles everything and we actually do not need sub-clause (1). Sub-clause (2) talks about a judicial officer not drawing any retirement benefits other than retirement benefits under this Act. So, if we maintain this particular provision alone and delete sub-clause (1), then you do not need this debate.

MR BYARUHANGA: To clarify with you, hon. Katuntu, your example of the Central Bank does not apply because the reference is to the Public Service. 

Furthermore, the description and definition in the Pensions Act is what we are describing here, which the Shadow Attorney-General has said that the applicability is what we refer to as “transfer of service”. The computation, therefore, is for the period that you served elsewhere up to the time of your retirement. That is computed under what he has just said – clause 22(2). I submit.

MR KATUNTU: As I conclude, Madam Chairperson, once we agree that there are retirement benefits accruing to somebody who served in the Public Service before you went to the Judiciary, we must get a formula. What is the formula? The formula is that you transfer service. Is there any other formula? There is no any other formula other than transferring those years to his station. If there is any other then we would be very glad, chairperson, to discuss the other.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I wish colleagues could listen to one another; that would help us because we can get mixed up. I rise up to seek for some clarification from the Attorney-General. Is it only those who were in the legal profession who are catered for in that transfer. I would like to be helped here and that is why I am asking. A colleague who was in the police service was at the level of AIP, but because of the scholarships they give, this lady went to law school and completed her training. She later took early retirement from the Uganda Police Force. She left and joined the Judiciary and she is now at the level of a judge; how do we handle that case? The first service was not in the legal profession, because she was just an ordinary police officer. So, do we transfer that? 

However, the case hon. Nandala-Mafabi was giving of somebody who was a lecturer at law school but is appointed to the Judiciary or any other service in government –(Interjection)– Can we listen to one another such that we are able to clarify this? 

MR BYARUHANGA: Hon. Okupa, as you have correctly pointed out, we are now discussing the Administration of Judiciary Bill and that is what we are trying to operationalise, as we did with the Parliamentary Pension Scheme, and as we did with the Executive. These are the three arms of Government. We did the Executive, the Parliament and what we are trying to do now is for the Judiciary. 

What we are talking about here is the subsequent service under the Judiciary. In the example you have given, and you will correct me if I am wrong, you said the lady policewoman did early retirement. There that is cut because that person got their benefit. That is what hon. Nandala was saying. There will be no double because that person retired and received the specific set of benefits due to early retirement. So, they started the Judiciary with a clean slate and at their retirement, they will receive it as computed. It is quite straightforward. 

MR ARIKO: Thank you, Madam Chair. I will request a few more moments so that we can clarify a few things to help us not to run the risk of passing a clause that might become technically difficult to implement. 

I shall begin by giving clarification to hon. Okupa. He mentioned two aspects. He said the AIP resigned but later he said that he took early retirement. Resignation from service and retirement from service are two different things. Resignation does not come with it, the obligation of completing a certain qualifying periods. The only condition for resignation is that the responsible officer, who in this case might be the Permanent Secretary and in our case the Clerk to Parliament, has accepted that you can proceed with your resignation. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I wish we could concentrate on our Bill. Stop speculating. There is nobody resigning here. 

MR ARIKO: Much obliged, Madam Chair. Let us come back to the Bill. When we come back to what the learned Attorney-General is proposing - hon. Nandala rightly mentions the aspect of the difference between schemes. I may be working for the Government of Uganda but currently the Government of Uganda operates different pension benefit schemes. What that means is that – I would like to just use the example so that there is understanding. 

When we had to move out of the Public Service Pension Scheme to the Parliamentary Pension Scheme, there were people here who were public officers in Government that were going to migrate to the Parliamentary Pension Scheme. 

What did it mean for their years? If you had been serving for 10 years before you were cut off into Parliament scheme, the 10 years would be taken as qualifying periods because you require 20 years of continuous service and 45 years of age to become pensionable. 

If these officers eventually retire from here, the calculation of their pension will not be entirely based on the parliamentary formula. The first 10 years of the Public Service will be based on the formula of Public Service. Then the subsequent period of the Parliamentary Pension Scheme will be based on the formula here, meaning that because the entitlements in the two different schemes are not the same, you do not use a blanket formula. However, the 10 years will not have been lost. 

Let me also use the example of Makerere University that the Attorney-General talked about. Makerere operates a different pension scheme yet it is part of Government. So, when you go to the Judiciary, the pension calculation of Makerere is much lower than the period in Judiciary. Therefore, it will have two different calculations but your period will not be lost. That is what I wanted to clarify. 

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you, honourable member, for educating us about the parliamentary double scheme that you just referred to. 

First of all, as the Chair said, we are now talking about this particular Bill and it does not have two segments. That is why hon. Niwagaba referred you to 22(2). I will read it for your benefit it says: “A judicial officer shall not draw any retirement benefit other than the retirement benefit under this Act.”

Sir, the person we are talking about, the moment that person comes under the umbrella of the Judiciary, he is under this Act. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 22 – 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I would like to raise a different procedural matter. I thought that this matter should be dealt with. We already passed clause 22 in the Bill but now we are also debating 22.  

The procedural matter I raised is for the Attorney-General to tell us whether he is withdrawing or recommitting –(Interjections)– no because in the Bill we have clauses 21, 23 and 24. Now in the proposed amendment, he also names them the same but not telling us whether he is substituting for those same clauses or he is adding. We are going to create a law with a number of –(Interjections)– he should first be on record on whether he is substituting or not so that we know we do not have to deal with the same clauses. 

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Chair. The answer to that is – remember I told you that we are inserting the new clauses. We have to move as we are moving now –(Interjections)– yes, they are and Madam Chair -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Before you start a new one, we deal with the existing. You either – 

MR BYARUHANGA: The issue was that the numbering is consequential now -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Learned Attorney-General, if you are inserting a new provision, you tell us what you are doing with the old one. Are you leaving it there? Are you deleting it? Do they now co-exist? 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: On 21, there is already 21 in the original Bill. We processed another 21 yet he has not told us what we have to do with this one. 

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Chair, that is why members demanded that they upload the document. They wanted to bring us in a rusty manner, if you had not ruled that they upload, they wouldn’t have. 

Learned Attorney-General, I think there is an issue here. We want the Bill to be passed today, but it should be in the national interest. That is why some of us bought the national flags and wear - in fact, we are mourning. The Attorney-General should tell us whether he is withdrawing what we have already passed because he is bringing two contradictory issues. 

Hon. Niwagaba, you would have helped the learned Attorney-General –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: To help you and to help the House, of course what we have passed remains passed but I believe the learned Attorney-General can re-number these newly inserted clauses as 21A, 22A or B something along those lines so that they are different from what we have already passed by adding A or B.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The renumbering will be done by the drafts people but you need to indicate that you are bringing this after this so that we know you are putting a new one. 

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I was going to talk about the drafting in the rules. I agree with you and we shall now define the 22 as 22A. 

Otherwise, I was going to tell you that under Rule 2(35) we were supposed to make these modifications in numbering of the provisions or in references in a Bill and make such other adaptations as may be necessary to accord with the decision taken by the House; they were going to be consequential. 

MR KATUNTU: Learned Attorney-General, clause 22 in the Bill is about the funeral of Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice. Therefore, it is not related. I think we do not have to panic. Madam Chairperson, there is a little bit of problem here. We have to find a way of numbering them properly.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General, I think we needed to be advised on how the new ones relate to the existing and what we have passed. All these are new clauses. Where do they fit in?

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I think what we need to do is to first get the principle; what do we want to do? The numbering can be done properly but we need to get the principle.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We also need to know where exactly they are going to be.

MR AOGON: Since they are talking of a new insertion, let us say, “Immediately after…” or “Immediately before…”

MS ERAGU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. To avoid confusion, the Attorney-General should come and read out for us the original clause and what he is substituting it with. For example, clause 21 is talking about retirement benefits for the Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice. He should come here and tell us because we have already replaced it with a new clause. They should read them out and clarify them to us.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, when you look at this particular insertion on clause 21 that talks about the application of the part, it would come as number one. Because these are general principles, they come before 21 and 22.

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, these clauses we are trying to approve are very important. We would not like a scenario where the court nullifies what we are doing here based on lack of quorum. Are we proceeding rightly with 30 members approving these important clauses?

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.54
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Chairperson, I move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.55
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018 and passed clause 21. (Interjections) The rest were deferred.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we inserted a new clause under 21.

MR BYARUHANGA: Yes, Madam Speaker. We passed a new clause and we will have it numbered.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.56
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that was a report. We passed one clause. On a serious note, I want to ask the technical people to assist the Attorney-General. If you are introducing a new clause, you have to tell us what you have done with the old clause; whether you are deleting or repealing. The way they have made the presentation, it does not say anything. They just say “There is 20, 22, 23, and 24”. Please do it properly so that we see what it coming and where it is fitting. You have eight new clauses but you do not know where they are fitting.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, it is not only the technical people. I am also surprised since I am seeing eight amendments for the first time this afternoon. I think it would be important if the Attorney-General and the committee sits to harmonise so that this haggling in the House is reduced. It would be very important if they get time like tomorrow morning to sit and discuss their differences. That way, they will be able to move. If we do not do that, then we shall have problems.

MR MUGOYA: Madam Speaker, time is the best judge in this world. This is exactly what I started with. I said let us create time to harmonise all these contradictions. 

If you look at these new proposals, for instance, clause 22 as proposed by the Attorney-General, there is no justification. You need time to sit, analyse and synchronise all these provisions if we are to come up with a good law. That is my humble submission.

MS ERAGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join colleagues to suggest that the committee together with the Attorney–General and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should try and harmonise this. Otherwise, it is causing problem to us on the Floor. This will make us to move together and be able to follow as well as make a good law.  

Madam Speaker, give us time like you suggested together with the technical team. I have here, “Substitute for clause 20 the following”. There is actually nothing that tells us what to do with clause 20, where it will fit and there is no justification. So, how do we process this?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is clear that there is still some work to be done. Attorney-General, you should not surprise the committee with amendments. You have come here with things that I have not seen or even thought about them.

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, it is not true that I have brought something by surprise. I started my remarks this afternoon, by saying that it was uploaded in February –(Interjections)– except yesterday, we were asked to re-upload, which we did.

THE SPEAKER: Uploading is not enough. You need to interact with the committee and agree. Go and harmonise it for the sake of the House. Tomorrow, you will not be on the Order Paper. We shall do it next week. Find time and sit. We shall have it on the Order Paper Tuesday next week. 

MR KAMUSIIME: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for handling this matter very diligently with a national heart.

In view of the discussions and what has been faithfully fixed in this amendment, I think that one week is going to cause another stampede here. I am proposing that you give them enough time like two weeks to internalise everything and come here with a   better report that we can follow. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chair, what do you say?

MS ERAGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. One week is enough. The judges have waited enough.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall address this matter again next week. I hope we shall be ready.

Honourable members, I would like to remind the members of the Executive that under section 13(13) of the Public Finance Management Act, you are required to bring your policy statements here by the 15th of March and it will be a Sunday. Since it will be Sunday, you must move faster and bring the policy statements by tomorrow. 

I think we have done enough. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.04 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 12 March 2020 at 2.00 p.m.) 

