Tuesday, 17 March 2015

Parliament met at 2.05 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: The Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, the Leader of the Opposition and honourable Members of Parliament, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I have some three pieces of communication to make. 

This evening, the Bishop of Lira, the Rt Rev. Joseph Franzelli, will celebrate a holy mass with Members and staff at 5.30 p.m. in the Members Lounge. Members are encouraged to go and speak to God through Bishop Joseph Franzelli after the end of this sitting.

The Parliamentary Commission has organised a two-day health programme for Members and staff of Parliament in the CHOGM Gardens. The programme started today and I believe hon. Rosemary Sseninde must have represented me. The theme of the programme is, “Promoting Nutrition and Body Fitness.” A number of activities are taking place including voluntary counselling and testing, blood donation, eye checks, dental check-ups and circumcision –(Interjections)- male circumcision. (Laughter) Please, spare some time today and tomorrow to witness and participate in those activities.

Thirdly, honourable members, I have been away attending events of the International Women’s Day and the Commission of the Status of women in New York. I was invited by the President of the UN General Assembly, the hon. Sam Kutesa, as part of the high level panel to discuss the way forward for stakeholders in the sustainable development goals, now being discussed as successor to the MDGs.

I bring thanks of President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, the President of Liberia, who asked me specifically to pass on the indebtedness of the Government of Liberia and the population for the support given to them by the Uganda medical team that went to help them combat the Ebola epidemic. (Applause) She acknowledged the courage and professionalism of Ugandans in the face of such severe risks to their own lives. 

On that note, I would like to remind hon. Rose Akol and the honourable Dr Twa-Twa that we had agreed to move a motion to pay tribute to those medical workers. I hope the motion can come sooner rather than later.

Honourable members, during the debate on the MDGs, it was acknowledged that in the design, one of the important stakeholders missing was Parliament. This has, in the last 15 years, affected implementation of some of the MDGs. 

My position and that of many others is that parliaments should be acknowledged as key stakeholders because of the important role they play in budgeting, monitoring and oversight. Therefore, I call upon the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to facilitate the participation of Members in the design, negotiation and advocacy for the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

I also participated in side meetings of the African Union. We discussed how the interest of the African people can be built into the SDGs but also that there are practical proposals being taken to the Summit of the Heads of State. The meetings identified and proposed prioritisation of the provision of water to enable women and children get easy access and give them time to engage in income generating activities, instead of walking several miles and staying for long at a water point. I also appealed to the heads of state to facilitate provisions of the energy saving devices to assist families in preserving the environment but also provide fast means of doing their work.

I also attended a meeting of the Commonwealth. I proposed that parliaments should establish SDG committees once the SDGs are approved, to monitor the goals. Also, that Government should be required to report annually to the Parliament and the country on the performance of the SDGs, especially since we have never had a report on the MDGs in this House.

I reported on the work done by the Uganda Parliament on the Beijing Platform for Action since 1995, which included legislations brought by the Government and the backbench MPs as private members’ Bills. I particularly highlighted the work of the committees of the House and the impact on policy changes. I briefed the Commonwealth Secretariat about the tremendous work done by UWOPA and Members to engender legislation and budgeting, among others. I call on you to support us in furthering the emancipation of women in this country. Thank you.

3.12
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. 

Recently, under the crime combat unit of the wildlife services of South Sudan, authorities in Kajo-Keji, Juba County of South Sudan, arrested 24 men from Yumbe District. These men had gone hunting but they were arrested on the claim that they had crossed to South Sudan. They grabbed all their mobile phones, food items, arrows and bows and even their clothes and bed sheets. 

Madam, Speaker, when these people go for hunting, now that it is dry season, they prepare to stay there for one month. That is why they go with all these things. However, our neighbours from South Sudan arrested these people, grabbed all their items and when our RDC and the DISO followed up the issue, they only released the people but not the items. Their items were not returned to them. They even warned that if these people were to be Madi, they would not have released them.

What hurt us so much is that these people were in Yumbe District; they never crossed. They claimed that these people had crossed to Bamure. Bamure, which South Sudan is claiming, is still part of Uganda. It was given by the Government of Uganda to the South Sudanese to settle when they had conflicts.

Madam Speaker, I request the Prime Minister and the minister responsible to follow up this issue so that my people can claim back their items that were taken by these people.

3.14
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

As we are all aware, there have been efforts to restructure or have new arrangements in NAADS. Accordingly, the new team that is handling NAADS, that is, the UPDF, went around registering people who want to be supplied with some seeds, seedlings or animals to rear. They assured the people that they would get the seeds for planting in February and they would get the seedlings in March when the rains have started. 

Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, when it came to the supply of seeds, they would supply one bag of five kilogrammes, for example, to a whole village. People were relying on these seeds for purposes of planting this coming season. However, as I speak, the farmers are stranded because they were assured they would be given the seeds but the seeds are not there and the rains are about to start. 

I would like to therefore seek an explanation from Government on what is going on. Are these people going to get seeds to plant or not? As it is now, they do not know what to do and the rains are about to start. I seek explanation from either Ministry of Defence or the Ministry of Agriculture, wherever I can get the appropriate answer. Thank you.

3.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE (FISHERIES) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is true that seeds have been purchased and some districts have started receiving them. What I will do is to go back and consult the honourable Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to find out what is causing the delay -(Interjections)- Okay, let me call upon the hon. Tress Bucanayandi to come and offer the explanation. I had not seen him.

3.17
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Bucanayandi): Madam Speaker, first of all I want to confirm to the honourable member who has raised the question that the distribution is going on in all the districts by NAADS. They are being received at the district level by the Army officers in charge of constituencies. Thank you.

3.17
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I welcome you back from that fruitful meeting. As women of Uganda, we are very proud that our voices are being heard across the continent.

Madam Speaker, while you were away we celebrated the International Women’s Day, and I just returned from my constituency yesterday. However, I want to bring it to your notice that as much we saying that women are empowered, on Women’s Day, which is an international day for women celebrated just once a year, women are still terribly harassed. I would like to point out that whenever these celebrations are being held, I get into running battles with the RDCs. I am not even allowed to speak because I am always not put on the programme and the arrangements are made without my knowledge.

This has not happened in my constituency alone. Most women Members of Parliament are not given time on that day to take stock. As women, we need to take stock of what we have achieved. We need to strategize and know what we want in the following years, as far as women emancipation is concerned. If the woman Member of Parliament is not allowed to speak on this one day of the year, then what type of empowerment are we talking about as a country?

Government is so proud that they have empowered us, which is okay, but why can’t women be given their space even just on Women’s Day to take stock and even be guests of honour? What does it take? Why do the RDCs take over the day while the women are left to just be participants? 

I want to pass this message on through you, Madam Speaker. If women of Uganda are to be empowered, this day has to be looked into so that as women Members of Parliament, we enjoy our day with fellow women. Women from my constituency are slowly withdrawing from attending these celebrations because even when the district councillors decide that their woman Member of Parliament officiates as the chief guest, the RDC will not allow. This has become critical. We pray that you direct the Government to give an explanation and give us our space as women of this country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I recall that the Prime Minister, in the First Session, gave directions on that issue but it seems they are not being followed. I also received complaints from two other districts. 

As you recall, before I went away, the Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development had brought a paper on Women’s Day, which will be discussed later. I think we shall bring up those issues during that debate so that we take a position once and for all.

3.20
THE PRIME MINISTER (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, the points raised by my sister, the hon. Beatrice Anywar, should not be seen as representative. It could be, to some extent, an isolated case. This is because from my experience in Kabale, where the country celebrated International Women’s Day, hon. Rhona Ninsiima, the Member of Parliament for Kabale, was the master of ceremonies and she did excellent work, I must say. 

Let me take this opportunity to salute a powerful contingent of women Members of Parliament who celebrated that day in Kabale. I must tell you that you left a powerful impression. Your message was clear and the population appreciated your support, participation and leadership.

The women were actually in charge of the parade and other activities. They were in charge of the day. Therefore, if in Kitgum District there were some problems, that is something that can be addressed by Government with our sister, Anywar.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE ARREST OF 
HON. MAYENDE STEPHEN DEDE, MP BUKOOLI SOUTH CONSTITUENCY 
3.22
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (DESIGNATE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I interacted with both ministers in the Ministry of Internal Affairs. They requested me to reschedule this statement to tomorrow because they have been called for an important meeting. They passed on their apologies. 

I want to assure you, Madam Speaker, that tomorrow, without fail, the statement will be presented to this august House.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our Rules of Procedure require ministers to attend the House to respond to questions raised. Those are our rules. I am wondering whether it is procedurally right for a minister to stand on the Floor of Parliament and say that there is some other important business, which most ministers have gone to attend to, that is more important than observing our rules here. 

Most importantly, this statement is about an honourable colleague who has been unconstitutionally held in prison for more than the mandatory 48 hours. This is an urgent matter where we cannot go by the wish of my sister that the ministers will come tomorrow. We do not know whether there will be another important meeting tomorrow, which will still require them to be away from this House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you know that the right to liberty is very important. It is not that we do not mind about other citizens, but this is our colleague and we do not know where he is. So you are directed to come with that statement tomorrow without fail. I have directed that the Minister of Internal Affairs comes here tomorrow to explain to us where the honourable Member for Bukooli County South is.

LAYING OF PAPERS

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO APPROVE THE TERMS 
AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE FOR THE CHAIRPERSON, VICE CHAIRPERSON 
AND MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE TRIBUNAL

3.25
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (DESIGNATE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker and colleagues, the Minister of Public Service, the Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister, is indisposed. The minister of state has travelled out of the country this afternoon. I beg to apologize. 

Madam Speaker, since this is a matter of laying of papers on the Table, I would like to confirm that tomorrow if we are given chance, even if the Minister of Public Service is indisposed and the state minister is out of the country, we will direct one of us to lay the papers on the Table.

THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Madam Speaker, while you were away on government and parliamentary business, we raised the issue of the indiscipline of Cabinet ministers in this House. We made it very clear that the way Cabinet ministers are behaving is directly impacting on the performance of Parliament, negatively. On that particular day, there was not a single minister in the House, although as we raised the concern, the hon. Muruli Mukasa came in and he was the lonely minister on that day. 

I thought it was agreed as a matter of procedure that – Please, make it a point, before you are appointed a minister, you must understand the rules. The rules are very clear that if you are not going to be in the House, you must not only delegate but also inform the Speaker. The Speaker should not hear from the Floor of Parliament that such and such a minister is indisposed, another one is overseas and another one is doing other things. I think that is indiscipline.


Madam Speaker, as far as I am concerned, if these ministers are not serious about their work, Parliament is ready with some documents. We discussed some of these documents when you were here. One of them is the Anti-Corruption (Amendment) Bill, which is ready. You remember we had started discussing it. There is also the national biotech Bill, which is ready. Therefore, as Parliament, we are moving forward. We should bring that parliamentary business and discuss it and ignore these people because they are not interested. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.29
MR WILLIAM NOKRACH (NRM, PWD Representative, Northern): Madam Speaker and honourable Members, I wish to lay on the Table the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2014 together with a report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for the following accounting centres: 

i) Bank Of Uganda – Agriculture Credit Facility; 
ii) National Enterprise Corporation; 
iii) Uganda National Roads Authority – Transport Sector Development Project – IDA Credit No. 4679-Ug; 
iv) Energy for Rural Transformation Project – Uganda Communications Commission; 
v) Uganda Printing & Publishing Corporation; 
vi) Uganda Revenue Authority – Managing Compliance Program, Trade Mark East Africa Fund; and 
vii) Uganda Wildlife Authority. 

Madam Speaker and Members, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Commissioner Nokrach. All these are sent to the Public Accounts Committee for perusal and report back.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE RETIREMENT BENEFITS SECTOR LIBERALISATION BILL, 2011

3.32
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Rugunda Ruhakana): Madam Speaker, I do not see the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the front bench. Hon. Bahati has not been sworn in yet nor has he gone the rigours. Ndugu Omach has just come in. Can you come and take the rostrum and discharge your duties, Ndugu Omach. 

3.33
THE MINISTER FOR STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and colleagues, we are ready to have the Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill, 2011 read for the second time. However, the report I am getting is that the committee report is not ready.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Kasule): Madam Speaker, I will ask Parliament to give us some time. The committee has a draft, but we need to build consensus on the final report. We have arranged to meet next week to have the draft looked at by the whole committee. We are asking for some more time, about two weeks. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know this Bill came in the First Session. It is a Bill, which is on high demand, and my fear is that once we get into the Budget process, all these things are going to fall by the wayside. So, I do not think we can give you two weeks. Can’t you do it in one week, chair of the committee? 
3.35

MR KASULE: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. We shall try as much as possible.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it is deferred for one week.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA WILDLIFE RESEARCH AND TRAINING BILL, 2012

THE SPEAKER: Minister for Tourism.

3.36
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, this is definitely unbecoming performance. (Applause) This does not correctly reflect the vibrancy of the government side. I do not see the two ministers. As Leader of Government Business, I will have to deal with this matter. The question of reshuffling is not part of my duties; my apologies about this.

THE SPEAKER: What is the position of our chair? Are you ready to proceed without the minister?

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Flavia Kabahenda): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Of course, I cannot proceed without the minister. However, I request that we reschedule the second reading of this Bill to Tuesday 24th because that is when the ministers will be available and the committee will be ready to report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, again I must express my concern because this Bill also came in the First Session and now we are in the Fourth Session. 

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA WILDLIFE EDUCATION CENTRE BILL, 2013

THE SPEAKER: Minister for Tourism.

3.38
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, we have just been having some consultations; we are ready to handle the government side if the report is ready on this subject matter.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Flavia Kabahenda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to request again that we reschedule to the 24th day of this month - next week.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, when the item was called and you asked the minister to formally move the motion for reading of the Bill, the Prime Minister proudly told Parliament that he is ready without moving the motion because he has received the - Is he, therefore, in order to take to the microphone and just say they are ready, instead of moving a motion that Parliament considers the Bill? Is he in order to mislead Parliament that this is how we should proceed?

THE SPEAKER: Can somebody move the justification for the Uganda Wildlife Education Centre Bill, 2013? If you are ready, justify and we move on. (Laughter)

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Well, while we are organising ourselves, we want to be sure that the chairman is ready, Madam Speaker. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to the next item.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF 
THE COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE PETITION 
BY THE RESIDENTS OF KASOKOSO, KIGANDA AND BANDA B1 
OVER LAND EVICTIONS AND DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY

(Debate continued.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter was partially debated; I think there were only small issues remaining. 

In the meantime, I want to introduce a delegation from Gera Village, Ngogwe Sub-county in Buikwe District. They are in the public gallery. They are represented by the honourable Dr Lulume Bayigga and hon. Dorothy Mpiima. They are here to observe our proceedings. You are welcome. (Applause) 

Honourable members, after item 10, I will be allowing hon. Hassan Fungaroo to move a motion as  item 11.

3.42
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker and honourable members, we read this report on 3rd March this year and debate begun. Amidst the discussions, Members mentioned a draft Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and National Housing and Construction Company and the residents of Kasokoso.

Madam Speaker and members, after crosschecking, we discovered that the draft memorandum of understanding mentioned during those proceedings was one sided. It was just an undertaking by NHCC and had not been signed by the residents of Kasokoso. 

After consultation with the legal brains, it was found prudent that it was not worth presenting to the House. So, the debate can continue minus the memorandum of understanding mentioned then, because it was just a draft sponsored by one side and not adopted by the other side. So, it was not worth presenting and it is not part of the documents that we present, with due respect.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was in the House the day the petition by the residents of Kasokoso was being debated. The Hansard can bail us out on this matter. 

The Speaker who was in the Chair that day wondered how a memorandum of understanding, a very critical document, could not be attached to the report. The chairperson stood up and said it had been an omission and that the clerk could have misplaced that document but both sides had agreed in accordance with a valid memorandum of understanding. That is where we stopped. 

The chairperson then hurried out to his office to get a copy of the MoU and while we were still in the House, the chairperson proceeded and indicated this to the Speaker. The crux of the matter was that once the memorandum of understanding was there, as the chairperson was asserting, the matter would be finished there and then. That is where we ended. 

Now, for the chairperson again to come up and say that it was a one-sided memorandum of understating beats my understanding. The House demanded that he brings it and as long as we had the memorandum of understanding, the matter would be put to rest. However, now the very chairperson is turning around.

Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for this Parliament to have moved and taken a position depending on a particular matter, that there was a memorandum of understanding as told and stressed to Parliament by the chairperson, and now there is nothing to show for that? Is this Parliament being taken for granted? Are we being duped by the chairperson? We need him to clarify, Madam Speaker, because that was the point and we are here, ready to proceed on the basis of that memorandum of understanding.   

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there cannot be a memorandum of understanding by one party. There must be people who are coming to an understanding. If there is no memorandum of understanding, it is not there. If it is a proposal by one party and it is not signed by the second party, then there is no memorandum. 

MR BIRAARO: Madam Speaker, after a question asked by hon. Barnabas Tinkasimiire on that day – I am reading from the Hansard; he said, “Certainly I am confused and that is why I am requesting for guidance” 

In my reply, I said, “Mr Speaker, this is exactly what we are saying under point No.6. All these things that we mention under 7.5 are part of a memorandum of understanding between National Housing and Construction Company Ltd and the residents of Kireka and Kasokoso. We have the written MoU on our table - (Interjections) - It is a draft memorandum of understanding.” 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if it is a draft, then it is not a memorandum of understanding. It is an intention. 

MR BIRAARO: That is what I am saying, Madam Speaker.  The House can continue without a memorandum of understanding because it is not full; it was a proposal by one side.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I am one of hon. Ephraim Biraaro’s closest friends in this Parliament. Hon. Biraaro told us that there was a memorandum of understanding; I am not deaf. 

When Justice Ogoola was interrogating people who had stolen money for TB patients, one person from Mbarara had claimed that he had travelled to London and they transferred all the money. He was sent for his passport and there was no visa. Justice Ogoola then said, “Now that you have told me a lie, how can I believe in your previous submissions and your next submissions?

Now that hon. Ephraim Biraaro, the chairperson of the Committee Physical Infrastructure, has told us a lie in broad daylight, how do we believe the report that he presented to us to be true? I would like to request this Parliament not be taken for granted and I would like this Parliament to scrap this report. So, is he in order to tell us a lie in broad daylight?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter arose from a petition. What are the prayers of the petitioners? Are they based on the memorandum?

MR MIGADDE: Madam Speaker, I am a member of the committee and for the sake of clarity, I think my chairperson erred in talking about that MoU. It is true that out of our deliberations and meetings with stakeholders, we did receive a draft MoU, which we did not consider because it was a draft. This draft MoU was never considered by the committee because there was no need to consider it anyway since it had not been considered by both parties. 

My chairperson is right to say that it was actually a draft MoU, just like I am saying, and we never considered it. Since it was a draft, it is not a binding document and we therefore cannot call it an MoU. 

THE SPEAKER: Then you cannot rely on it. It is an intention.

MRS SSENINDE: I thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank you for giving us the opportunity to resolve the Kasokoso issue once and for all.

The people of Kasokoso have lived in anxiety for quite a long time and they are actually looking up to this august House to resolve their destiny, as far as this issue is concerned. That is why we came with a petition on their behalf to this House. 

Dear colleagues, I would like to move an amendment to the recommendations in that report at the right time. However, even before we come to the amendments, allow me to raise this important concern so that as Members of Parliament deliberate on this issue, they are properly informed. In the report that was presented by the chairperson, if you look at page 11, paragraph 2, it indicates that satellite images showed that there were was no human settlement while page 12 shows that there was evidence that some people had been there for a long time. It is quite clear that there is contradiction. 

So, please, allow me to lay on the Table some documents that show evidence that there were people there since 1966. 

Having said that, I also have a document that I will lay on the Table. It was written by the National Housing and Construction Company in response to the forensic report. They indicated that actually –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, are those the papers that you presented to the committee or they are new issues?

MRS SSENINDE: We presented these documents to the committee.

THE SPEAKER: So they are part of the report?

MRS SSENINDE: Unfortunately, when you read the report, you realise that the findings are basically looking at one side. The side of the petitioners has not been considered and this is my biggest concern. I feel a lot of pain because the concerns of the people who petitioned have not been aired in that report. 

I am surprised that even the documents that were presented before the committee are nowhere to be seen and that is why I would like to lay them on the Table, if permitted. However, at an appropriate time, I would beg to move an amendment to the recommendations of the report. Should I lay the documents on the Table?

THE SPEAKER: Let me think about the impact of laying papers now when the report has been produced. 

Read the prayers. Let us hear the prayers and we shall come back to you. Let us hear the prayers first so that we can focus.

3.54
THE MINISTER FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker and honourable members, you asked what the prayers were. The prayers are:

    1. That Parliament carries out investigations to ascertain how the land in issue changed ownership since 1964;
    2. investigate the use of excessive force by the Uganda Police Force in an attempt to evict the petitioners;
    3. render the petition urgent attention to prevent loss of life and to restore peace in the area;
    4. Give remedies it deems fit.

Those were the prayers. Madam Speaker, my view is that we would consider this report and find out whether the prayers were attended to because the report is available to all of us. It also has recommendations, which we should consider and find out whether these recommendations are actually in line with prayers that the petitioners set.

3.55
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The background to the submissions earlier - I was in the House and we had a matter relating to consent judgement and the interest of these petitioners was not clear either in the judgement or elsewhere in the report. The background to this was that when the chairperson of the committee said that there was a draft memorandum of understanding, the Speaker then said, if there is a memorandum of understanding then that is an agreement that would resolve this matter there and then. The debate was adjourned or postponed or deferred.

Madam Speaker, if the chairperson now recognises the challenge of bringing a draft memorandum of understanding, which was not part of the record, we can still expunge the record in that regard and proceed. However, does the report address the interests of the petitioners? Does the consent judgement, which is a powerful judgement in the world, address the interests of the petitioners? If the answer to those two questions is in the affirmative, the debate would be livelier and we would be very focused in this. 

Basically regarding this matter, the chairperson, in the heat of debate, could have allowed some words, since in our mouths we do not have sieves. Words can come out in the heat of the moment and I am saying this deliberately to give leeway so that we move forward and look at the issues. 

The honourable Minister of Lands and Housing and the Member of Parliament representing the petitioners should note that there was some progress. I rise to support the petitioners in this matter; the rare occurrence that I am siding with the hon. Ssemujju, not that there is any Japadhola in that place. However, we cannot take tenants who have been on that land for granted or allow a situation where they are bought off and their interests are not taken care of legally. This is the House and if they have not got justice anywhere else, they should get it from here.

THE SPEAKER: Let me hear from the representative of the petitioners.

3.59
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We stood over this matter at the point where the chairman of the committee went to produce a memorandum of understanding as he had told Parliament. Eventually, the chairman brought a draft. I chair a committee and I can understand the effort that was put in processing this petition and I would be sympathetic to the report. However, I think the chairman should be courteous to Parliament. Once you have made an error as a chairperson; you come here on the Floor and tell colleagues that you have a memorandum of understanding -

As I said, that day the chairperson appeared as if he had picked and you can see the sitting arrangement. The honourable Minister for Lands is a party to this petition but he summoned the chairperson from where he was sitting to come and receive instructions from him. Those were the problems we had even then; the petition appeared as if the chairperson was just reading a document given to him by the Minister for Lands -(Interruption)
	
MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Ssemujju has asserted that I summoned the Chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, supposedly to give him instructions. The fact of the matter is that I have not summoned the chairperson at all. The chairperson has the right to choose where to sit when in the House. Is it in order for hon. Ssemujju to impute wrong motive on my part?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I believe it is not possible for hon. Ssemujju to hear what is being said on this bench so he is out of order.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When we adjourned, the real issue, as has been said, was the issue of the memorandum of understanding; its authenticity or its existence. When the chairperson now comes here and says the thing is in draft form, how do we proceed as a House? To what extent did the MoU in draft inform the report and the decision of the committee because if it did inform and now it is a nullity, would we be proceeding correctly?

4.03
MR SIMON PETER ALEPER (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Madam Speaker, I wish to put facts in their correct form. Members may recall that at the time this debate was adjourned, the issue that came out was about the memorandum of understanding that the chairman mentioned. I wish to appreciate the progressive submission of my brother, hon. Oboth that probably the chairman, in his submission, got certain words wrong. 

However, as the vice chairperson of the committee and from where hon. Migadde stopped, I remember that day when the minister, hon. Migereko submitted on the benefits of the people who are now residing on that land in Kasokoso. The Speaker asked one question, what is it that binds National Housing and those people? Is there anything to show? This was after the chairman had read the prayers. That is when the chairman said, there is a draft MoU. The chairman was then asked, was that draft part of the report? This is on the Hansard. 

In his own words he said, it is not part of the report. Therefore, how did it become part of the report? That is the time the Speaker adjourned because that particular document that the chairman mentioned was not part of the report. I can assure you, Madam Speaker, that even in our committee when National Housing presented this draft, we found that the draft was one-sided and we disregarded it.

Therefore as we talk, and using the words of my brother, we should expunge the chairman’s words and continue with the main report, which does not contain this.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think there is something which hon. Alaso asked. How much did that draft influence the outcome?

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think the issue is that when we were debating this matter, the chairperson together with hon. Daudi Migereko made the case that this project was going to be beneficial to the people of Kasokoso. The chairperson then added that there is actually a memorandum of understanding, which already exists. That is when the Speaker said that if there is a memorandum of understanding saying that the people of Kasokoso are going to benefit from this transaction, please bring it to Parliament. The chairman actually brought a draft.

Madam Speaker, as I said earlier, I would not have a problem with Parliament taking a decision on this report. However, I said the chairman should be courteous and come here and say sorry for lying to Parliament that a memorandum of understanding exists. We would then do away with the issue of the memorandum of understanding and deal with the rest of the contents of the report. It is at that stage –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the committee. On the day when the draft memorandum of understanding came, the two parties were not involved. Therefore, I really feel the chairman is not right to say that there was a memorandum of understanding. In the committee’s knowledge, there was no and there is no memorandum of understanding. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, if you look at the report critically, we really feel that there was something wrong with the report. There are many issues -

THE SPEAKER: Did you file a minority report if you objected to the main report?

MR OLANYA: That is where I am coming to, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, did you file a minority report?

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, I consulted and wrote to the chairman of our committee and stated to him clearly that we have a minority report that we wanted to present before the House. The chairman told me that the main report had already been submitted and, therefore, the committee could not tolerate a minority report. That is the information we got.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from hon. Isiko and then we will need to take a decision on how to move.

4.09
MR ISIKO ASUPASA (NRM, Busiki County, Namutumba): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I was in the House when we debated and came out with three issues that we needed to resolve. One was the undisputed legal ownership of Kasokoso. Two, was the development of Kasokoso to be in tandem with modernity. This development was to give Ugandans decent accommodation in the way other cities develop. The third issue was the social responsibility of the people who have rights in Kasokoso.

As Parliament, could we just allow Ugandan citizens to be thrown out of Kasokoso? The answer was no. This Parliament could not move itself to throw out Ugandans with or without a memorandum of understanding. Could this Parliament move its own citizens, consider them and somehow provide for them in a way so that they move out or live in Kasokoso in a way that is decent for citizens of this country?

Therefore, Madam Speaker, we ended at a point where this Parliament had to provide for the people who stay in Kasokoso while allowing modern development to continue.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, now you are debating the report. I would like to propose that we give ourselves time to refresh ourselves from the Hansard. I would like to go and read the report myself because I am hearing very many things. This petition is important, it was brought by citizens and we should handle it with care but in the right way. Therefore, I defer this matter to Thursday. 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION 
OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS ON THE 
15TH ANNUAL REPORT OF THE UGANDA HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION, 2012

4.11
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS (Ms Jovah Kamateeka): Madam Speaker, I rise to present a report of the Uganda Human Rights Committee of Parliament on the 15th Annual Report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission, 2012.

Under Article 52(2) of the Uganda Constitution, the Uganda Human Rights Commission is required to publish periodic reports on its findings and submit to Parliament annual reports on the state of human rights and freedoms in the country. The commission submitted its 15th report covering the year 2012 to Parliament wherein a number of recommendations were made. 

In accordance with rule 174 (c) of our Rules of Procedure, the Committee on Human Rights considered the report as referred to it and now wishes to report. The committee held meetings with respective Government ministries, departments and agencies to consider the recommendations of the Uganda Human Rights Commission and the extent to which they had been complied with. You have a list of the MDAs.

The committee also undertook field visits for on-spot checks on some of the institutions like the prisons, police cells, hospitals and health centres in the different regions as well as visits to the oil exploration areas and refugee camps in Bunyoro region.

The report addressed specific rights as enshrined in the Constitution namely the right to education, access to quality education, access to justice for vulnerable persons, right to health and compliance to international and regional reporting obligations.

Under the Uganda Prison Service, the commission had reported high numbers of inmates beyond holding capacity in the prisons inspected. The committee observed that the Community Service Programme had not been embraced to the desirable level yet it is a good tool for not only reducing the congestion in the prisons but also a means of reducing the cost of looking after prisoners and reducing the period of petty offenders interacting with hard core criminals. I am now on page 6.

The Uganda Prisons Service facilities that the committee visited were very congested with most of them handling double the population for which the facilities were designed and some of them handling three times as much.

The committee recommends: 

    1. That the agencies under the Justice and Law Order Sector (JLOS) popularise and implement the Community Service Programme. 

    2. That the Prison Decongestion Programme currently being implemented by the Justice Centres, Uganda, a legal aid delivery centre operating under JLOS, should be strengthened. 

However, members should note that the Justice Centres, Uganda only operates in a few districts and not in all of them.

    3. That the construction of new prisons and expansion of the regional prisons be expedited. In addition, there is need to restructure Luzira Prisons and make use of the available land to construct staff houses and cells rather than selling off the land. In so doing, the need to relocate prisoners to upcountry prisons will be minimised.

On cases of long and arbitrary detention, the committee noted the explanation that was given to the effect that there were improvements but found that there were prisoners who had been in detention for more than five years without trial.

The committee further observed that there is need for improvement in the handling of petty offenders who should be dealt with under the Community Service Programme, and further need for coordination of the agencies in the administration of justice to speed up the process of investigation and prosecution.

Further to the recommendation on the popularisation of the Community Service Programme, the committee recommends that the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs should bring a statement to Parliament providing an explanation as to why prisoners are kept for five years without trial and there is an appendix to that effect. 

On the separation of children in detention from adults, the committee observed that incarceration of children together with adults was a matter of negligence and needed to be addressed by the units concerned.

The committee therefore recommends that:

    1. The Uganda Prisons Services makes every effort to separate children from adults through sufficient provision of remand homes, bearing in mind that the law provides that each district should have a remand home.

    2. The human rights desks in Uganda Police Force should take the issue of remanding children with adults seriously and ensure that, that practice is stopped in all Police stations.

On the care of children detained with their incarcerated mothers, the UHRC reported that the detention places had no budget to cater for the children or nurseries to accommodate them. 

The committee observed that the Uganda Prisons Services had a framework for handling the children in question within the available resources, including offering special diets. However, the facilities offered were inadequate. They provide one cow per prison and the committee observed that the one cow per prison is not enough and that children need other nutrition facilities other than milk.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, are you saying that there is one cow for all the children?

MS KAMATEEKA: Yes, Madam Speaker. The Uganda Prisons Services provide one cow per prison in Uganda and this is close to the women’s section. In addition, the committee also noted, especially on the recent visit, that not every prison has a cow. Therefore, it is a policy and some of the prisons have a cow while others do not.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MS KAMATEEKA: The committee recommends that: 

    1. The Uganda Prisons Services takes reasonable measures to improve the dietary needs of children.

    2. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should provide the Uganda Prisons Services with adequate resources so as to overcome this challenge.

    3. The Community Service Programme should be considered as the first option for mothers with children who commit minor offenses.

On the provision of adequate resources to ensure provision of facilities to detainees including provision of ARVs, the Uganda Prisons Services explained that HIV prevalence was 11.2 per cent and that there were facilities. 

The committee noted the report of the UHRC and the explanation of the Uganda Prisons Services that reasonable measures had been taken to cater for persons living with HIV in their custody. However, in the various prisons visited by the committee, it was observed that TB cases were not handled properly.

The committee recommends that the Uganda Prisons Services takes reasonable steps to ensure that cases of detainees with HIV and Tuberculosis are handled and that drugs are provided in order to address this major problem.

On lack of specific facilities for PWDs, the UHRC reported lack of special accommodation, wheel chairs, ramps, crutches and others for PWDs.

The committee observed that provision for PWDs in the physical structures within prisons was important.

The committee recommends that the matter be taken up with the seriousness that it deserves with reference to the building control standards as provided for in the Building Control Act.

On detention of civil debtors, the UHRC found 172 detainees on account of failing to pay debts, an act that was found to be in contravention of Article 11 of the ICCPR that provides that an individual cannot be detained merely on the ground of inability to fulfil a contractual obligation.

The committee noted that the existing legal regime provides for commitment of debtors to civil prison and as a country, Uganda was not adhering to the provisions of the ICCPR, which prohibits this. 

The committee observed, however, the practice of Ugandans who dishonour their contractual obligations and the need to protect lenders. Much as we need to adhere to the ICCPR, there is a challenge that Ugandans have a practice of dishonouring their contractual obligations.

The committee recommends that the Government:

    1. sensitises Ugandans on the need to honour their contractual obligations;
    2. harmonises laws for the management of the credit system within the country; 
    3. expedites amendments to the Microfinance Act and other financial laws; 
    4. domesticates the ICCPR and expedites the amendment of the relevant laws to conform to it.

On insufficient food, beddings and clothing, the committee observed that failure to provide minimum basic requirements to persons who are under custody of the state agencies is an abuse of the rights of the same. The committee therefore recommends adoption of measures to ensure that the minimum requirements are met not only provision of more resources but also developing strategies that reduce the number of detainees to manageable numbers. 

On sanitation and personal hygiene, the UHRC reported areas of detention centres lacking water within a radius of 4kms making inmates go for days without taking a bath. In addition, some prisoners are still using the bucket system.

The committee observes that hygiene for prisoners is paramount and therefore recommends that:

    1. Appropriate and alternative measures should be taken to provide water to detention centres. 
    2. The bucket system should be eliminated in all detention centres because it is dehumanising.

On ventilation and lighting in the prisons, the UHRC reported that 209 detention cells and wards lacked proper ventilation. The committee observed that whereas the colonial structures may not have taken into account the requirements for proper lighting and ventilation, it was incumbent upon the Uganda Police Force to make the required adjustments to meet the current human rights obligations. It was further observed that the structures of the 1920s referred to had been declared unfit for human occupation. 

The committee recommends that appropriate funding be provided to replace the detention centres that have been condemned because detaining prisoners in such centres is a threat to their lives and an abuse of their rights.	

On the right to work, the commission reported that prisoners were working outside the stipulated conditions, among them working for more than six hours and being paid a mere Shs 100-500 per day.

The committee observed that whereas the relevant regulations to protect the prisoners were in place, there were gaps in enforcing them in all prisons as there were reports of prisoners working outside the required standards.

The committee further observed that whereas it was important to keep prisoners engaged and for them to earn some money, it is a violation of their rights when they are made to work beyond the stipulated six hours.

The committee therefore recommends that the Uganda Prisons Services enforces adherence to the stipulated working related conditions of prisoners and punish the culprits who go against the regulations.

On prisons staff welfare, the commission reported that the living and working conditions of the Uganda Prisons Services were deplorable due to insufficient funding. The committee noted the improvement in the welfare of prisons staff but observed that more needed to be done. 

The committee recommends that:

    1. Due attention be given to the welfare of the staff in the Prisons Service.
    2. That the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development ensures that the welfare of prisons staff is improved by providing the required resources.

On the Uganda Law Reform Commission and in relation to assessment of conditions in detention centres, the commission recommended amendment of the law to prohibit the detention of civil debtors in line with the International Convention on the Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) as referred to earlier. The Law Reform Commission agreed with the observation and recommendation that this should be done. 

The committee observes that Uganda is signatory to the ICCPR and is therefore obliged to perform its treaty obligations, which if breached, would have far reaching implications. Of course, we are already in breach. 

The committee recommends that given the obvious contradiction between the legal framework and the provision of the ICCPR, appropriate changes to the existing laws to conform to the requirements of the ICCPR should be done by specifically removing provisions relating to the detention of civil debtors from the Civil Procedure Act and the Civil Procedure Rules.

On human rights education and outreach, the commission recommended that the Constitution be translated into more local languages in order to ensure that more Ugandans are aware of the provisions of the Constitution. The committee observed that translation of the Constitution and other pieces of legislation that are vital in the day to day lives of the common people had been slowed down due to inadequate budget provision. 

The few that had been translated were through the support of development partners and this is not in sufficient numbers. The lack of the translation leads to human rights abuses due to lack of understanding of the laws. The committee noted that this underlying delay is a cause for human rights abuses. 

The committee recommends that the budget of the Law Reform Commission be enhanced for them to translate, disseminate, sensitise and educate Ugandans on human rights issues.

Emerging Human Rights Concerns 

The commission reported that the legal framework and environment within which non-governmental organisations were operating were restrictive. 

The committee observed that there is need to revisit the NGO Act for purposes of providing a conducive working environment for NGOs and one, which promotes a cordial working relationship between them and the state, bearing in mind the necessity for transparency and accountability.

Access to Justice for Vulnerable Persons 
The Uganda Human Rights Commission reported that the Children’s Act did not provide for, among others, the diversion of children from the formal justice system as well as the handling of children at risk including drug abusers and street children.

The committee observed -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, just hold on a bit. I would like to introduce the team upstairs. They are residents of Ngogwe Sub-County in Gera Village represented by Dr Michael Bayigga and hon. Dorothy Mpiima. I had announced them before they arrived. We are happy to see you. They are wearing kanzus and gomesis and are very smart. You are welcome. (Applause)

MS KAMATEEKA: The committee observed that the proposal to have the law aligned with the requirements of the CRC - the Law Reform Commission said that there was a draft Bill in place to align the Children’s Act with the Convention on the Rights of the Child.  

The committee observed that the proposal to have the law aligned with the requirements of the Convention of the Rights of the Child was action in the right direction. 

The committee observed however that the process was taking too long. Further, the lack of elections at local council level was undermining community involvement in enhancing the rights of children.

The committee recommends: 

    1. That the process of having the draft Bill tabled before Parliament be expedited. 
    2. That the government expedites the election of Local Councils I and II so that cases involving vulnerable persons at the lower local council levels are adequately handled.

Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development: Emerging Human Rights Concerns

The Plight of Teachers

The commission recommended that government should urgently operationalise the Collective Bargaining Agreement to enable labour unions function effectively, set a minimum wage for workers and fully operationalise the Industrial Court. 

The committee observed that the teachers’ remuneration is poor. More so, the threats issued by the Ministry of Education to teachers involved in the strikes were unjustified. Members will recall that I think it was the Rt hon. Prime Minister who said that teachers must return to work or be dismissed at that time. 

The committee observed that the strike by the teachers reflected the plight of many public workers and consequently the need for a minimum wage law as the existing law is obsolete.

In addition to teachers, many Ugandans working in industries run by foreign investors are greatly exploited. Foreign investors were recruiting non-nationals for casual work that could be done by Ugandans. 

Many districts did not have labour officers and those working were doing so in acting capacity and as a result, concerns faced by teachers and other workers could not adequately be addressed. More so, the lack of a fully operational Industrial Court negatively affects the settlement of labour disputes.

The committee also observed that there was lack of sensitisation of the public on Labour Laws by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

In addition, Government had recently appointed judges to the Industrial Court, which is a step in the right direction.

The committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development – 

    1. expedites the process of setting up the board responsible for reviewing wages by sector and coming up with strategies for minimum wage legislation and consequently a Bill;
    2. sensitises all stakeholders on the law governing employment and labour relations and how it empowers collective bargaining and negotiation;
    3. strengthens its monitoring role and ensures that the rights of Ugandans employed in firms run by foreign investors are protected and respected by their employers. 

Transitional Justice: The Right to Remedy and Reparation in Northern Uganda

The Commission recommended that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and its partners should put in place special measures to handle post-conflict gender based violence and family justice as well as reduce stigma for children born in captivity.

The committee observed that the level of post-war trauma in conflict affected areas was very high yet there was no concrete programme on psycho-socio support. As a consequence, people had taken to alcohol abuse so as to cope.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development –

    1. Strengthens the implementation of laws and policies on violence against women and girls;

    2. Engages with other stakeholders and strengthens multi-sectoral response services to address post-conflict gender based violence and family justice as well as protection of children in conflict affected areas; and

    3. Disseminates and popularises the psycho-socio support guidelines.

On the Ministry of Health, the Uganda Human Rights Commission recommended improvement in the general working conditions of health workers including medical interns. 

The committee observed that whereas the infrastructure in some of the health facilities had improved, there were still gaps in the working conditions of health workers in as far as the medical sundries were concerned.

The committee recommends that structured measures of improving the conditions of work of health workers by providing the required facilities and enhancement of their salaries be urgently put in place by the Ministry of Health with specific emphasis on nurses and midwives.

The UHRC recommended provision of adequate protective gear to health facilities to guarantee the safety of health workers.

	The committee noted and observed that whereas improvements had been made, there were still reports of shortage of basic kits at the health centres.

	The committee recommends that the ministry, in liaison with the National Medical Stores, procures adequate health kits for health workers and for all health centres.

	The commission recommended skilling, equipping and motivation of health workers and housing within the reach of health consumers.

	The committee noted the interventions geared towards improving the health service delivery through the various projects as listed under clause 90 on page 24.

	The UHRC recommended prioritisation of NTDs control. The ministry reported that the master plan for elimination of NTDs involving preventive chemotherapy and elimination of   Onchocerciasis, Lymphatic filariasis using the bi-annual vector elimination by river dosing be done.

	The committee observed that whereas the master plan to eliminate NTDs was in place, not much had been done in terms of providing the required funding and sensitisation of communities on the dangers of NTDs.

	The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health prioritises and steps up the elimination of NTDs. 

	The commission recommended strengthening of accountability systems including supervisory and monitoring systems.

The committee observed that whereas the report of the minister was impressive, there were gaps – I did not read the report but you will read it - in health service delivery especially in local governments characterised by absenteeism and lack of drugs in the health facilities.

	The committee recommends that the ministry carries out close monitoring of health workers to ensure proper service delivery to our population.

	The commission recommended a mechanism to popularise the Patients’ Charter in health facilities. The minister submitted that this had been done through the Patient’s Charter in health facilities.

	The committee noted that this was an innovation in the right direction, and recommends that it should be popularised to enable the consumers of the health services understand and follow it up.

Under the Ministry of Education and Sports

Human Rights Education and Outreach 

The commission recommended that government designates a programme for continuous civic education to support the Uganda Human Rights Commission fulfil its constitutional mandate in the area of human rights education.

	The ministry responded that civic education was outside its mandate as this was not provided for in the Education Act, 2008.

	The committee noted the need to incorporate civic education in the curriculum of schools to enlighten school children on both the rights and duties of a citizen as a measure of developing responsible citizens.

	The committee recommends that:

    1. The mandate of the Ministry of Education and coverage of the school curriculum be expanded to include civic education.

    2. Government develops and implements a National Civic Education Policy.

On emerging human rights concerns on the plight of teachers, the UHRC recommended that the Ministry of Education and Sports should facilitate District Education Officers to regularly conduct monitoring of institutions of learning within their jurisdiction.

The ministry submitted that the budget for supervision and monitoring had increased from Shs 621 million to Shs 1.921 billion in the year 2014.

The committee took note of the increment in the provision for monitoring as a welcome response but observed that the provision was still inadequate to have meaningful monitoring and inspection done.

The committee recommends that more resources be provided to facilitate adequate monitoring and inspection. 

	The UHRC further reported that verification of teachers on the payroll should be urgently conducted and concluded to ensure that teachers that were erroneously deleted from the payroll are reinstated and ‘ghost’ teachers expunged.

	The committee observed that the recurring problem of ghost teachers and deletion of teachers from the payroll impacts negatively on the desired outcomes in the education sector.

	The committee, therefore, recommends that the ministry designs mechanisms of verifying and updating the teaching force in schools, to avoid making payments to ghosts and the inconveniences caused to genuine teachers that miss their pay.

	The UHRC noted the need for engagements between the teachers’ union (UNATU) and the Ministry of Education. It was explained that the ministry had engaged UNATU and had come up with agreeable mechanisms of improving the conditions of service of teachers through salary enhancement and establishment of the teachers’ SACCOs. 

	The committee noted this was a step in the right direction but recommends that the Ministry of Education makes every effort to enhance the relationship between the teachers’ representatives and the ministry for purposes of designing solutions to emerging challenges facing the teachers and the teaching profession.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chair, just read the subject and your recommendations. The Members can read the issues.

MS KAMATEEKA: Assessment of Access to Quality Education. 

The committee observed that Parliament had recommended creation of a vote for special needs education but this had not been addressed.

It is therefore recommended that special needs education be given a vote status, and due attention be given to special needs education as required by the Constitution.

Continuous Monitoring, Inspection and Support Supervision to all Private and Government aided Schools
The committee observed that whereas the money is released, the monitoring and supervision of schools by the local governments was inadequate.

The committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Education ensures that supervision and monitoring is carried out against given benchmarks that have to be met by all educational institutions.

Review and Reform of the Education Curricula at all Levels from Academic-based Forms of Learning to Life Skills Education
The committee observed that there were efforts made in reviewing the curriculum. The committee recommended that sufficient resources be provided for skills training and reporting mechanisms.

Ministry of Public Service 

Delayed Payment of Salaries and Pension -

THE SPEAKER: I think you can start with 125

MS KAMATEEKA: The committee observed that the management of pensions was riddled with problems, including non-accessibility of pensions by the beneficiaries, high costs of travelling to the centre, insensitivity by the staff in the pensions section and inadequate budget provision. I personally have not been paid pension since September 2013.

The committee supports the recommendation of Uganda Human Rights Commission that payment of pension be decentralized and accounting officers be pecuniary responsible for any ghosts.

Uganda Police Force 

Emerging Human Rights Concerns

Torture of Suspects detained in Police Cells 

The committee agreed with the findings of the UHRC and observed that there are several cases of suspects tortured while in custody. 

The committee recommends that:

    • The Uganda Police Force should ensure that it inplements the Anti-Torture Act. 
    • Katikiros should be given strict instructions not to torture fellow inmates, hence anyone engaged in any form of torture should be punished accordingly by the authorities.

Assessment of Complaints Management in 2014 Regarding the Training of Officers in Investigation Skills 

The committee observed that despite efforts so far undertaken to equip police officers with investigative skills, a large number of them, especially those stationed in rural areas, lack capacity to conduct adequate investigations.

The committee recommends that the police leadership scales up both investigation and soft skills training such as communication, mediation, stress management  for officers at all levels and in all regions. The committee also recommends that Government provides adequate resources to ensure that the training is achieved.

Equipping the Force with Necessary Facilities 

The committee observed that despite the explanation that the Uganda Police Force adheres to the 48-hour rule, the visits made by the committee to the various prisons across the country revealed that suspects are detained for long periods beyond 48 hours.

The committee recommends that the Uganda Police Force be provided with adequate facilities to ensure that suspects are produced in court within the constitutional requirements.

Assessment of Conditions in Places of Detention

Construction and Renovation of Buildings

The committee noted that although progress has been made through construction of new police stations and renovation of old ones, the state of infrastructure of a number of police stations visited by the committee were in a dire state.

The committee recommends that Government should increase the capital development budget of the Uganda Police Force to construct more police stations as well as renovate and maintain the existing stations and police posts. 

Separation of Child Offenders from Adults

Similar to the case of the Uganda Prisons Service, the committee observed that many police stations lack reception centres for juveniles, hence children in conflict with the law are kept in the same cells with adults, exposing them to inhumane conditions and of course, a higher criminal scheme.

The committee recommends that Government provides sufficient resources to the Uganda Police Force in order to ensure that reception centres for juveniles are provided for in every district.

Freedom of Assembly 

The committee observed that the Public Order Management Bill had been enacted into law. The law clearly states the rights and responsibilities of all parties involved in public assemblies and demonstrations. The committee further observed that the police had commenced the process of sensitizing the police and the public on the law.

The committee recommends that the Uganda Police Force expands the training on the guidelines and adheres to the Public Order Management law and the Prohibition and Prevention of Torture Act.

Freedom of Expression 

The committee observes that investigations of police officers by the Police Standards Unit for actions such as harassment of journalists and destruction and confiscation of their property, particularly during coverage of demonstrations or assemblies, is inadequate. 

The committee recommends that the Police exhibits evidence of investigations and action in the public that members of the force who torture Ugandans have been dealt with.

Assault by Police Officers 

The committee was satisfied that action had been taken by the Uganda Police Force leadership.

Role of the Police in the KCCA Conflict over the status of the Lord Mayor 

The committee observed that –

    1. The Police acted in a partisan manner by blocking the legal representative for the Mayor from serving documents to KCCA management on behalf of his client. 

    2. The Police did not carry out independent investigations as information presented to the committee was the same as that of KCCA, verbatim.

The committee recommends that – 

    1. Police should always be impartial, make independent investigations and preserve and protect the rights of Ugandans at all times; and project a positive image of protecting Ugandans’ rights as the primary defenders of those rights. 

    2. The Police should endeavour to create a cordial working relationship with the members of the public. 

Office of the Prime Minister 

Assessment of Conditions in Detention 

The committee observed that creation of the RWCs was out of the need to provide administrative support, which could only be effectively carried out with the required facilitation.

The committee recommends that the said committees be facilitated to fulfil the purpose for which they were established.

Disaster Preparedness Management Commission 

Allow me to read 167. The committee observed that whereas establishment of the Commission may have heavy costs, the constitutional requirement needed to be heeded to and its establishment could not be wished away administratively.

The committee recommends that the constitutional requirements for establishing the Disaster Preparedness Management Commission as envisaged in Article 249(1) and any other provisions be adhered to.

Financial and Human Resource Strengthening 

The committee observed that the country had become disaster-prone, and therefore, requires a strong institutional framework to respond to the same.

The committee accordingly recommends that this be given attention by, among others, strengthening the disaster preparedness and management institutions.

Coordination of National and International Partners so as to have Effective Emergency Response to Disasters 

The committee noted instances of duplication of interventions to disaster by different stakeholders.
 
The committee recommends that there should be a formal coordination mechanism for coordinating national and international efforts towards disaster management.

The committee also recommends that there is also need for a local mechanism for mobilizing local efforts towards responding to natural disasters.

On the interventions in disaster, applying human rights based approach; the committee observed that because of lack of a human rights based approach, the vulnerable groups have been more adversely affected.

It recommends that special attention ought to be paid to vulnerable groups in responding to natural disasters. The interventions should incorporate the human rights based approach.

On land being secured in Kiryandongo Resettlement Camp, the committee observes that some of the people are still living in the disaster prone areas and recommends that the government should speed up efforts to resettle the survivors.

Transitional Justice: on transitional justice mechanisms, the committee observed the efforts so far made by the ministry. However, it further observed that there was no formal compensation mechanism for the victims. The verification exercise of who lost what was taking too long.

The institutional frameworks and interventions were in place to address the state of affairs existing in Northern Uganda, but there were gaps in implementation.

The committee recommends that the transitional justice policy be expedited, the verification exercise be expedited and adequate compensation be established, mobilized and paid to the victims taking into consideration the women, children and other disadvantaged groups.

Establishment of a victims compensation fund: The committee recommends that Government should mobilize and provide funding for the victims compensation fund.

Ministry of Water and Environment 

Human Rights concerns arising out of floods in Bududa landslides: a number of boreholes across the country are non-functional, more so, areas supposed to benefit from deep wells have only got shallow wells. 

The committee further observed the lack of funds specifically committed for disaster response which has led to funds being sourced from Ministry of Finance when disasters occur.

Funds for disaster management should be centralized in the Office of the Prime Minister. The committee further recommends that, the Ministry of Water and Environment should expedite the process of developing a flood management strategy.

Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development 

Human rights concerns arising out of the oil and gas. The committee observed that the oil bills had been enacted into law by Parliament.

However, it noted the lack of consultation by the ministry with the Uganda Human Rights Commission during the process of formulation of the oil bills, which was a serious omission.

Furthermore, during its field visit to the Albertine region, the committee established that, although the ministry reported that 160 people had been compensated, many in the region had not been adequately compensated despite having given up their land for oil exploration activities. Moreover, there were also allegations of under-valuation of their land.  

The committee recommends that:

    • Government undertakes a human rights audit of the existing oil laws to ensure that they are human rights complaint. 
    • The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development ensures that in respect to the oil revenue sharing arrangement as provided for in the Public Finance Bill, resources are equitably distributed.
    • The developments should not come at a cost to the rights of the people in the region and Government should therefore ensure protection of the rights of people.
    • Government through the minister of Energy and Mineral Development should expedite the compensation of affected persons and ensure that it is fair and adequate.

Level of transparency and accountability: The committee observed that access to information in respect to oil and gas activities is limited and hardly accessible by the locals in rural areas where oil and gas activities are presently being undertaken.

The committee recommends that the ministry avails information to all communities in the oil region and also undertakes sensitization of communities on the activities in the region and the oil revenue sharing agreements.

Inadequate environmental protection: The committee observed that environmental safeguards were in place but more needed to be done.

The committee recommends that:

    • The ministry should come up with concrete measures on how oil spills and other environmental hazards should be handled by all those involved in oil and gas exploration activities.

    • The ministry makes it mandatory, for each oil exploration company to submit an oil spill and fire plan as well as undertake strict measures to address environmental damage.

As I conclude, Madam Speaker and Members, allow me to extend special appreciation to the Uganda Human Rights Commission for tirelessly updating us on the human rights situation in the country through its periodic reports. The commission has been doing this amid financial and human resources constraints.

I would, therefore, appeal to Government and government ministries, departments and agencies in particular, to take the recommendations in this report seriously, as part of their human rights obligations enshrined in the Constitution and the conventions and protocols to which Uganda is a party.

Thank you, Madam Speaker and members. I beg that this report be adopted by the House. I beg to move. (Applause)
 
THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much honourable chairperson, and the Standing Committee on Human Rights for your report. 

Members, the report has been signed by the necessary minimum of one third of the members; if you have comments, make them and if you agree, we adopt the report.

5.02
MS LYNDAH TIMBIGAMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report and for having recognised new human rights violations that are rising.

I am commenting on the rights of teachers. They are missing salaries. This issue is now a year old but all we are saying is that we are ironing it out. Teachers have not yet been catered for; there are those who are crying and yelling like children. I would like the committee to include this in the recommendation as a demand, but not a request. Thank you.

5.03
MR MUDIMI	WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and the committee for the report. There are issues of feeding in prisons; however, most of them have huge farms and only lack equipment.

We have been discussing the budget, saying Government should equip prisons farms so they can produce their own food. And it will help Government to reduce expenditure on feeding. They asked for Shs 10 billion and it is a one off capital investment, but up to now, Government has not provided it. 

The issue of disasters; Government has acquired land to relocate people from the disaster prone areas. However, they are silent and we are approaching the rainy season. I do not know what is happening. I talked to the Permanent Secretary, in the Office of the Prime Minister; they say they are waiting for the planning. But these are emergencies. I do not know what Government is doing to address such issues. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We will just do two minutes each.

5.04
MS HELLEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. To begin with, is the issue of settlement of survivors from landslide zone areas, especially those in Kiryandongo. I would like to tell the truth; I have just been in the constituency and the truth is that these people have not received whatever the government promised. It has not fulfilled it; not even a half of it.

Therefore, as I talk now, the people who were relocated from Bududa area and taken to Kiryandongo; out of the 603 households, it is only 111 who got some temporary structures, which are also incomplete. The rest still sleep under those tarpaulins that were issued during that time. 

I would like to disagree with the committee’s observation that resettlement had taken place. I would request the committee members to visit these people and see for themselves. Otherwise, these people are suffering and due to too much suffering, some of them opt to go back because of the harsh conditions they go through.

Madam Speaker, I would like to comment briefly on the education, especially in the Uganda Prison Service. One time I was watching television, and I saw that the prisoners in Luzira live a life that other prisoners upcountry do not. I was happy to see a female prisoner who was either taking a course in law and very many other people pursuing different courses in vocational subjects.

When you go to upcountry prisons, they are only taken to farm or to private gardens and that is all. Therefore, I pray that whatever happens in Luzira especially –(Member timed out.)

5.06
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, I will talk about tuberculosis and HIV among the prisoners. When you spend one year with HIV without getting drugs, you have 10 per cent chance of developing tuberculosis. Therefore, if you spend 10 years, you have 100 per cent chances. One of the pre-exposing factors to tuberculosis infection -

THE SPEAKER: By the way, where is the sector minister; the minister of Justice? Is hon. Nasasira in charge? Okay.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I am trying to tell whoever is concerned more so the minister who is not here - I hope he will read the Hansard; that exposing people to tuberculosis patients that go untreated is causing chaos and he may also become a tuberculosis patient when he goes to visit them. It should be given urgent attention because it is not very good to expose people to tuberculosis patients untreated.

HIV too must be treated because right now, the drugs are available. I have heard something very bad in the report, when they were lying that whenever they go to hospitals, they are catered for. Very many prisoners do not have medical personnel.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, gratuity of people who have retired is being eaten in public service. The head mistress of Mary Hill Senior Secondary School, Madam Atim, who retired and is now supposed to be in Busia went to look for gratuity and they asked her for 10 per cent of it. Why should a person retire and some small boys and girls in public service want to take 10 per cent of the money? I know of a police officer in Mbarara who retired recently and has not gotten her retirement package and gratuity. Apparently, they want to take all her money and this is a lady called Corporal Edidah.

I do not know - the Prime Minister has gone out, but I am in pain. Can we completely personalise the Ministry of Public Service so that when I retire, I get my money? Honestly, the people we represent – others are eating their gratuity and we keep quiet. I am telling you the thieves are available and known; the minister can go and get them. That is why I pity the President of Uganda, who keeps bringing them back and leaving us behind. We would perform the job for him. I thank you.

5.09
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative Bundibugyo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the chairperson for the widely researched report and the facts therein. As a woman under the Uganda Women Parliamentary Association, we have been interacting with some of the prisoners more especially the females. Most of the problems they face are not addressed in the report read by the chairperson. There are special problems that these women have that some of the male prisoners do not face.

There are women who go to prison with children; there are no facilities to cater for children. There are women who are imprisoned while pregnant; there are no facilities and special attention given to these women. There is one of the women whom we met in Mpigi; she was pregnant and at the same time HIV positive. She did not have the drugs yet she was arrested while taking the drugs. There is no attention which was given to this woman.

I do not know whether the Inspector General of Prisons goes to inspect these prisons. These are things which are general that everybody should know. Maybe, among these prisoners, there might be these situations and somebody could pick interest to handle the matters.

Madam Speaker, there are ladies down there who are suffering without any thing to use. You would hardly find a woman with sanitary pads in prison. There is nobody to provide for them; they are there being taken for digging, sweeping and they forget that there special attention on sanitation that they are supposed to give to these women. As women of this country, we feel humiliated and annoyed when such situations happen to our colleagues. Though they are in prison, they still remain women of this country.

The problem of feeding: the prisoners go digging and they produce food. However, the type of food they are eating is very bad. Why don’t they dig and eat from the same food they are producing? The problem remains that the prison wardens and leaders need money from their energies yet they cannot provide for them. What do we do as Government? We need to place a recommendation to task these people that whenever they produce food, prisoners should be given a chance to taste on the produce of their sweat.

On housing, I feel that the way prisoners sleep - for example, hon. Kahunde has put it cleary that people admire being detained in Luzira than being detained in the village prisons because down there it is disaster. There, you find ladies sleeping, mosquitoes are everywhere, all these are human lives. They have committed crimes, fine, but why should they get Malaria from the same prison where they sleep on the floor?

That is double punishment; we need to protect them, provide mosquito nets, give them good treatment and give them blankets. If you reach where they sleep, they use the blankets we use for burying dogs –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Ntabazi. Hon. Ntabazi said that the females are entitled to their rights yet they are prisoners. However, prisoners are also in different categories. There are those who are found red handed murdering people; there are those who are found red handed killing their own wives and there are those who steal chicken or idlers. All those ones who are walking to work and all these categories, Madam Speaker, are not the same. 

Now, in such a circumstance, how do we proceed? Especially I would like to implore the chairperson on this; how do we proceed given those various categories of prisoners - how do we handle them?

Secondly, why should prisoners over stay in prison without their cases being concluded? It exerts a lot of pressure on Government just because their cases have not been concluded.

MS NTABAZI: Thank you, my brother from Rwenzori. I think the point which you wanted to bring forward was that whether chicken thieves or whatever, they are all prisoners.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I want an explanation from the Minister of Internal Affairs. In the first session, we delayed in approving his budget so that he could make provisions for sanitary towels for the women -(Applause)- and after three days, he came here and reported that he had found some money. So if you are saying that they are not there, we want to know who has eaten that money. Yes, we want to know which man has eaten that money -(Applause)- from the Minister of Internal Affairs, he should explain who has eaten that money.

5.16
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee chair for this report and Uganda Human Rights Commission. Listening to the report, I think they have done a good job.

Madam Speaker, I beg to be protected from the Leader of Government Business, you know generals cannot be ordered, but - my comment is on prisons. To be a prisoner does not make you less of a human being and Government has a responsibility to secure the rights and liberties of prisoners.

Madam Speaker, under section 48, the report talks about the use of the bucket for a toilet. It is ashaming; how can Government put up a public building without a toilet? I think they are using the buckets not because they do not have toilets, but as a form of punishment. It is inhuman, degrading and it spreads diseases among the prisoners.

I would like to propose to the chair that instead of simply saying, “The system should be eliminated,” we should make this recommendation a bit stronger and say, “The bucket systems in all prisons should stop immediately.” It should be abolished and there should be a special audit and any inspector of any prison that is found to be still having this practice should be dismissed immediately. I think this is the most inhuman thing that we still have in our prisons.

The other issue is the welfare and hon. Ntabazi clearly pointed out the poor feeding. The prisons have land, but it is unfortunate that they are unable to feed the prisoners because the prisoners are used to go tilling other people’s private land. I think this is a form of slavery in the modern times -(Member timed out.)

5.18
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their work and to concur with the committee’s recommendation that district education officers should conduct regular monitoring and supervision of educational institutions.

However, Madam Speaker, although the committee has told us that funding has been increased for that, there are challenges in some districts - challenges of staff. For example, in Amudat District, we have one staff who is education officer as well as District Inspector of Schools. What do we expect from one person monitoring all the educational institutions in the district?

I think there is need to do something about that to increase staff in districts; there are very few staff and education officers.

Madam Speaker, on hygiene and sanitation, the inmates still have a lot of problems. In addition to the inadequate clothing, they have problems of soap. One time, I visited an inmate who comes from my village; he was in Kirinya Prison and he told me one of the greatest problems - he did not even talk about the food; he talked about soap and he told me, if another time I visited him, I should at least take soap for him. I think there is need to provide these people with soap so that after coming from the garden, they can bathe and wash the few pairs of uniform that they are provided with. I thank you.

5.20
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, PWD Representative, Western): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I wish to thank the committee for this comprehensive report and the Uganda Human Rights Commission for their observations and recommendations.

Madam Speaker, just recently, the Ministry of Water and Environment in conjunction with the Ministry of Lands agreed to cancel land titles of people who acquired land in wetlands. Today, prison’s land is vulnerable for land grabbers and prisons in this country are some of the organisations that have had vast land across the country. However, they are under threat today. Can I request the Ministry of Internal Affairs to ensure that the people who are vying and those who have already acquired prison’s land beginning with Luzira and others are brought to book?  If possible, their titles should be cancelled.

Madam Speaker, prisons in Uganda are self-sufficient in food supply. If you went to Mubuku in western Uganda, they were carrying out cultivation, but they were ensuring food security that prisoners could not go hungry. Today, prisoners are a source of cheap labour; any person who wants to do his farming can come for that cheap labour to go and carry out their private farming. 

We wish to know from the minister whether he is aware of such slavery that is being carried out on prisoners – they go and dig vast areas of land for individuals and we do not know whether there is any benefit that is accruing to these prisoners. That is very rampant.

Madam Speaker, the other issue I wanted to comment on is the question of police bond. In my view - and since you are a senior lawyer - a person who is eligible for bond should be clearly clarified - (Interjections)- just yesterday, there is a young girl who was murdered in the areas of Lwengo. This story was on Agataliko Nfufu. She was hijacked from a wedding of her sister. The suspects were arrested and brought to the police station and were given a police bond even when there were clues that these were the people who participated in the murder of that young girl.

Now, is police another form of court? I thought that if a suspect is going to be freed, it should be on court bail because such things are capital offenses?

Madam Speaker, those are some of the areas where we feel abuses of human rights have been concentrated. So we urge the Minster of Internal Affairs to ensure that such things do not happen again –(Member timed out.)

5.24
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the issue of psychosocial support to handle post war trauma, the committee noted that many people have taken to alcohol abuse. However, I want to inform my colleagues that apart from alcohol abuse, there are numerous cases of suicide in Northern Uganda. People are committing suicide like they are mad and psych-socio support programmes have remained on paper. Nothing is being done to rehabilitate the minds of the people. 

Madam Speaker, if somebody from Government could pick interest and go to Pader or Kitgum districts right now as I talk and take record of the number of people who have committed suicide in the last one or two weeks, I think that person will be amazed.  

I would like to appeal to Government that what is on paper should be implemented so that we support our people who for many years suffered from the impact of war.

On the issue of prison congestion, it is important to ensure that there are cells that can separate some of these inmates or suspects under certain instances. 

About two weeks ago, there was a very unfortunate incident that took place at the Uganda Prisons in Pader District where a suspect named Kenneth Banya murdered another suspects called Simon Pachuto. This Kenneth Banya had been taken in a number of times over killing – he had killed an LC I chairperson and a number of other people. He was confined with other inmates and I think that something entered his mind and just picked a chair and hit Simon Pachuto to death. I do not know – (Member timed out.)

5.26
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I would like to note that the issue of Persons with Disability is more on physical accessibility.

There was a deaf man imprisoned in Soroti and because he did not have a sign language interpreter, he has never received justice to this day. He is a poor man who cannot afford a sign language interpreter and whenever he is brought to court, there is a communication barrier. This gentleman is really having challenges of accessing justice. We all know that justice delayed is justice denied. 

My other recommendation is that sign language interpreters should be provided by Government to help these people access justice. It should not be the burden of the person in court. 

I would also like to say that when the Persons with Disability are taken to prison or court, they are asked to remove their appliances, for example, the callipers and walking crutches because people think that these are weapons and yet they are part and parcel of these people’s bodies. They are asked to remove these appliances because the authorities say that people who go to prison must walk on bare feet. Some of them, you should remember, have no feet to walk but are left in that unfortunate state.

The issue of civic education is critical. The report brings the issue and there is an argument on whose responsibility it is. No wonder the public out there thinks that Members of Parliament have to do everything because they are not aware of their roles, responsibilities and obligations. 

There is need to come up with a strategic way of bringing civic education to inform members. If you went to a primary school and asked who the new ministers are, the answer would be a nightmare. Those days we used to know the ministers by name and position but these days, it is a nightmare for people to know the ministers –(Member timed out.)

5.29
MS MARGARET ALEPER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kotido): I would also like thank the committee for this report. My concern is on the Community Service Programme. The committee has rightly observed that this needs to be embraced to the desirable levels. 

This programme is beneficial to both the prisons and the offenders. It is my observation that only the male offenders enjoy the benefit of this programme unlike the females. I think that this is an indication that female offenders are mainly capital offenders, which is not the case.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to agree with the recommendation of the committee on taking the first option of mothers with children to be considered in this programme because this is the only way that the children who have seen a raw deal in the situations in the prisons can enjoy the comfort of their own when the mothers are involved in the Community Service Programme.

The other concern is on the right to work by the prisoners. Indeed the prisoners are subjected to long hours of work but there is more strenuous work like agricultural work and brick making in some prisons unlike in other prisons. I would therefore suggest and propose that instead of keeping some prisoners in certain zones where there is less work and having others in zones with a lot of work, there would be some kind of rotational –(Interruption)

MR GILBERT OLANYA: I thank you, hon. Member. . 

THE SPEAKER: Is it information?

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR OLANYA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. As we speak now, we have prison warders who are turning the prisoners into business. If you need to dig your garden, you go to the prison and the warders give you prisoners who work from 6.00 a.m. to 6.00 p.m. You pay the money to the prison officers. This is a very serious issue and is majorly happening in the upcountry districts. 

For example in Amuru where we have plenty of land, every morning you see inmates aboard a truck going to dig in Amuru. They work from 6.00 a.m. to 6.00 p.m. and so they are becoming the business of the prison officers.

MS MARGARET ALEPER: Having all that information –(Interruption)

MR JAMES BABA: The information that I would like to give is that the law allows prisoners to do some work as part of their training to acquire skills. But the issue of working from 6.00 a.m. to 6.00 p.m. needs to substantiated. 

5.32
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere):  I thank you very much, Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: I understand that you are a member of the committee?

MS ALASO: No.

THE SPEAKER: Are you not?

MS ALASO: I left the committee when I was appointed the Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I thought that you were tempting me.

MS ALASO: But I was a member some time back. I would like to thank the chairperson for the report. I have three issues that I would like to address myself to.

One, on education, the committee points out the need for a review of the curriculum. In this country, it is becoming fashionable to talk about curriculum review that excludes the key stakeholder. The person who reviews your curriculum determines your value system, aspirations and capacity. Every time we talk about review of the curriculum, we are talking about some “Muzungu” who funded the review and, therefore, their values and aspirations. 

If we want to genuinely review our curriculum, we need to engage the stakeholders who are Ugandans; the cultural leaders, the people of this country, the religious institutions are the people who are stakeholders in this curriculum review. I hope that the chairperson will take that concern very seriously.

The second is the question of the right to life. In this country it has become very cheap. You will be shot; you will be killed. I raised here issues of gun murders in Teso and you directed the Ministry of Internal Affairs to come to this House and tell us why life has become so valueless in Teso. Two three months down the road, the Ministry of Internal Affairs has not come here to tell us why they do not exhaust investigations. Therefore, the police simply walk around, the culprits are set free and then this thing continues.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I would like to inform hon. Asamo that I raised the issue of the minister’s order. I wrote asking him to exercise his power of granting a minister’s order for the release of that person in Soroti prison. They are actually two; we went together that time. To date, Government thinks it is okay for a person to suffer without getting access to justice. I hope that the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs will exercise the right he has under minister’s orders to set Otim and one other person free from the Soroti prison. Otherwise they will rot there.

5.36
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank hon. Jovah Kamateeka and the committee members for this very good report. I would like to comment on the issue of gender based violence. As I speak, there are serious issues to do with women suffering gender based violence because even the police protection unit, which is supposed to protect family members, especially women and little children is no longer offering justice to women. 

Today, there is a woman called Atok Milly who is suffering in Kinawataka, after the man refused to provide her and her children meals for close to six days. She reported to Kinawataka Police Station but the police asked her to buy airtime and load it onto their phone if she wants the man to be called to the police station. The woman has been going there for seven days to follow this matter but she has not received justice. I wonder who is responsible to protect the lives of women who suffer in the slums of this country, upcountry and wherever they are. This is a serious matter because the police have not provided justice.

Madam Speaker, allow me reiterate what hon. CD Lowila said about post-war trauma and gender based violence and suicide. Last week alone, in Agago District, I had five cases of death related to post-war trauma and suicide. A man killed his wife and hanged himself in the hut. The woman was breast-feeding twins who were six months old. Just before that -(Interjections)– will I have that one minute? Okay -(Interruption)

MS LILLY ADONG: Thank you, hon. Franca Akello. I would like to inform you that in Nwoya District last month, we had seven cases of suicide and four were from one sub-county, including a man killing the whole of his family of five.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: So, Madam Speaker, especially we, the members of the greater northern Uganda, we have been really -

THE SPEAKER: Yes, that is an important point because I have also raised it not only here but also in international fora, about post war trauma.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Members of Parliament have repeatedly spoken about this matter. It is important for Government to devise means of addressing psycho-social problems, especially having psycho-social support programmes that would address post-war remedies for some of these problems. Unless it is done, we are losing people and having people who are seated redundant because they still imagine that they are in the camps, as before. They wake up one morning to kill themselves like the cases I have been citing here. In my district alone, just last week, five different people killed themselves because of post-war trauma.

Lastly, I would like to thank the chairperson for bringing out the issue of civic education. Members of Parliament and leaders in this country are suffering carrying the burden of what Government -(Member timed out.)

5.40
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I thank the committee for this report. I am concerned about the issue of non-clearance of people’s retirement packages. I agree with the recommendation that this item be decentralised. If the issue of pension, salary and unsteadiness of the payroll is not handled, it will not only be a socio-economic problem but also political. 

Therefore, I advise the government to prioritise it because people are demotivated and others have died without getting this benefit. They come to our offices but the problems are too big; we have files in our offices. Therefore, I request that Government must prioritise this otherwise it will affect all of us politically.

On the recommendation to centralise the fund for management of disasters, I disagree with this. In our districts, the disaster management committees are not operational because they do not have the funds. In my district, the committee is there but operationalization is a problem and that is why many of the issues related to disaster are brought here in the ministry. This becomes a very big challenge for the ministry to handle. Therefore, can we operationalise the district disaster management committees?

On the issue of the inmates, Madam Speaker, majority of them are youths. In Adjumani, I visit inmates yearly and Seventy per cent of them are youths. What does it mean? The energetic productive group of people is in prison. Therefore, I propose that the directorate relevant to the youths should be supported. 

We need more programmes to engage the youths so that they get diverted from being in prison. You will release 10 youths today and after three weeks, they are back to prison. So, I think we rather engage these people in being out than waiting until they are there –(Member timed out.) 

5.44
MR MOHAMED KAWUMA (DP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Human Rights Commission produced this report in 2012 and we are processing it as Parliament, in 2015. It is my conviction that a number of events have unfolded. Probably what we are handling now, issues could have changed. 

That said, I would like to address myself to the issue of the Albertine region of oil and gas, where the committee visited and established that 161 people were compensated and the committee established a number of people not ideally compensated. 

Unfortunately, what was not indicated in the report is how many were not compensated because this is a very serious matter. People are looking at oil and gas as a curse in the area. Many of these people are bona fide owners of land that have no titles. People have come from big offices in Kampala to go and own this land and then the genuine bona fide persons are not compensated. Therefore, if they are displaced, where will they base to come and claim for their entitlements and rights? Therefore, the committee should update this Parliament with the appropriate figures and probably to narrow it down to specific individuals that have not yet been compensated.

On the issue of prisons, prisons have a problem with transportation of prisoners to the courts of law to seek justice. In Kigo, for example, there is one truck that takes people to Entebbe and to Mpigi. By the time they are ferried to Mpigi, probably the magistrate or the judges – for that case – are not there and they miss getting justice on those appropriate days. That has not been mentioned in this report. 

Madam Speaker, this issue has been mentioned by some members but I want to reiterate it – the issue of children of incarcerated mothers. I visited Kigo Prison and there were school-age going children that did not have opportunity to attend -(Member timed out.)

5.46
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank God for releasing me to catch your eye. I must confess that I have been a resident to some of these detention centres they are talking about, for several times. At least I was a resident in Luzira Prison. I have been there twice -(Interjections)- as a researcher, don’t ask me. I know most of what takes place there.

In Luzira, for example, water is rationed, including in the toilets. By 4.00 p.m., there is no more water and lunch is served at 3.00 p.m. Therefore, if you got a stomach problem, your relief is left on top and whoever goes there next does the same. There is no washing of hands; there is nothing till the next morning. You have been talking of sanitary pads but even men would need water at least when they go to the toilets and when they come out of there. It is rationed.

I one time tried  to inquire and they told me the water bills were becoming a problem and that they could not afford paying National Water and Sewerage Corporation so they tried to reduce on them.

Madam Speaker, the other concern I have appears as number 160 in the report. It is named, “The role of the police in the KCCA conflict over the status of the Lord Mayor.” I thank the committee for at least observing that our police have become partisan and the cost now has come to compromising our political rights. In the case that is mentioned, the police became partisan by blocking a lawyer, one Abdallah Kiwanuka. This lawyer was acting on behalf of the Lord Mayor and he was trying to take a court order stopping the illegal assembly that was taking place there. The action of the police meant, first of all that the administration of justice was compromised but also the services of the Courts of Law were rendered very difficult to execute.

It is on record and I personally have recordings of the IGP trying to persuade people to support sole candidature. It is on record; the IGP, Gen. Kale Kayihura, was trying to engage NRM party cadres to support one of the candidates in the NRM party. What took place here –(Member timed out.)

5.50
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am interested in following up the issue of the sanitary towels whose money we passed last year, after tasking the minister. Now that he is here, we need an answer.

Two, I thank the committee for the issues raised – the question of availability of water. You may talk about water upcountry but I stay along Entebbe Road and the areas of Zana, Ndejje, Seguku all the way up to Akright have no water. During the dry season like it is now, women do not sleep. You hear them with jerrycans all over the night – between 1.00 a.m. and 3.00 a.m. looking for water; right at the nose of the capital city. Therefore, something is very wrong with this country. When we talk about the rights, honestly speaking, this is not a right because women are really suffering and we cannot continue denying these families water. A jerrycan of water in Kampala is almost Shs 2,000. How many families can afford that when we are talking about the urban poor?

On the question of climate change - forget about the over 90 per cent boreholes in the country that are non-functional, just like you said. Many women in the countryside do not have access to land and that means that their male counterparts have a right on what is planted where. These days you cannot even access the bush that the women used to have in search of firewood. This is a big issue because the women are the ones looking for means of feeding families. Therefore, I would like the committee to also look at the question of climate change as a human rights issue because if it continues unchecked, Government has to look for ways of making sure that it is easier for women, as a right, to have affordable energy.

Lastly, there is this question that has been raised here. We would like to hear from Government what is going to happen on the water bills of Luzira? At least let us talk about Luzira if we are not yet ready to spread. All of us are candidates to Luzira Prison. If Government is saying the water bills are very high and water is released for less than one hour, then what happens to the inmates? I think – (Member timed out.)

5.53
MR KENNETH KIYINGI BBOSA (Independent, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to also thank the committee for the comprehensive report. 

I strongly support the committee’s recommendation that the budget of the Law Reform Commission be enhanced to translate, disseminate, sensitise and educate Ugandans on human rights issues. However, I also urge the committee to consider not only the human rights issue but even the existing laws. I believe this will answer the civic education problem because many of our local people down there, their rights are being abused because they are not in the know of the existing laws. As it has been mentioned by honourable colleagues, this burden has been left to the Members of Parliament. I believe there is a very big gap between the task that we accomplish as Members of Parliament of enacting laws and the process of these laws being known by the people down there.

Madam Speaker, allow me to also address the matter of the right to a fair hearing in the courts of law. It is sad to note that the courts in the lower communities are becoming a preserve to the high income earners who would even have the courtesy of coming up with forged court orders to evict people from their land. In a given case, if you may allow, in a court in Buwama, a Kibanja holder in this case was ruled that he was trespassing on the Kibanja. How can a bona fide occupant trespass? This is what is happening at the grassroots. I believe the committee would interest itself in such cases so that the rights of the people down there are respected.

Finally, on the matter regarding the Uganda Police Force, in particular the matter of assault by police officers, justice was done to the officers who attacked the Mukwano Industries’ employee but there are a number of cases where you find police officers in uniform, actively participating in evicting squatters. They actively participate in cutting down plantations. How can this be dealt with -(Member timed out.)

5.56
MS LILLY AKELLO (Independent, Woman Representative, Kaabong): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the rest of my colleagues to thank the committee and the chairperson for a well elaborated report. I have three concerns.

First, I want to know more about the cow, which the chairperson said they give to all the prisons. In some of our districts in Karamoja, we do not have those cows which the chairperson said are given to the prisons. I do not know whether they are for meat or milk for the children of the inmates. Therefore, can you give us clarification on that?

Secondly, I would like to find out and as well make a proposal: some of my colleagues here said that the inmates are really made to do a lot of heavy work, which is true. I have visited some of these prisons, for example, in Kotido, where you find that the inmates go to the gardens, make a lot of bricks and cut big logs. 

My proposal to the chairperson is: can you include in your recommendations that the money which is earned in engaging the inmates in those activities should be given to them to help them buy basic needs like soap, body lotion and sugar. This is because I know the prison officers get the money. 

I bear witness because when we go down there, the inmates ask for soap and sugar, which we buy for them. Therefore, I propose that you include this in your recommendations to help them and it is their rights.

Lastly, on the issue of conjugal rights, the chairperson of the committee has not included anything to do with the conjugal right there. (Laughter) Conjugal rights is a right for everybody in this House –(Interruption)

MS CHEMUTAI: Thank you, hon. Lilly Akello, for giving me this opportunity. About conjugal rights, I one time visited a prison and we discussed a lot on this but they told me that homosexuality is very common in prisons. Therefore, as we discuss the Anti-Homosexuality Bill here, we need to know that homosexuality is very common in prisons and we need to condemn it everywhere including in prisons.

MS LILLIY AKELLO: Madam Speaker, it is true conjugal rights are a need for all of us including those who are here. (Laughter) When we deny those inmates who are inside there their conjugal rights, it becomes a problem and a human right issue. Therefore, I request Government to at least come with a policy where we can include this for the – you know prison is for all of us. We are - (Member timed out.)

5.59
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me add a little flesh to the already fleshy report. The committee did a very good job. My concerns are the following: 

First of all, matters of relationships: this report did not look at the relationship between the inmates and the prison warders. Some of the inmates have been, under duress, forced into sexual abuse and I thought their report should have come with the statistics of some inmates who claimed to have been probably forced into sexual relationships or whatever.
Secondly, if a prisoner attempts to escape, the level of mistreatment that a prisoner is subjected to after that attempt is unbelievable. I witnessed that in my constituency where a young man - I do not know what happened but he wanted to jump and escape and the way that man was beaten - I think this report should have also gone ahead to give us statistics of attempted escapes and how the rights of those people are respected.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you are setting a really a high benchmark. The report is responding to the report of the Human Rights Commission. Therefore, if they did not touch it, the committee cannot import it. I think you should tell this to them in the ordinary reports of their work but this is specifically found in the Human Rights Commission’s report.

MR ANYWARACH: Most obliged. Madam Speaker, on the question of infrastructure, I think they focused mostly on the state of the prisons and so on, which is okay. However, if you look at the situation where a whole prison has only grass thatched houses for the prison itself and the staff quarters -(Member timed out.)

6.02
MR MARTIN BAHINDUKA (Independent, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker and I would like to commend the committee for the good work as well. However, I will be specific on two issues.

The first is having prisoners do a lot of work. I heard the minister say it is part of training. I do not understand what training that is but the most annoying bit of it is that most of these prisons have land. If you moved around today, you would notice that most of the prisons’ land is actually cultivated by the prisoners themselves. If you look at - because I know and I have seen some colleagues, mainly prison officials who are in those high ranking offices; they have contracts to supply maize to these very prisons. What happens is they use the prisoners to cultivate their land, get the maize and sell it to the same prison. It is quite embarrassing because we give you a budget –(Interjections)- I wish the minister would substantiate on this because people will come with figures and show us that in such a year, Luzira had this much land and we did not buy maize because at least you know that we cultivate all the time. However, they buy it every other day and time. They are using these prisoners, taking them for a ride and making a lot of money out of this kind of scheme. I think it would be dangerous and equally costing us as well.

Finally, on the issue of conjugal rights, I know it could be - but let us be honest here; let us not cause more troubles for these prisoners. The man is in prison because probably he has committed crimes because of inadequacy in one way or the other. You are giving him a wife in prison, he will get another kid outside and the next thing, because of inadequacy, the wife will probably also commit crime and equally join the man in prison. Therefore, let us protect these people. They are there for a purpose. As much as it is important, let us not cause more troubles. Let us leave it the way it is as much as it may be important to members. Thank you.

6.04
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My issue is about the prison farms. I want to take the example of Mubuku and Ibuga prison farms. I have also had the privilege of visiting other regions in this country such as the east, north and also the central here.

Mubuku and Ibuga specifically, which are in Kasese have expanse land. They grow a lot of maize, sunflower and just a few years ago, they started growing cotton. The proceeds from these farms are a mystery to the surrounding communities. The Minister for Defence, Dr Chrispus Kiyonga will agree with me that the communities around there who grow the same maize, sunflower, cotton have transformed but I do not see any additional thing there in Mubuku and Ibuga.

It would be important for the minister to educate this House on how prisons can be sustainable. In my view, prison farms should also be audited seriously to the extent that the harvest in Mubuku alone should be around 3,000 bags of maize in just one season. What about for the whole year, 10, 20 or 50 years? What is being done? 

Finally, I also would like to look at the issue of oil and gas. From the chairperson’s submission, she said that this information is not accessible to the local people and yet Government manages resources on behalf of the people -(Member timed out.)

6.07
MR BENARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my fellow honourable colleagues in thanking the committee and particularly the chairperson, in presenting this report. I have about three issues.

The first issue is in regard to accommodation of police officers. The committee did recognise the need for investment by Government in infrastructure. 

I am raising this in light of the contribution that the Uganda Police Force is making in raising money in the coffers of Government, particularly through the traffic department. I interacted with one traffic police officer and his suspicion was that some of these monies that they raise are being abused. It is important that as Parliament, we interest Government in finding out how much money is being raised through the penalties that the traffic office is undertaking.

I was also informed that for a police officer who has been transferred from one session to another to get accommodation, they have to pay at two levels. One has to pay to the OC of the station, the District Police Commander (DPC) and also the OC of the barracks. They have people who are given the responsibility of allocating accommodation. If you do not have at least Shs 1 million, you do not get accommodation. 

In Kampala, it is very rampant. That is why you find that most of them are either renting houses outside the barracks or squatting and sharing one unit. In that case, they have to leave their families in their ancestral homes and that disintegrates or disorganises their social life. Therefore, it is important that the committee takes interest in matters of the social life of the police in regard to accommodation.

Lastly, the committee has talked about compensation for victims of war, particularly in Northern Uganda. I come from West Nile. We equally suffered both directly and indirectly; Buses were burnt. I remember a day when we spent over one week at Karuma waiting to cross to return home. I – (Member timed out.)

6.10
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee and the Uganda Human Rights Commission for enabling these critical matters come to light. 

I am glad that the Uganda Human Rights Commission investigated 2,195 complaints. I am also happy that the commission, together with the committee, are coming up to bear the common man’s voice and is becoming the voice of the voiceless. They need all the support.

This Parliament was alarmed when it came to light that indeed female inmates in Masaka prisons were using sawdust as part of their sanitary facilities. I am glad that this is not reflected here; probably there was an improvement there. This should be encouraged because -

THE SPEAKER: No, there is no improvement, hon. Ssekikubo. I actually want to know from the minister what happened to the money he told us he had found to buy the sanitary pads. He has not. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Fortunately, the minister is here and if the case has not improved, I must tell Parliament that it was totally degrading for our counterparts, the female colleagues who are inmates but are still Ugandans, to be reduced to using and applying sawdust. It was widely reported. 

These reformatory centres and prisons are for Ugandans. I am glad that out of the retreat, the President has assured Ugandans that there will be no more privatisation because everything was privatised. You privatise and give out to investors. When you go to Butabika where people with mental problems are kept or Luzira -(Member timed out.)

6.12
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this chance. Our prisons are full of youth between the ages of 18 to 35. I would like to draw the attention of the Minister of Health that if we are to decongest our prisons, we should note the following; 

    1) We should be able to regulate issues related to narcotics, drug abuse and alcohol.

    2) Circulation of small arms, light arms as well as big guns such as the AK 47 are in the hands of the youth and are used for moving, robbing, murdering and committing other crimes.

    3) The issue of unemployment: This has made the youth involve themselves in criminal activities like theft, robbery, murder, rape, defilement and so forth.

Therefore, if we are to take note of all these three points, then we shall be able to decongest our prisons. 

There is also need for us, as leaders, to do a lot of sensitisation, education and mobilisation of the youth so that they can take meaningful and gainful employment. Thank you very much. 

6.14
MR AHMED AWONGO (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this wonderful report they have made. It is so elaborate and has explained each and everything that we think that is important, for the wellbeing of all the prisoners there.

I also would like to thank the Human Rights Commission for this very important observation that they have made. I personally believe that these observations have been made to improve the kind of life that is in our prisons.

In 2004, there was a research done which revealed that about 20 per cent of people in our prisons are out there by accident. They are not criminals but are there by accident. This therefore means that when we are looking at people who are in prison, we should not look at them as wrong or bad people. Prisons must be looked at as centres for improving people’s behaviour. They must be looked at as centres for rehabilitating people, who may have gone wrong in one or the other. It is very unfortunate that – maybe right from Parliament up to the prison warders, we do not seem to care about the prison. 

Sometimes when I look at the budget for the Ministry of Internal Affairs and more so for those sectors which are involved, the budget is so small that the ministry is unable to provide those essential things that are supposed to be provided. When you mention the sanitary pads, I think those were some of the things which were directed to be done some time back. However, up to now, these things have not been provided in these prisons. I therefore would like to appeal to the Minister of Internal Affairs to ensure that these prisons and the people who live in those prisons are really cared for. When it comes to the issue of food for prisons -(Member timed out.)

6.16
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to thank the committee for a job well done. However, I would like to address myself to the issue of long detention.
Much as I have seen the response or the recommendations of the committee, I am not satisfied as per what happens, for example in hard-to-reach areas like Buvuma, where you have a visiting magistrate, who comes only twice a month. This means that if someone is arrested on a Monday, one has to wait for another two weeks to be arraigned before the courts of law. So many people are actually suffering in the different police stations. 

There is also an issue of accessing the police stations. The different police officers do not have the means, especially in the islands where there is no police patrol or a police boat. A prisoner or a suspect is moved from one island to another district; spends there two days to access maybe the ferry into another district. This is perturbing to the communities in the island. 

The other issue is the time taken to dispose of some of these cases especially civil cases, specifically land cases. Very many people die while still waiting to hear whether they have won their land cases and actually, some die because the cases take too long.

The behaviour of some of our magistrates concerning addressing justice is not commendable. It is only in court that someone is given an appointment to appear on a particular date, only to be informed that the case will not be heard, after appearing there. Some people drive long distances; from Kampala to Jinja, only to reach court and they are told that their case will not be heard on that day. So many people are suffering due to such scenarios. My humble prayer therefore is that every district should have a resident magistrate so that the time taken for some of these people to access justice is reduced. That is my submission and I would like to thank the committee once again for a job well done.

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Ssali comes, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, on the question raised by hon. Migadde: In the last election, some districts in Karamoja could not produce candidates because they were unable to travel to where the commissioner for oaths was, in Mbale, to take oath on their nomination forms.

It is a serious matter. Actually, there are many types of councils which are not filled due to that reason. Under our law, we can appoint a justice of peace to do that work. 

Elections are coming and I do not know what will happen. If there are no magistrates there, again the Karamojong will not be able to swear their nomination papers. We are disfranchising them. Please consider the issue of justice of the peace for all those areas, until we do the needful, through the appointment of magistrates.



6.21
THE PRIME MINISTE AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA): Madam Speaker, that is a very legitimate point. It deepens our democratic practices and Government will be more than happy to pursue this matter and make it simpler for people who intend to contest as candidates, to have easy access to all the legal requirements.

Therefore, we are soon coming to this House to look at electoral issues. In my view, that will be the right time to be able to do so. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: They could also look at the other legal issues without including the magistrate.

6.21
MR BAKER SSALI (NRM, Buikwe County West, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report. The committee covered the Ministry of Works and Transport, the Ministry of Education and Sports and talked about the environment and the Ministry of Water but there are other pressing issues. 

We have just handled the Kasokoso land issue. The rich are grabbing poor people’s land and this causes women and men to suffer; the children miss food due to scarcity of food and they are malnourished, among others. 

Human rights is a wide subject and very deep, which encompasses children, men and women and in that matter, children are being abducted, defiled, sacrificed but the report did not cover such issues.

There is also an issue about the environment and that is climate change. As you are well aware and from what we see, the temperatures here in Uganda and Kampala in particular have gone up from 32 to 40 degrees and there is no sign of rains coming. I therefore request that they should have covered the issue of the environment -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this report is evaluating the report of the Human Rights Commission. If they did not include the environment, this committee cannot bring it in. They are responding to the report of 2012.

MR SSALI: Madam Speaker, I am sorry about that but it is very unfortunate - 

THE SPEAKER: Raise it elsewhere but you cannot say that they should bring it. It is not in the report; they cannot respond to it.

MR SSALI: Madam Speaker, as you know -(Member timed out.)

6.24
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report presented. Since I have little time, I would like to specifically address myself on issues of children, particularly children who come in conflict with the law. 

The report has not covered much about the issues of remand homes. I really urge the committee to critically look at that. We have a remand home in Gulu, which is strictly - actually Government has abdicated the role. It is been run by the District Local Government and NGOs. I would like to remind the ministry that there are preparations underway and people are coming to demonstrate because those children cannot be taken to the main prison. It is left in the hands of local government and the parents or the districts have to contribute money to run the centre. This means it is actually a training center for criminals because bigger children are put together with minors and they are simply learning. Their welfare is not being catered for neither their education. The children run around because they cannot be taken to the main prison. 

I would like to comment a bit on issues of salaries. Salary is right but our civil servants are demoralised because of salaries. Leave alone the money paid being little, not enough to sustain them. The little does not come and the most affected are teachers and health workers. You know how critical areas of education and health are. 

Madam Speaker, one time, I went to Mulago hospital. I did not introduce myself as a Member of Parliament. I had taken a patient I brought from the village. On interaction with the doctor, when he learnt that I was a Member of Parliament, he completely changed. He started talking about his salary an issue that was not related to what I had gone to do. That shows the level of discontent and demoralisation of our civil servants. Let the little that is theirs be given.

Furthermore, I have realised that the problem regarding missing of names in the salary payroll are spelling mistakes, where someone changes from Adong to Odong. Those are two different people. You find people are being deleted from pay roll and they are not getting back.

Secondly, pensioners, our senior civil citizens are suffering because they cannot get pension. Even the current civil servants forget that they will also get out of service and move around looking for their pension. I think if we address this, we will be able to solve those issues - even if the money is little, it must be there.

Lastly, issues of land rights. Land has become a very sensitive issue. I do not know whether it is timing bomb. We need to revisit the land laws.  If there is ambiguity in the land laws, bringing all this suffering - In Nwoya District, I have pending evictions -(Member timed out.)

6.28
MR AMOS MANDERA (NRM, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee for the good report and I would like to address myself to emerging human rights concerns especially the plight of teachers. 

The committee recommended that the budget for education officers should be increased in order to facilitate, monitor and supervise learning institutions. It is true. However, I would like to say that some educational officers and inspectors have become predators to their teachers. A case in point is where some teachers’ salaries are infringed on by some micro finance institutions. 

We have a micro finance called B-Blue, where teachers who never applied for a loan neither guaranteed somebody find their salaries missing. I have more than six teachers in my constituency in a place called Kizinga Primary School. These teachers have missed their salary since July last year. Some time back, I went to the B-Blue, they said they admitted it is true but it is the CAO and his staff who make submission of such people who never applied for a loan. This is a very serious issue when addressing the issues of human rights. I think it is very pertinent. I would like to call upon the institutions especially the Ministry of Education and Sports to intervene and even the investigative arms of the government.

Secondly, I would like to comment on the prisons land. In rural areas, there is a tendency of lack of harmony between local leaders and the prisons. Where the prison has some land, you find if a sub county is to dispose of some piece of land, they encroach on that particular land. Sometimes you find the prison – if they had where to grow, maybe maize –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Isiko, Abwoli, Nyirabashitsi, hon. Katirima - 

6.30
MR WILSON ISIKO ASUPASA (NRM, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have personally visited a number of prisons; I have visited a prison in Iganga in my constituency, Pallisa, Kamuge, Malukhu in Mbale and interacted with the inmates. To some extent, they agree that there is improvement in the levels of communication between themselves and the prison warders. There is an attempt of humane treatment and to some small extent, they are taught something about human rights. Somehow, inside the prison, they are considered as human beings but as inmates. I thank the Uganda Prison Service, to some extent, there is a move towards treating prisoners as human beings but that said, there are still some gaps that need to be covered as submitted by various colleagues.

I would like to address myself to the issue of hard-to-live areas. There are areas in Uganda, which have been categorised as areas hard-to-live in and hard-to-work in; hard-to-be in. Those areas lack certain special amenities like good water, recreation and social services. 

There are police men who have worked in the far hard-to-reach areas like in Karamoja. They very much love to be transferred and also be brought to some areas where their children can get some education, which is different from what they get. Many of them resort to deserting forces because they do not have a way out. 

I am appealing to the managers especially the police force and the army, like they do for the soldiers who go to Somalia, bringing them back after year and take others. It is not humane to work in hard-to-reach areas for the whole of your life. Many of them feel so bad about the situation. They feel as if Government has forgotten them completely. 

I am also concermed about the issue of absenteeism of health workers. Uganda is –(Member timed out.)

6.33
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO	(NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I have three issues.

Isimba Prison is in my constituency and it is classified as  a commercial prison. I did take particular interest. Isimba produces maize, sunflower, sugar cane and beef - they breed cows. I was informed that most of these things go in to the feeding of prisoners especially covering Northern Uganda. 

Much as that is happening, you find the local prisoners are not properly fed as it has been mentioned by the committee. It is important that as they provide for others; they should also be catered for. 

Working or hiring out prisoners; they also told me they are clear rates -  how much do you should pay if you are going to hire out a prisoner to do some work for you, whether in your garden or elsewhere. This includes feeding and transporting them in addition to paying the warders who come to oversee them.

When I asked them what this money does or where it goes, I did not get a clear explanation but somehow, they said it trickles back to the consolidated fund. 

Madam Speaker, there is another angle to police accommodation that the committee has not looked at. If you visit all the barracks all over Uganda, most police officers have acquired plots within the barracks.

They started with mad and wattle and now they are building permanent houses. Even when they are transferred, they either sell these houses which they have built on police land, rent them out or continue living in them. Is this now Government policy that police officers -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nyirabashitsi, hon. Katirima and then we close the debate with hon. Ogwal.

6.35
MS SARAH NYIRABASHITSI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good work. I have about three areas to talk about.

I will start from where my colleague stopped, on the issue of teachers especially on B-Blue. It is very true; these people are cheating our teachers to an extent that even after paying the loan, they keep deducting and they have only one head office, which is in Kampala.

It is very expensive for a primary teacher to move all the way from Kisoro to Kampala so that they rectify their problem. This should be addressed.

It is very true, the prisoners work for people but I would like to be educated, at what age should somebody stop working or going to work for people because it is not in order for very old people to work and collapse in gardens.

Madam Speaker, one day, I was in Kabale Hospital and we met a very big group, I was with hon. Ronah Ninsiima. They told us their prisoner had died in prison.

When we inquired, they informed us that the person got the problem at night, they tried to call for help but there was no one to open. By the time they opened in the morning at 6.00 a.m., on taking the person to hospital, he had already died. Something should be done especially for the prisoners at night. Who is there to attend to them from inside, not outside?

Finally, I will talk about the issue of health, especially for the marginalised group like the Batwa. Madam Speaker, the Batwa also have a right to go to hospitals and no one stops them. However, they find it very hard to mix with other people. We have not put special facilities for them especially on the issue of -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: That is a minority group; half a minute for you explain the problem. (Applause)

MS NYIRABASHITSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I took one Mutwa to the hospital to give birth. She told me, “I cannot enter there.” I asked her, “What is the problem?” She said, “Now, you want these people to see me naked. Maybe you get for me a Mutwa who will look after me here.” It is a very big challenge. I do not know how we are going to address it. We got a doctor and took her to the theatre without her knowledge. We wanted her to produce because she was about to die.

Madam Speaker, this should be addressed. Those people who come from the Batwa -(Ms Ntabazi rose.)

THE SPEAKER: Their representatives. (Laughter)

MS NTABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, hon. Nyirabashitsi, for giving way. There is a time I reported in this House the level at which the pygmies are getting HIV/AIDS.

The challenge at that time was that they did not have food, though they were taking ARVs. The organisation that was taking ARVs to them was World Vision. For the last one year, World Vision has quit, because of the attitude that they have towards the general health services; they no longer take ARVs.

The pygmies are dying day in day out. They need special attention. I wish we had little health centre, whether II or where they can access drugs from within their community because they have centres called communities. So, within their community, we can put a facility so that these pygmies access health services.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Katirima -

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also represent Batwa in my constituency and I would like to agree with the concerns raised by my colleagues.  Recently, a group of the Batwa came to my house and demanded that they would like to come to Parliament and meet you, Madam  Speaker. 

I am putting you on notice that a group of Batwa would like to come and visit Parliament and interact with the Speaker; they would like to see how Parliament looks like.

THE SPEAKER: The Batwa are Ugandans; they are welcome. Let me know. I will organise tea and coffee for them. (Applause)

6.41
MAJ. GEN. PHINEHAS KATIRIMA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee and the Human Rights Commission for this report. I rise to comment on two areas; One, is paragraph 72 and 73 of this report about the NGOs.

We recognise that the Uganda Law Reform Commission noted their narrow space and they need to improve it. I have not noted that the Ministry of Internal Affairs, which is responsible for supervising the NGOs was consulted. Therefore, before we come to any conclusions, there is need to give them opportunity to say something on this issue. And when we are adopting these recommendations, we need to take into account that these NGOs also have something to hide. There are matters of national interest and the NGO Board is so small that it is not able to supervise them to know their activities.

Madam Speaker, the other area is about the adoption of this report. Will it be possible to pick out the issues, recommendations and the action areas by the different stakeholders for purposes of follow-up and accountability?

Who will do what on what recommendation? I propose in those two areas, one, the NGOs before we adopt this, at least let us also hear – as they say in my language that before you resolve the case of the “kawala”, also hear the case of the “kalenzi”. Meaning, before you decide in favour of the girl, why don’t you also hear the side of the boy? Before you support the NGOs, have you heard from the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the NGO Board about their role in promoting national interest and the delivery of services to the people of Uganda?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think that we should condition the passing of this report to the Ministry of Internal Affairs. They have a sectoral committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, which can handle that.

Human rights they are responding to what was in the 2012 report of the Human Rights Commission. They are not doing general research. They cannot just import things. (Ms Kamateeka rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson – 

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, in addition to what you are saying Ministry of Internal Affairs is one of the Government departments and ministries that came before the committee. So, we put these issues to them. 

THE SPEAKER: Clearly, under the Justice Law and Order sector? They are under JLOS. (Members rose_) I think we close with hon. Ogwal and the minister.

6.44
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to salute the committee for addressing issues that affect Ugandans regardless of their political leaning. This is a commendable job. I now agree that when you put a woman somewhere, you can expect quality work. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, gender equality is a human rights issue and needs to be addressed seriously by Ugandans. I hope that what you have been doing to strategise with the global leadership in order to broaden the arena to be occupied by women in leadership positions should not be neglected by Ugandans. And I hope that as we wait as Ugandans to see the Deputy Chief Justice take his or her position, I hope women are not going to beg for that position because that automatically belongs to a woman. I am yet to find out why out of very many slots; the Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister, one; Deputy Prime Minister, two; Deputy Prime Minister, two; Deputy Prime Minister, three; maybe there will be a forth and a fifth, and there is no woman there. Does it mean that women in the NRM do not yet qualify to occupy the Office of Prime Minister?

Can we be told that we are packed at the back seat of ministers of state? Therefore, can the government be accountable on that issue - because gender equality is a human rights issue? I hope that the committee would address this with seriousness.

Madam Speaker, the rights of civilians being abused by police is another area that I would like the committee to address. I am very happy that you have brought it on the Table for discussion but I am yet to receive from Government what has been done about Ingrid Turinawe’s breast issue and hon. Nabillah  Sempala skirt pulling issue because this is abuse of women in positions.

Hon. Nabillah Sempala whose shirt was pulled in public and Ingrid’s breast was squeezed in public by male police men –(Interjections) 

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, we discussed that matter here, in this House and condemned those actions. We did. Please, conclude.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hope that no breast will be squeezed from now on and no skirts will be pulled. I would like to ask, I know these issues have been dealt with but allow me to ask what the Ministry of Internal Affairs has done with a man called Arinaitwe who brutalised Dr Kiiza Besigye. I am yet to hear that. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you because I know that what the committee has addressed has touched all of us and particularly, our side of this House is very happy with the balanced report. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Of course, we shall expect a treasury memorandum from the government on this report but in the meantime, let me allow the honourable minister of Northern Ugandan to say a few words. 

6.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE (NORTHERN UGANDA) (Ms Rebecca Amuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought I would have spoken before Maama Cecilia Ogwal but since she has chosen to do that, it is fine. I would just like to put on record what is happening in Northern Uganda like the Members of Parliament have alluded to, that there are so many suicide cases especially in Acholi.

It is true that this war took over 20 years and we are discovering new things every day. Some of those issues have come up when people have got back home and they were not as many people in the camp. I agree with you that it must be handled. You will agree with me that in the PRDP I and II, NUSAF I and II, we only handled mostly the issue of resettlement of the people and infrastructural development but now we are looking at the soft issues and so forth.

I would like to ask ourselves as Members of Parliament, Northern Uganda has over 3000 NGOs and we agree with them that every NGO should give us what they intend to do. And most of them, honourable members, do say that they are going to handle issues likes pyscho-socio support but when you get to the ground, you do not get what they are doing.

In Northern Uganda, we have nicknamed some of them Nothing-Goes-On (NGO) and Madam Speaker, very soon I am going to bring another paper on NUSAF III, PRDP III but I want us as Members of Parliament to agree that if there is going to be a difference in Northern Uganda, the NGOs must be held accountable. They do not declare what they bring in the basket, they do not want to report to the districts but they are all there accounting on behalf of Northern Uganda but you do not get them on the ground.

Therefore, I would like to request –(Members rose_)– can you allow me to just bring out this point. I will give you an opportunity. I would like to request that we should not only talk about ourselves but let us look at what these partners are bringing.

Secondly, as Members and leaders, we should also see what we are telling our people. These people are so fragile that whatever you tell them affects them either positively or negatively. As we sit here, we find people in the villages telling the people of Northern Uganda, or in the Conference Hall in Kampala and everywhere, trying to tell people how bad their condition is and how they have suffered. Instead of bringing these people together and healing them, we are hurting them more. And for me, as a Minister of Northern Uganda, I have worked in these areas and I want us to join hands to make sure that we handle our people into the system of the healing process.  (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One more minute, hon. minister.

MS AMUGE: Madam Speaker, I would like to say this, pyscho-socio support will come in because they have not handled- you will see that in the PRDP III, NUSAF III, those are areas that are going to be handled. You will agree with me that we are ending this project and programmes now. They are not there.

The end of this financial year will not have PRDP II, NUSAF II but we want to make an undertaking that in the next phase some of those issues we are going to look at and we want to say –(Interruption)

MS EKWAU IBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I did not want to be a burden to the honourable minister. However, in the Eighth Parliament, this House was taken through - we sat down with all the planners of PRDP and specifically, the question of pyscho-socio support was an independent pillar of its own. PRDP has poured all the amounts of money that has been given; PRDP has done something - we do not refute but what happened to an independent pillar of psycho-social support? What happened to it, so that we would have healed part of these people and attended to some of them? Now, we are talking about PRDP III, NUSAF III and blaming NGOs. Let us not leave the issue of such an important fabric to the non-governmental organisations.

My clarification to the minister is what happened to an independent pillar of the psycho-social support in the effort to work out PRDP?

THE SPEAKER: Can I confirm that that matter was brought to the House and we endorsed it in that PRDP which you say is ending. We had serious arguments here but it was endorsed. I do not know where it disappeared to.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you and the honourable minister. Perhaps, the minister maybe excused as an individual but really the executive as a collective know the length and the breath we went through. In fact, UWOPA convened a meeting and we went through engendering that document called the PRDP and it kept coming up. It shocks us that now Government wants to associate and sympathise with the massive suicides that is taking place in Northern Uganda.

If only Government had heeded to the pleas of this Parliament that time, we would have embedded psycho-social support in all the infrastructure programmes we were going to do in Northern Uganda. This would not be happening. Therefore, my counsel to the honourable minister, who I would like to excuse as an individual but hold collectively as part of Government, is that if she would like to see a change, it is not about the NGOs, they are under no obligation at all. They will choose what to do but you and I are duty-bound.

Therefore, go and engender NUSAF at these formative stages, ensure that it has psycho-social support; do not be duped to that proposal that always comes up; that you will engender it at implementation; nothing ever gets streamlined at implementation. 

If you want to embed psycho-social support, if you want to engender, deal with vulnerable groups, deal with it at formation, at the borrowing of the money. Forget about the NGOs; leave them alone. They are not duty-bound to address your main problem. 

MS AMUGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I agree with the contributors that the NGOs should be left alone. However, we also agree that they are our partners. If it is by the agreement of this Parliament that we leave them alone, then it will be fine.

However, you remember that we gave assurances that a certain percentage would be handled by partners and another percentage maybe by Government. You choose what should be done yet they have refused to be accountable. I do not want to get into that. 

Madam Speaker, we are doing lot of consultations and we are meeting cultural leaders. I had a retreat with the Acholi cultural leaders for two days and they said there are issues that must come in and they would like to handle the area of reconciliation.

I met the Lango cultural leaders just a few days back; they have brought in their issues. We are meeting the women separately and they would like to bring in what they think must come in and other stake holders. It is not easy to do rehabilitation. Twenty years of war can bring very big damage. That is why I am saying that we will take obligation to make any adjustments that must be done.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I put the question that the report be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: We shall expect a treasury memorandum on all the issues from all the ministries. They should not just go to sleep.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF REPORT OF 
THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND (NSSF)

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the chairperson of the Committee on NSSF; I do not know where he is. There is a motion? We said I would give you time at the end of the day. What is your motion?

7.00
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker. This motion is moved under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. It is on your iPads and there are copies being circulated around for those who may not be able to open the iPad.

“WHEREAS objective II (i) and (ii) of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy have obligated the state to, among others, empower and encourage the active participation of all citizens as well as ensuring all Ugandans have access to leadership positions at all levels;

AND WHEREAS objective II (iv) of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy oblige the state to ensure that the composition of Government is broadly representative of the national character and social diversity of the country;

AWARE THAT Article 111(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda establishes a Cabinet consisting of the President, the Vice President, Prime Minister and such number of ministers as may appear to the President to be reasonably necessary for the efficient running of the state;

FURTHER AWARE THAT Article 113(1) of the Constitution imposes an obligation on the President on the Republic of Uganda to appoint a Cabinet with the approval of Parliament from among Members of Parliament or persons qualified to be elected as members of Parliament;

NOTING THAT in March 2015, the President, while exercising powers granted to him under Article 113(1) of the Constitution, appointed persons to serve in the Cabinet;

ALARMED THAT in the March 2015 Cabinet appointment, certain regions of Uganda, including Northern, Eastern and Central regions were not adequately represented in the Cabinet;

APPRECIATING the roles played by Members of the Cabinet in the development of their regions and country at large;

COGNISANT that the Parliamentary Appointments Committee, acting under Rule 155(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament is now scheduled to vet individuals and approve the Cabinet next week;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that:

    1) The parliamentary Appointments Committee takes not of the displeasure of the people of Northern, Eastern and Central Uganda about the regional imbalance in the appointment of this Cabinet;

    2) Until a more regionally representative Cabinet is appointed by His Excellency the President of Uganda to reflect, proper regional balance, taking into account the marginalisation of Northern Uganda and other areas, the Parliamentary Appointments Committee does not vet and approve the President’s appointed Cabinet because it violates the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy section II (i), (ii) and (iv) as stipulated in the 1995 Constitution of Uganda.”  Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, the whole of last week, we had a problem. The Chief Whip of the Opposition, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, said that debating very sensitive issues and serious department issues in Parliament, surely, we need quorum. 

This is a very wonderful debate, Madam Speaker -(Laughter)– bearing in mind that Mbarara is not there also, you know such happenings as far as the Cabinet are concerned. 

We do not have quorum. Are we procedurally right now to debate this important matter when we do not have the numbers in this Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I think this is the first time we are being asked to issue an injunction against ourselves. I think that is a very serious decision. Let me ask the Clerk to count before we proceed.  Yes, because issuing an injunction against our committee - that is what it says. It means that we are issuing an injunction against ourselves. The prayer is to stop the Appointments Committee from doing its work and that is an injunction. 

Please, count before we move because it is a serious motion - the first time we are telling ourselves, “stop your work.” This is new. (Members rose_) Let me hear from the Clerk. We are counting. (Members rose_)

After the debate, what do you want to do? You tell me which part of our rules gives us authority to issue an injunction against ourselves and then we shall debate. You tell us which part of our rules allows us to stop a committee of the House from doing its work. If you have got it, tell me and we proceed.

This is new. Honourable members there are 65 Members in the House; we do not have quorum. When we get the quorum, we shall debate it. (Laughter)  House adjourned. 
   
(The House rose at 7.08 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 18 March 2015 at 2 p.m.)
