

Tuesday, 10 March 2020

Parliament met at 2.09 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I just have a few issues to communicate. One is to inform you that the Government has issued a travel advisory against Ugandans travelling to the following countries: China, Islamic Republic of Iran, Japan, South Korea and Italy. I hope the public will adhere to this. If other countries get on the list, we shall inform you.

Secondly, I received a petition from the Uganda Motor Industry Association, in which they have an issue with the Government’s decision to renew the contract of SGS relating to motor vehicle inspection. The Uganda Motor Industry has an association of 10 members; they are importers of new cars. 

In the petition, they state that they have the capacity to do vehicle inspection and that they would like to be given an opportunity because their association is Ugandan. They also do not see the reasons for the Government to give preferential treatment to a foreign company when the same work can be done by Ugandans. To them, this should be done so under the Buy Uganda Build Uganda promotion. 

Therefore, I hope that the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives will advise us on the way forward and how Ugandans can benefit from this arrangement.

Thirdly, I received a petition from residents of Rwemisambya in Kitumbi sub-country who were violently evicted from their homes in August 2017 by the Mineral Protection Police and UPDF soldiers. They claim that while they were not leaving the mining area, they are either deliberately or accidently being targeted. 

Their homes, commercial buildings and merchandise were destroyed and families separated. They complain that since 2017, no effort has been made to review this situation to rehabilitate or compensate them. They claim that the properties that were not destroyed are now occupied by the UPDF yet these were either personal houses or commercial buildings. 

Their efforts to get assistance from the Head of the Mineral Protection Police by someone called Jesca Keigomba have been fruitless. They further claim that each time they have tried to go back to their buildings they have been beaten up.

They were here yesterday - they are asking the Government to respond to their issues; to tell them where they should go and how they should begin their lives again and that they should be compensated because they were not in the mining area yet they were evicted.

I take note that it is becoming a habit now. First, it was the Fisheries Protection Unit taking over the lakes of Uganda. Now, other police are taking over the minerals of Uganda. Yesterday, I was told that at Nawantale Market in my constituency, the Fisheries Protection Unit invaded the market - and not at the lake - and confiscated Moon fish commonly known as mukene. I do not know whether mukene is immature fish but mukene is mukene. Anyhow, you can see how much state-inspired violence is growing and going on with impunity.

Lastly, and this has to do with what was reported at the Women’s Day Celebrations by the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, on Saturday I visited the theatre at Mafubira  - and I was told that other theatres especially in Namutumba and Kamuli have been closed down because the donors withdrew from duty.

Unfortunately the minister is reporting that all of them are operational. Today I called the chief administrative officer at Kamuli and they confirmed that the theatres are no longer there – yes, the buildings are there but the services are no longer available. 

Therefore, I would like the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to take an interest in that situation to see that women, children and men who have suffered violence still have somewhere they can run to when there is a problem.

Now, there were a few matters of national interest – okay, let us start with hon. Othieno.

2.15
MR OTHIENO OKOTH (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to raise a matter of national importance regarding police brutality against the residents of Nagongera Town Council.

Madam Speaker, the residents of Nagongera are living in extreme fear for their lives after the Uganda Police Force imposed a door-to-door curfew in their area. And whoever is found out of their homes after darkness has set in, is indiscriminately beaten up. Even the business community are followed up in their shops and beaten up for refusing to close their shops, the moment it gets dark. 

We have only one clinic that operates 24 hours. Last week, police stormed that clinic and beat up the patients and health workers in there. The only reason was that they were operating after it had become dark.

Madam Speaker, it is now impossible for anybody to move around or to be found outside his premises in that area. Whereas there could be insecurity in the area, what police needs to do is to keep law and order and not to make life difficult for the people.

Whereas we have got a police station at Nagongera sub-county and a police post within that area, these operations are being conducted by policemen who are dropped in pick-up trucks from Tororo Police Station. When they come, they do not even liaise with the colleagues from the local police station; they just descend on whoever they come across and beat indiscriminately.

Madam Speaker, I have the following prayers to make:
    1. That an explanation from Government on why ordinary citizens from Nagongera Town Council and the neighbouring areas are being indiscriminately beaten up by the police should be given.
    2. We need police to maintain law and order and stop beating up people indiscriminately in the area. 
    3.  We need the curfew to be lifted with immediate effect because there is no state of emergency in that area because we do not know why the police have imposed the curfew there.
    4. Finally, Madam Speaker, we need remedies for these Ugandans whose rights have been violated through torture by Uganda Police officers, no matter whether collectively or individually. Those individuals need to be brought to book and if there is a way, they should be made to compensate those they have brutalised. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the Minister of Internal Affairs is required to come and explain those issues on Tuesday next week. Honourable members, it is now time for Ugandans to start suing those individual officers and not waiting to sue the Attorney-General but the individual officers. When they start to feel the pinch in their pockets and stand alone in the dock, they will understand they should not violent people’s rights.

2.18

MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a matter of national importance in respect of the Uganda Fish Maw Traders Association. We are in a liberalised economy but the Government of Uganda has entered into a protocol with the Government of China where they are restricting fish maw traders from exporting fish maw to any other country other than China. 

The traders have been exporting fish maw to various countries including Hong Kong and Malaysia. Now, Government has come up with a restriction and issued a directive through the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries over the export of fish maw only to China through a specialised business person, just the way they have taken over the water bodies. 

Whoever wants to export fish maw to international markets can only export to China through a licensed trader who must be working with people in Government. Our traders are stuck with their fish maw because they cannot export to any other international market other than China.

I would like to lay on the Table a draft copy of the protocol. It is even in draft but being executed by the Government of Uganda – (Interruption) – He is an expert in the area.

Mr masika: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I brought this information to Parliament some time last year. I am an expert in that I have moved with the Chinese who have been hunting for fish maws. 

This year, I brought information to Parliament and wanted the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to shed more light on this information but it was brought in a scanty way that fish maws are a delicacy eaten in China. I however explained the importance of the fish maws. 

A piece of fish maw, which is the equivalent of a kilogramme, can cost over US$ 50,000. I have been to Korea, Taiwan and Hong Kong and I know those people who buy it. They have been planning, the way my colleague has just mentioned, that they should be the autonomous buyers of that stuff. 

Last month, the minister explained in a very casual way that it is something, which is eaten. It is not just something that is eaten; it is an expensive asset. We have gold swimming – I cannot go back to it because I do not have time. If the Speaker gives me time, I can explain. I was here and explained the importance of the fish maw. 

If the Speaker can allow me –

The Speaker: No.

Mr masika: That is something, which is very important. Government or Parliament should make sure that our fish benefit our people. For example, the Members of Parliament who are around the lakes would be buying their machines. Otherwise, we are being looted while seeing. Thank you.

Mr mwiru: Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleague for the information. I beg to lay on the Table the draft protocol, which is not yet even ratified by the Government of Uganda but is being implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries together with the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. I beg to lay.

I also beg to lay on the Table a circular by the Director, Fisheries Department, Dr Lukunya Edward, communicating the restriction of dealing in fish maw export only to China through the company they have earmarked themselves. 

Our prayer is that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should come and explain to Parliament how they can restrict business when this is a liberalised economy, to an unidentified individual for their own benefit and therefore causing financial loss to our people who are in this sector. Thank you.

The Speaker: One would want to know whether it is the Government, which is actually in business. Can we ask the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to come and explain to the country why they have stopped Ugandans from exporting fish maws and why they are implementing a protocol that has not been ratified and is therefore not of the level of implementation in this country? This is just abuse. How can Government close the lakes and then say, you must sell to one person and export to one country? That is abuse of office. 

Therefore, the two ministers should jointly come on Wednesday to explain the issue of the fish maws. Fisheries will also feature there.

2.25
Mr henry kibalya (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I address myself to the issue concerning nursery bed operators and coffee farmers in Busoga Region. 

Every region has a field that it is specialised in. From history, the income for Busoga has been coming from coffee growing. It is of recent that sugarcane came in. 

Some farmers that specialise in planting coffee took over making nursery beds. They have received information that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries went and held a meeting in Jinja with a few people and said that nursery beds operators this time will not be supplying their seedlings to coffee farmers. In addition, coffee farmers that plant elite coffee will not receive coffee seedlings this coming season because they have phased it out. Instead, they want to go for coffee cuttings.

Every area has what it grows best. When you say that Busoga should go for coffee cuttings immediately and yet you have not taken them through and informed them about how to plant it - People have just removed their sugarcane, given the factors that are affecting sugarcane growing and have prepared their gardens to grow coffee. Then, the minister comes up to say, they will not give them coffee seedlings. Even the operators that invested money in their nursery beds cannot receive money. This is very disappointing – (Interruption)

Mr baseke: Thank you. I once worked in Busoga as a coffee officer. In November last year, after hearing rumours about the impending suspension of coffee seedling production, I raised an issue on the Floor of Parliament concerning the way Government would advise farmers. The Speaker directed the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to come and make a statement in regard to that issue. However, up to now, the minister has never come to make the statement.

Madam Speaker, we raise these issues concerning coffee but each time you direct the minister, he keeps quiet. The information I would like to give my colleague is that usually, clonal coffee thrives in areas with a lot of rain. It is the seedlings that survive in areas like Busoga where you have a lot of drought sometimes.

However, if you just stop the programme without informing the farmers, it is disastrous. 

Mr kibalya: Thank you, colleague. Hon. Baseke worked in that field for long so the information he was giving us is good; that it is only our seedlings that can survive in our region. The clonal coffee they want to introduce may not survive unless the Government has a clear programme for making the Basoga poorer. After frustrating sugarcane growing, they are now frustrating the growing of coffee. 

We need an explanation from Government so that they tell us the programme they have for the Basoga and we know whether theirs is different from ours. Maybe they are for another region and not Busoga region.

Our prayers are:
    1. We request Government to revisit the statement and have nursery bed operators supply the seedlings because they invested money in those beds.
    2. We also request Government to have the coffee farmers receive the seedlings to plant, more especially that we are getting the rainy season in April. Therefore, we request Government to have the farmers receive the seedling. 

Government wants to introduce the supply of clonal coffee in Busoga. However, we request that they first research and see whether clonal coffee grows in Busoga or the coffee cuttings they want to introduce can also work, before they come up with their programme that can benefit the Basoga, other than saying what they do not want – (Interruption) 

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give is that when the honourable Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries was trying to bring the Coffee Bill to the House, we met him as Buganda region. One of the proposals was that the minister should meet concerned regions over coffee. He promised that he was going to do so in order to meet regions and get the challenges, before they enforce the law of bringing the Coffee Bill. 

However, I am surprised that he went to Jinja without fulfilling the promise of meeting regions and understanding their concerns over coffee growing. Therefore, I second you, my colleague.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you can see how lack of planning is affecting the agricultural sector. I think the Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is going to the nursery operators and the people of Uganda to address the issues raised by hon. Kibalya. Apart from trying to zone Busoga in sugar, now coffee and the fishing, what is left? 

The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should come on Wednesday and explain to us these issues. I have noted that the Minister in charge of Fisheries has come. I do not know whether she has come to respond to the fish maws. 

2.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Hellen Adoa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For the issue of coffee, I will make sure that we bring the report on Wednesday.

Going back to fish maws or swim bladders, it has been a challenge and those who deal in it want to be allowed to gut fish at the landing site. First of all, the EU market is very concerned about the quality of fish fillet. It is a bit challenging for us to allow the gutting of fish around the landing site. 

Most of these traders, who are petitioning  Parliament and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, do not understand that it is not only China that needs the fish maws; other countries would want the fish maws because of its functions. I know, soon, when we bring the Fisheries or Fish Bill to Parliament, it will answer most of these issues. 

However, at the moment, what some fish traders do is that when they go to the lake and get the fish, they gut the fish within the waters. They also get the fish maws, put it in their pockets and then put the fish – (Interruption) 

MR ILUKOR: Madam Speaker, I am just seeking a small clarification from the honourable minister. Honourable minister, maybe, you were not in the House when the honourable member raised the issue on a liberalised economy; why we liberalise and then we again cross. He was also referring to exporting to only one destination - China. Therefore, we could get proper information and then you possibly give us an answer at an appropriate time. Thank you. 

MS ADOA: Thank you for the clarification. That is why I was saying that we all know that China has been getting this but at the same time, why are other countries not getting the fish maw? It is because of the way it is handled. Therefore, we are trying to see how to harmonise it. Then, when we pass the Bill, we can be able to send or export the fish maw to even other countries. For now, why is it only China? It is because of the way it is being handled. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think it is important that you look at the Hansard and get the issues raised because there is a draft memorandum between the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Government of China on the export of fish maws. It is giving monopoly to one company in Uganda to sell only to China, not to India or Japan.

MS ADOA: Madam Speaker, let me come back on Thursday with the right answer, since we shall be handling the one of coffee on Wednesday. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. The Clerk should arrange and give the copy of the draft protocol to the minister as well as these letters.  

2.34
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I rise on an urgent matter concerning the Uganda Police Force, Northern Uganda. At present, the logistics, especially the vehicles (the pickups) that facilitate Uganda Police Force in Northern Uganda are mostly virtually broken down. 

I visited Gulu Central Police that coordinates most of the work in Northern Uganda only to find that police cannot effectively manage their work, because all the vehicles do not have tyres. They cannot get out of police stations because of tyres.

I was told that ever since the pickups were delivered, up to date, the Ministry of Internal Affairs has never replaced those tyres that came with those vehicles. It is now five years and it is a crisis. 

We would like to know from the Minister of Internal Affairs how and why they could spend over five years without putting a single tyre on these police pickups, and yet they are doing a lot of work in terms of managing and protecting law and order in this country. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to come and update the country on the state of police motor vehicles countrywide on Thursday next week. 

2.36
MR FRED BASEKE (Independent, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter I raise is in regard to a senior citizens’ grant. Parliament unanimously resolved to have a national rollout of senior citizens grant also known as Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE). It was supposed to be rolled out in the financial year 2019/2020 but it was not possible. 

When we are considering the national budget framework paper, we resolved to have this rolled out in the financial year 2020/2021. However, when the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development brought the second budget call circular, this money was not provided for, yet Parliament resolved that we should have this senior citizens’ grant rolled out in the whole country and the districts. 

Madam Speaker, paragraph 15 of the budget’s call circular talks about having this funding gap met within the existing ministerial sector budget. This means without providing the Shs 45.58 billion, we are not going to have the national rollout. 

Two days ago, during the International Women’s Day celebrations in Mbale, His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, launched the national rollout but when you look at the resources, they are not provided for. 

As Parliament, we may have another year of not having a national rollout. In some constituencies in Kayunga, we already have the SAGE but in some places, this rollout is not there. Some people are using it against Members of Parliament. I have heard somewhere where they told the public that their Members of Parliament have not signed for this money for the elderly and that is why they are not getting it. Therefore, if we do not have the national rollout, colleagues here are going to suffer.

My prayers are: 
    1. That the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which is supposed to provide the resources, makes a statement in regard to the national roll out. 
    2. As Parliament, we should insist on the national rollout in the financial year 2020/2021. 
I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it was very exciting to listen to the President on Sunday saying that he has launched the national rollout. Really, we want the Minister for Gender and Finance to confirm to us that the money is actually available and that what the President launched is actual -

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, the reason why the age was lifted to 80 rather than 65 was so that we use the resources that are available for national rollout. In addition, we have been told that national rollout starts now in 2019/2020. Please, let us not say 2020/2021 because the promise was 2019/2020 and all our people were registered and expecting this money before the end of the financial year. That is the information I wanted to give you.

THE SPEAKER: So, let the Minister of Finance confirm to us that the money is actually available because we were there when it was being rolled out and we were very happy. We want to be sure that the money is actually available. Minister, do you have the information or you want the one of finance to speak about it?

2.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (GENDER AND CULTURE) (Ms Peace Mutuuzo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have some funds to implement the rollout for the whole country from January this year -(Interjection)- I know January passed. However, the funding is availed. By the time it was availed, there was some work that we had to do to prepare. When we begin paying, we shall pay the whole country from January 2020, even to places that had not been rolled out.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, let us go to item 3(I) 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON DECENTRALIZATION OF SERVICES OF THE NATIONAL INFORMATION AND REGISTRATION AUTHORITY (NIRA)

THE SPEAKER: Not there. 3(II)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE REPORTING OBLIGATIONS ON THE STATUS OF WOMEN IN REGARD TO THE 64TH SESSION OF CSW AND IMPLEMENTATION OF UNSC RESOLUTION 1325
2.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT((GENDER AND CULTURE)(Ms Peace Mutuuzo): Madam Speaker, you will recall that at the 13th Sitting of the 3rd Meeting of the 4th Session of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda held on Thursday 13th February 2020, the House sought clarification from the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development on whether Uganda was up to date with its reporting obligations on the status of women in light of the impending 64th Session of the Commission on the Status of Women (CSW) slated for 9th - 20th March 2020 in New York, United States of America; and, directed the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to brief the House on the implementation of the United Nations Security Council Resolution (UNSCR) 1325 and preparations for the third plan of action.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving us this opportunity to present to you the status on these two issues.

The Government of Uganda is a signatory to a number of international instruments on gender equality and women's empowerment. 

Key among these includes the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women (UN CEDAW) which Uganda ratified in 1985 without reservations and the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. 

The Government of Uganda, under the leadership of the National Resistance Movement (NRM) has been consistent in its pursuit for gender equality and the empowerment of women. 

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is responsible for coordinating the periodic reporting on the progress made in the implementation of these instruments. 

Status of Reporting Obligations
Madam Speaker, our obligations to the provisions of the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) are well embedded in the legal, policy and planning framework of the country. 

The provisions of the convention have been embedded in Uganda Vision 2040, the Second National Development Plan II and sector specific policies and strategies including the Social Development Sector Plan.

Madam Speaker, Uganda submitted its initial report to the committee in 1992; then its Combined Second and Third Periodic Report in 2020 and its Combined Fourth, Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Periodic Report in 2010. 
After the review, the committee gave Uganda concluding observations to which we are required to provide a report on our consideration and implementation.

The next report was due in October 2014 and as such the Combined Eighth and Ninth Periodic Report covers the period 2010 to 20l8. The Combined Eighth and Ninth Periodic Report was presented to and approved by Cabinet on January 27, 2020. The Combined Eighth and Ninth Periodic Report were submitted to the UN Committee on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against Women through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

Madam Speaker, I would like to lay a copy of this report on Table.

Madam Speaker, Uganda is committed to the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. The Government of Uganda has every after five years, submitted national reports on progress made on its implementation. 

In June 2019, the national report was submitted representing measures undertaken in partnership with all stakeholders for the period 2014-2019.


Madam Speaker, I would like to lay a copy of this report on Table.

In addition, the Government of Uganda delegation to the 64th Session of the Commission on the Status of Women has organized a side event to present Uganda's report on the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action.

Due to roaming threat of the Coronavirus, participation at the CSW has been scaled down to the permanent missions only and all side events have been cancelled.

Implementation of the United Nations Security Council Resolution 

Madam Speaker, the Government of Uganda is committed to the implementation of the United Nations Security Council Resolution (UNSCR) 1325 that was adopted by the global community in October 2000. The resolution requires parties in conflict situations to prevent violations of women’s rights, to support women’s participation in peace negotiations and in post-conflict reconstruction, and to protect women and girls from sexual and gender-based violence.

Madam Speaker, the Government of Uganda was one of the first countries to adopt the resolution and has so far implemented two National Action Plans (NAPs) on UNSCR 1325. The first National Action Plan (NAP I), from 2008 to 2010 on the UNSCR 1325 was adopted in 2008 and implemented up to 2010. In 2010, Uganda adopted its second NAP (NAP II), whose implementation ended in 2015.

The evaluation of the implementation of NAP I and NAP II in 20l7, indicated that there is fairly satisfactory performance in terms of enactment of laws and formulation of policies on ending GBV, enhancing capacity of duty bearers, improving access to health services and strengthening the reporting and referral pathways. However, there are notable gaps with regard to implementation and enforcement of laws and institutional reforms partly resulting from limited resources allocated for GBV programmes across the sectors.

Uganda has also registered notable increase in representation and participation of women in political leadership and decision making. However, there are still gaps in regard to women’s participation and representation in peace building and conflict resolution.

In 2019, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, with the support of UN Women and the Embassy of Norway, embarked on the participatory and consultative process for the development of the NAP III on women, peace and security. The draft NAP III on the women, peace and security is in place and is due for presentation to the ministry’s top policy management, which will be in March 2020 for approval. The implementation of NAP II will require multi-sectoral collaboration and coordination.

Madam Speaker, this is the status on the Uganda’s reporting obligations on the status of women and on the implementation of the UNSCR 1325 and preparations for the third NAP on women, peace and security. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. First of all, we would like to finally say, “Thank you.” This is the first time in over 30 years that the Government has laid the report on the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW). We have been demanding for this for very long but finally, they have complied. So, we shall be sending this to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development because the CEDAW committee expects Parliament to make comments before you send it to New York. However, you have already sent it; but for the future, you are required to come here first before you go to New York. It is here and we shall send it to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for their comments.

We also want to thank you for the plan of action; we hope that Parliament will be consulted in the formulation of the third plan of action. Honourable minister, I hope that we shall be consulted on the third plan of action because you have been doing it on your own and I think that it is important that Parliament is consulted. Are there any few comments on the matter, honourable members?

2.54
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for bringing this report. I am more interested in the UNSCR 1325 on women, peace and security. I would like to agree with you that the issue of the action plan to be shared is critical. In Uganda now, a lot of land issues have been raised and we do not understand where the women are in all those arrangements. People are being displaced and women are suffering more.

I would like to remind the House that I sit on the Agenda 1325 in Djibouti, representing this Parliament on the issues of women, peace and security in the region. So, I would like to encourage the minister that we need to share a lot of information about women because we tend to base ourselves on gender-based violence, and we leave the status quo on issues of women that are really affecting us. 

When you come to the political arena, Madam Minister, you have not gone to the real actions - how are women affected in terms of their participation in the political arena? We also know that some people have lost their families because of wanting to participate in politics. And we need to critically see how to put some stop gaps to ensure that the women are not mistreated in their homes.

The other issue is on peace and security; as issues happen in most of our areas, I know that we are doing a lot under the Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) but we need to see how we can progress. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, as we listen to hon. Nsereko, join me in welcoming a delegation of district speakers and deputy speakers. Are you the ones? Please stand up. They have come from the entire Ankole sub-region and they are here in Kampala on a study tour and are here to observe our proceedings. (Applause) You are welcome.

2.56
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Security of women is important but we should also envisage their economic empowerment. At the moment when you look at small businesses all over the country and internationally, women and mothers are the backbone of household factories. So, further empowerment of women through access of cheap capital is one of the ways to improve, not only their personal security, but also their economic security. There should be growing concern in the growth of single parents; many countries have adopted the policy of compelling men to do what we call cost-sharing. Wherever you deposit a child, you do not abandon them; they either attach part of your salary or wages wherever you are in order to promote child support. You find that Members of Parliament have become the fathers of – (Interruption)

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and my honourable colleague, for getting this information. As a researcher, I have come across and we now have more single mothers than ever before. So, the country has got many single mothers and they are carrying the burden of these fatherless children. Many of the men due to low income and others for being unemployed just produce these children and abandon them to the women. 

Therefore, there are a lot of challenges, which are being faced by the single mothers.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, hon. Ruhunda. This one is saying that it happens in towns. I know that Madam Speaker meets very many persons that are in such dire situations but as we are talking about this matter, it reminds us the issue of protection of the girl child, mainly those that drop out of school early as a result of lack of sanitary towels. 

When you talk about women, you need to realize that the process of having a woman starts from the protection and upbringing of the girl child. If you give them confidence that society cares about them, they can definitely realize personal security and confidence, not only to participate in politics but also to harness the education that has been fostered by this regime. If we want them to be in school, then it is also important to look at their personal hygiene. 

Another issue is about the maternity leave, mainly in the private sector. Very many women that work in various factories have complained that whenever they go to give birth, they do not find their jobs available. Not because they are not competent but because the laws are not fully enforced. 

We call upon the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to further enforce the issue of job security for women that go on maternity leave. 

Finally, let me say something about promotions in various sectors, whether security forces or any other Government sectors. Government should play the lead role to see to it that many women that have competence – we have seen many competent women – are given the due promotions that they deserve. In so doing, they will help in the promotion of others; giving them confidence and awareness. 

Madam Speaker, we used to have the women conferences and workshops at different levels, for example, at sub-county and parish levels. Let us try as much as possible to create awareness through sensitising women on their rights to land ownership, to inheritance and many others. 

We also need to encourage religious leaders, wherever they are, to preach to the people and society that women are an integral part of society and indeed, a backbone to society. 

3.00
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to say that I am also an ardent supporter of the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women.

However, as a researcher, like my colleague, I have realised that women and men need each other. The gender ministry should not be lopsided; much effort is being given to women. Research has it that many men are committing suicide because of lack of attention; they also need empowerment. (Laughter)

We have an international men’s day, which is supposed to be celebrated on 19th November but the ministry is oblivious of it. The ministry ought to wake up and know that men and women need each other to – 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I am sure the minister has heard. Now, please join me in welcoming students from Kampala University, represented by hon. Ibrahim Kasozi and hon. Nabilah Naggayi. (Applause) You are welcome. 

3.02
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the voices of the others in thanking the minister for the report presented but to also request the House to take keen interest. Much as we talk about violence against women, these men were talking about single mothers. 

There is another group; the widows, especially in some cultures where when a husband dies, they are sent away and upon that, the widow will leave her children and/or will go to suffer with them. Most of them are not confident. Some of them do not have jobs from which to earn a living. When the husbands die, they take all the property from them and/or some of them are sent back to their fathers’ homes. Some of them hide and suffer with the children because of challenges. 

My prayer is that the responsible minister should take keen interest and research on them in order to see how we can equip them especially through economic empowerment. 

3.04
MR ABDULATIF SSEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Empowering women is a matter of paramount importance. I agree with my colleagues who talked about society having so many single mothers. 

From an educational point of view, our women have a lot of responsibilities. For us who run schools, you may have a child for six years but without seeing the father yet he is alive. Whether it is on an open day, a visitation day or class day, the women always outnumber men. 

In my constituency, I promised – and there is a prize – that whenever I attend a school function and the men outnumber the women, all the men will receive Shs 10,000 each. This is now my fourth term since I made that promise, but I have never given out any money. Whichever function I go to, women outnumber the men –(Interruption)

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you, honourable, for allowing me to give you information. The information I would like to give is that another scenario occurs during baptism of children. The men are never there, even at the point of going for the baptism classes. 

One of the priests came up with a resolution that on the day of baptism, the father is the one to carry their child. This has started forcing some men to be more responsible because on the day of baptism, without the man, children cannot be baptised. 

Unfortunately, now some of the ladies have started hiring boda boda riders to stand in for the fathers of their babies. 

MR SSEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, for that information. Madam Speaker, even on immunisation days, it is only the women who go there. Even when women are going to hospital to deliver, you hardly find men accompanying them yet their presence would be very encouraging. 

Finally, let me talk about financial literacy for the women. Women have been exploited in terms of financial literacy and getting money for their business. 

In Kampala right now, there is a project we are piloting. It is an interest-free project. We are looking at women from markets. Kampala has almost 300 markets. 

We have decided that in the morning every woman in a market picks Shs 100,000; the number is very big but they pick this money and bring it back in the evening without any profits. We are trying to implement some kind of Islamic banking. 

We have so many women in Kampala whose capital is between Shs 50,000 or Shs 100,000 but they are looking after families. We are piloting that project. We have now covered up to 120 markets. 
Madam Speaker, these women are very trustworthy. We do not demand any collateral from them but in the evening, they return the money. Then the following day, they come and get more money, go and sell their things and come back without any collateral. 

Madam Speaker, if we empower women and push them, they can be a strong backbone for our economy because they are honest, trustworthy and dependable. If we fast track the opening of Islamic Banking, women are going to benefit a lot. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I hope the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development can tell us why Islamic Banking is not working. I thought they did the regulations.

3.09
MS ANNA ADEKE (Independent, Youth Representative, National): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the report. It is a pity that at the time of the Commission on the Status of Women (CSW), the coronavirus impeded the active participation of the ministry and Members of Parliament because I think this year’s theme was a very powerful one. Nonetheless, I thank the minister for presenting the statement.

I would like to move the minister to expand the understanding of violence against women to include the deliberate denial of access to property and enjoyment of property rights to women. Many women - maybe by reason of culture or religion - do not have access to property. The succession laws do not favour women ownership of property. I think that violence against women should be expanded to include the violence they face when they want to access ownership of property.

Madam Speaker, as the minister may know, without access to many of these resources – these factors of production like land – women are locked out of the production cycle and they are reduced to beggars. They use land without owning it and therefore, not much can be harnessed from their efforts on such factors of production. 

Since you are in the ministry that also has the cultural institutions, I would like to see cultural institutions – down to the clan level – amend the way they distribute property and ownership of property because many women have been locked out. Actually, it should be classified as violence against women’s economic rights. Thank you.

3.11
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to look at it from a balanced perspective. When men marry women who are muscular, the women mistreat them and they never report. (Laughter) Since the men never report, it is assumed that it is the men who are mistreating women throughout. 

Madam Speaker, I have seen a number of video clips where women are actually mistreating and battering men and the men have never reported. 

The other aspect is to do with culture. For example –(Interruption)

MS OPENDI: Thank you, hon. Nzoghu, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I need some clarification from hon. Nzoghu as to whether he is experiencing this violence. I would like to know whether his wife is muscular and is harassing him. (Laughter)

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, actually I alluded to the fact that I have seen a number of video clips. For me, I handle my woman properly. (Laughter) I have seen a number of video clips and that is what I was referring to. It is not me but I was trying to advocate for men who are being battered and they have not reported anywhere, and women assume that they are the only ones who are being battered.

Madam Speaker, the second scenario is the one to do with culture. With the Karimojong, for example, before you marry, you must do some reasonable wrestling. If the woman defeats you, it means you will never marry –(Interjection)– Yes. (Member timed out.)

3.14
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. The right to life is very important. Recently, we saw many women being killed in Wakiso, Kampala, Masaka and other areas. I expect the minister to come here and tell us about that. If you are talking about the status of women, we also need to know the status of the investigations into the murders of these women. One of them was Nagirinya. 

We have not heard anything. It is as if nothing has ever happened. The families and the women fraternity are concerned. We would like to hear what Government is saying and how these investigations have been carried out. Some people were arrested. We would like to know those who were arrested, what the charges were and the status of these cases.

Madam Speaker, in political parties, women are still discriminated against. When political parties are registering, they talk about gender but when it comes to actual implementation, they are not in tandem with the national Constitution, which says that one-third of the leadership must be women. I think there should be a checklist with a view of deregistering some of these political parties if they are not in tandem with the national Constitution. Thank you.

3.17
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari North County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and the NRM Government for empowering women.

Madam Speaker, one way to empower women is to empower the girl child and the best way you can do it is through education. Girl children in rural areas and disadvantaged districts are suffering and are not exploiting their potential. 

I will give an example of the recently released ‘A’ Level and ‘O’ Level exams. There are some districts in this country, which registered zero girls in first grade. It is not because these girls are dull or are not studying hard but because of the conditions in these rural areas. I am sorry to given the example of Buhweju District, which registered no girl in first grade in the recently released ‘O’ Level results. 

When you look at sciences, girls are still marginalised. They are not performing well like the boys. I would like to therefore urge the minister to look at those factors and see how to help the girl child. Honourable minister, good enough, you are a woman. You know the problems you face. The Government should introduce special programmes for the girl child especially in the rural areas and disadvantaged districts. Thank you very much.

3.18
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement.


I would like to address myself to Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme, which is a major effort by Government to improve the economic standard of women.

Madam Speaker, consultations with the various women groups in my constituency showed that this project has brought positive impact to women. Particularly, it has increased their earnings, which has enabled them to pay school fees for their children. However, there were a number of challenges.

One of the challenges is that the money is not adequate. The money that is given is about Shs 5,000,000 and yet this money is shared between 10-15 women. They reported that this money is inadequate.

The second challenge they highlighted is that most of the women who benefit from this funding are those who have a bit of education. The most illiterate women in the group do not access this money; the most vulnerable. Therefore, I think Government should come up with an effort to ensure that there is a bit of sensitisation.
There is also another challenge of lack of practical skills. Many times, when they get this money, some of them do not use it well and at the end of the day, it does not benefit them.

In addition, there is a challenge to do with lack of trust of the district and subcounty officials. Many of the women complained that when they go for this money, they are required to pay some bribe especially, the women that cannot fill the application forms. In fact, they also reported that too much paper work is a challenge.

Madam Speaker, I would like to encourage the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to have engagements with those in charge of this programme at the districts and subcounties. Otherwise, they seem to be frustrating the programme at the lower level. I would like to also appeal to the Government to put more money in that project so that more women can benefit from it.

Madam Speaker, the assessment of this programme is based on whether women pay back the money since it is a revolving fund. Government should therefore not focus on whether women pay back but focus on the impact of this money on the women. Otherwise, the most important aspect is whether the fund has brought change in the lives of the women not whether the women are able to pay it back. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.21
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM,	Gomba West County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to talk about two things. The first is that I would like to commend you, Madam Speaker, for the day-care centre we have. It is a very good example. I have been thinking that we should publish it on the television so that other institutions can take it on.

Madam Speaker, I gave birth when I was in the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. We had only 45 days of leave, which was one and half months. You would ensure that you forfeit your annual leave and add it on the maternity leave so that you could get leave of two and half months. We had to actually negotiate with our bosses so that we could come early and work up to around 2.00 p.m. and then take off the day to go and continue breastfeeding.

Madam Speaker, to be able to sit here, go and breastfeed and then come back means that you can get the full attention of female members, which is commendable. As a member of the Uganda Association of Women Lawyers (FIDA-Uganda), we used to allow women to come with their maids so that the mother can go in the hotel room and breastfeed the baby and then come back. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for that initiative. Let us now see how to sell it to others.

My second concern is on violence against women. Madam Speaker, when I presented that report, you were not here, but issues regarding violence against women have continued to come up. The report we presented here was on sexual harassment against school children in primary, secondary, tertiary and university. 

Madam Speaker, if it is not too much, I am requesting that this Parliament should have a standing committee on violence against women. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we have other things on the Order Paper. However, I would like to concur with hon. Rwakoojo. 

I have been able to market the day-care centre to the Speakers in East Africa and Commonwealth. I think it is important that we publish it more so that other agencies can pick it up. The police have been telling me that they are also going to borrow from us, and do something at the police headquarters and police stations for the women officers to be able to go with their children there. I think we need to talk about it more. Thank you. Let us now go to item 3 (III)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE WILDLIFE ACT

3.24
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Col (Rtd) Tom      Butime): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the Speaker and all members of this House for passing the Uganda Wildlife Act, 2019. The Act came into force on 27 September 2019 following its assent and gazettement.

The Act provides the legal framework for the ministry and lead agencies especially, Uganda Wildlife Authority to conserve and sustainably manage wildlife resources of Uganda for the benefit of the people of Uganda and the global community.

Madam Speaker, since the enactment and gazettement of the Act, the ministry has and continues to undertake deliberate efforts to sensitise the general public about the Act.  We have placed sensitisation jingles about the new Act on the following radio stations in local languages: 

    1. Radio Pacis 
    2. Radio Hoima
    3. Voice of Kigezi
    4. Voice of Toro
    5. KFM
    6. Radio Simba
    7. Atekere FM
    8. Kasese Guide Radio
    9. Unit Radio
    10. Kikara FM
    11. Rupiny
    12. Packwach FM

We have also placed billboards and posters highlighting key issues in the new Wildlife Act in major towns including Kampala Kasese, Mbarara, Gulu, Jinja, Mbale, Fort Portal and others. The posters have been printed and distributed all over the country in English, Acholi, Alur, Langi, Luganda, Lukonzo, Lugbara,   Lumasaba, Rufumbira, Runyoro, Rutoro, Runyankole, Rukiga and Karimojong languages. We are committed to translate key aspects and clause in the Wildlife Act in all Uganda languages –

We have planned in the coming budget 2021 regional sensitisation workshops in all regions of the country to popularise the Wildlife Act so that the general public is aware of what the law says.

I wish also to inform the House through you that sections 82 and 84 in this Act provides for compensations. My ministry has started the process of developing regulations to operationalise this and other clauses.

We could not start with compensation scheme without first accumulating funds into the compensation fund as envisaged in the section 83 of the Act, as well as regulations to guide the management of the compensation fund.

We started with setting aside 22 per cent with the wildlife revenue into the compensation fund starting this financial year 2019/2020.

Therefore, the fund will only have some money at the close of this financial year in July 2020. By this time we shall have also finalised compensation regulations, which are now under formulation.

Similarly, the revenue sharing regulations are now being reviewed following the change of the law. The review process will also have been finalised by July 2020.

The matter raised by hon. Bintu Jalia on elephants invading Kiruli Parish in Masindi District from Murchison Falls National Park and consequently the issue raised by hon. Agaba Abbas on elephants invading Kitagwenda from Queen Elizabeth National Park are regrettable incidences.

These incidences have been effectively responded to and elephants successfully brought back into the respective protected areas; that is Queen Elizabeth National Park and Murchison Falls National Park.
	
Effort is being made to stop any such incidents not only in Kiruli Parish Masindi and Kitagwenda but in all other areas neighbouring the wildlife protected areas.

We are progressively implementing all the measures enumerated here on the Floor of Parliament, by my predecessor hon. Ephraim Kamuntu, a few months ago on this subject including electric fencing, trenches, beehive lining on boundary, scare shooting, use of chilli cakes among others.

We have already established 20 kilometres of electric fence in Rubirizi District, an additional 25 kilometres of electric fence is being erected in Kasese. Fifty kilometres of electric fence will be erected around the Murchison Falls National Park starting this financial year and running into the next to cover the hotspot elephant crossing points. 

We continue to dig trenches and encourage neighbouring communities with national parks to engage in bee-keeping which is not only an animal intervention measure but also a livelihood project as it generates income for the communities through sale of honey.

The issue of human wildlife conflicts has been discussed here on this Floor a number of times. It is a very big problem but I would like to assure you that the matter is being addressed despite the limited resource envelope. 

Our pre-occupation is to prevent such incidences and where we fail we shall compensate using the compensation fund established under the Uganda Wildlife Act, 2019.

As you know, we have successfully recovered the wildlife population that had almost gone into extinction during the political turmoil this country went through. In 1983, Uganda had only 2,000 elephants left of the 30,000 that we had in 1960.

As of today due to sound conservation policies of the NRM Government, we have managed to turn the tide and recovered the population to 6,000 and it is still growing as it is the case with other species.

On the other hand, the human population is equally growing at an unmanageable level. We had only 13.74 million people in 1983. 

Today we have 42.86 million Ugandans. What has remained constant is the land size and this is the root cause of the conflict.

Finally, we have a collective duty as leaders to protect and conserve the wildlife for our own ecological and socio-economic benefit and at the same time have a duty to protect our peoples’ lives and property. 

It is a delicate balance that needs support from all of us and as Government we stand committed to ensuring peaceful and harmonious coexistence between wildlife and people. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister especially for informing us about the progress in the implementation. We could have one or two comments.

3.36
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the report on the progress of the implementation of Uganda Wildlife Act. 

We had a meeting about electric fencing of the parks but so far the report we are getting shows that nothing has started and the dialogue with the communities around the park, especially those who have a problem with the boundary, is still wanting. 

Specifically on the problem animals, we have game rangers as the minister stated that they respond swiftly on the elephants incursion but I would like to report to him that these rangers are either lazy or do not want to work.

They recruited scouts who are local volunteers; in the past years they were being supported with gumboots, raincoats and some local guns out of matchsticks.

However, for the last one year these youth run around in the night chasing elephants barefooted without any protection; this work is supposed to be done by rangers but they are not being paid. Honourable minister, your rangers run way; they are behaving like the police. If you call them that there are elephants around, they want you to transport them. They want you to feed them. They want you to house them and do everything for them and yet you will be running around together with them, still chasing the elephants.

In the end - maybe you need to step up; either recruit more rangers or closely supervise them. Let them do the actual work. This business where the work of most of these security men is relegated to auxiliary forces or some groups created and yet the actual people getting money are elsewhere, is not right.

For this particular group, honourable minister, I suggest that since revenue-sharing is sent to the district with guidelines and conditions, you would condition the district to give even one per cent to these people because this money is given. However, most districts use it for maybe – some buy goats and some projects but others construct schools. However, if you could pick just 2 per cent of this money you have sent to a district to be used to motivate –(Member timed out.)

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I equally thank the minister for his statement. However, there is the aspect of the community wildlife committees in conservation areas. These have not yet been established. In conservation areas, especially in these local governments, it is a requirement under the law that we have these committees.

I would like to find out from the minister, as part of implementing the Act, when these committees will actually be in place in the conservation areas. I thank you.

3.40
MR ROBERT NTENDE (Independent, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, honourable minister, for the statement. As members of Parliament who represent constituencies surrounded by water, part of our area is surrounded by Lake Victoria. Most of our people have been attacked and eaten by crocodiles. Most of the victims are women and children because they go to the lakeside to fetch water for domestic use. However, in your statement, we have not really heard that particular solution to our families and people who are being eaten by the crocodiles.

For instance, in my constituency, I register about two cases every month. Your ministry had started construction of some protected areas where people can go and fetch water and are not attacked by crocodiles. I pray that as you move by your statement, you also consider the people along the lakeshores. I thank you.

3.41
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have one specific concern that the minister and his ministry need to attend to on the issue of compensation of victims. Most often, colleagues have come here to complain. They talk of people who have lost lives to the animals. However, we have not heard of any clear criteria or policy on compensating such people.

Every other day, people complain. Whenever a simple animal is injured, you people make a lot of noise but when animals injure a human being, you go quiet. We get concerned. Who of the two is more important? I thought we should coexist in a favourable manner such that you compensate those who lose lives; give their families something because it is really too much for them. 

It is the duty of Government to protect lives, both for the animals and the people. However, we have to really try to revisit what you are doing. You seem to be relegating the other part to somebody whom we do not know. What are you doing about this in terms of compensation? We need a clear answer from you on policy and criteria. People seem to be stuck. Let me take that information.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nzoghu? There is no information. (Laughter)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to get clarification from the honourable minister. One; from the time when the law was assented to, how much have you put together as compensation, which the people can now claim and in particular reference to Kasese?

Two; I would like to know from the honourable minister how they intend – this time round – to discipline those wildlife officers. And from the time the law was assented to, how many they have disciplined in regard to their actions. The law puts it clearly that once the wildlife officers do anything that is outside the law, they will be individually responsible. I know that there are actually some wildlife officers who should have been individually responsible by now. How many have you put on record?

Three; honourable minister, when are you completing the programme of Kasese, especially with the elephants which are actually ravaging the entire Kasese and especially the farms around the national parks?

3.45
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): I thank the minister for the statement. However, Madam Speaker, revenue-sharing in these national parks, like Mt Elgon National Park, should not have been discontinued in implementation of the Wildlife Act. The remittances should have actually continued normally as they review or implement but that it had to be halted as implementation is done. I think this is a vice that the ministry should correct.

I would like to know from the minister about this compensation. They are compensating victims but there are also those who were attacked that ought to be compensated. There are people who are attacked by these protected animals and in self-defence, they kill them.

If I have killed this wild beast, even if it is an endangered species and is protected but I do so in self-defence, instead of being incriminated, I should be compensated. Therefore, the law should be fair to Ugandan citizens who, in self-defence, kill these protected animals or beasts.

Madam Speaker, among those that should be compensated, we have people living along the fringes of these national parks. The animals and wildlife, both flora and fauna, have encroached on their land. You know the challenge of land fragmentation in areas like Mt Elgon. 

Those people instead are said to have been the ones who have encroached on the national park, when the actual fact is it is the reverse; the other way around. So, the minister also needs to put into consideration these compensatory approaches to the citizens.

3.47
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas it has been observed that the animal or wildlife population is increasing, the forest cover where many of these animals seek shelter and livelihood is being depleted. We are getting more stray animals into the population, as a result of the National Forest Authority failing to protect forests. 

At one point, the President had to even write wondering whether the Uganda Wildlife Authority could take over national forests in Uganda. Therefore, we have got that crisis where animals now have nowhere to go due to the rapid increase in human population.

Madam Speaker, other countries have devised methods of getting the communities to hone especially those communities neighbouring national parks. There is a stake where these communities own some of the national parks and their duty is to protect the animals so they earn revenue from them.

However, the model, which we are applying here, just makes the community to look at animals as a taboo and not as an asset. We need to review some of these policies to ensure communities develop a sense of ownership of these animals and the wildlife. They should be able to know that this is part and parcel of their income. Therefore, the revenue sharing model, which we are doing, is out-dated; we need to improve.

3.50
MR HILLARY LOKWANG (NRM, Ik County, Karenga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to thank the minister for the statement presented. There is a situation in Karenga District, where a hunter went to court to seek an order to stop the construction of the Karenga District headquarters, claiming that it is an animal corridor for animals to traverse in.

However, this piece of land is between the two communities of Kidepo and Karenga. The hearing date has been set for 16 March 2020. On that day, the district officials have to attend court. I heard the minister talk about the fence but he is not talking about Kidepo, where issues are very contentious. 

That area has a lot of issues with animals crossing up to Ruyolo on the border with Kenya. Along the way, they keep attacking people and damaging their gardens. As I speak, we have another patient admitted at Mulago National Referral Hospital; that patient even lost a child, as a result of wounds sustained from an elephant attack.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the President has been giving directives on tourism roads but Kidepo National Park does not appear anywhere. We border Kenya and South Sudan but there is no road connecting us to customers in those countries? Therefore, tourists that go to Kidepo travel only from Kampala; we do not have any route to Kenya and South Sudan. This is one of the issues the minister should note as a serious matter. Thank you.

3.51
MR OTHIENO OKOTH (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for that statement. I know the minister is new in that docket but I do not doubt his ability. I get perturbed when I hear from colleagues the methods of conservation that are being employed in our national parks.

Madam Speaker, when you visit other places, the methods have shifted. Just go to Tanzania here in Ngorogoro, you will find communities living harmoniously with these animals; especially on the upper side before you go to the crater down there; you find communities living harmoniously with animals.

This could be as result of certain skills given to the conservationists or workers; there is a way in which they tame these animals. There are tourists who come to visit animals in sanctuaries or reserves. You can just take statistics of the visitors who go to Ngorogoro to see elephants; they are more than those who come to see our wild elephants here.

Another good example is Chiang Mai in the northern province of Thailand. They have a model where animals have been tamed. Every weekend, they have what they call elephant days and there are so many tourists who go there to look at how the animals have been tamed to live harmoniously with communities. You find communities collecting a lot of revenue from tourists.

Therefore, what I would like to state is that our wildlife authority needs to re-examine the way they are doing things. It no longer pays - and nobody is interested in coming to see the wild animals. People are more interested in seeing how communities are coping or living harmoniously with these wild lives; it pays more. 

The crisis we are talking about can easily be overcome because it is very disturbing to hear that people are being hired to chase and make noise for animals at night. We are at the same level of development with Tanzania. If Tanzania can do a little bit of more sophisticated ways of managing these animals, why don’t we benchmark them? We are even in the same integration region.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I urge the ministry to borrow a leaf from our neighbours on how they are managing wildlife. You no longer hear of those kinds of embarrassing situations or reports in Tanzania and Kenya yet they are our neighbours. 

There are other places that I have given as examples like Chiang Mai in Thailand. You could go there to see how they are managing the wildlife. Madam Speaker, I urge the ministry to adopt better methods of managing wildlife other than the primitive and dehumanising methods they are subjecting our citizens to. Thank you.

3.56
MR JAMES BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to genuinely thank the minister for the report. The minister was very clear in telling us about the conflict between human beings and animals.

However, on this Floor, we have also had conflicts between human beings and forests, swamps and water. Now, can the minister tell us - because these conflicts have been going on since Uganda was partitioned particularly in the colonial days? Can the minister tell us whether Government has reviewed the partitioning of Uganda among the different stakeholders? 

The population has gone so high and I would like to hear from the minister on whether the Government has reviewed the partitioning of Uganda to the different stakeholders - the people, animals, forests, swamps and the water. Is it still the way it was partitioned in the colonial days? I thank you.

3.57
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do not want to blame Parliament but when this law was being passed, from the onset, I felt that it was rushed. Members were not given ample time to discuss a number of issues within the proposals that were there. 

I remember there were three sets of regulations that the ministry is mandated to set. I came in the middle of the minister’s presentation but I wonder whether the minister was able to present to this House these sets of regulations because these are the ones, which should govern the implementation of the law.

I remember that we were supposed to have regulations under section 33 of the Act; the minister is supposed to come up with regulations governing the conservation areas. This is what most of us would want to see. 

For instance, I somehow border Kidepo National Park and my district suffers a lot from elephants. I have, time and again, been complaining about attacks of elephants on human beings and on our crops. Many a time, elephants have eaten gardens of food; moreover, we do not touch the park.

In the Act, you find that affected areas that do not touch the park itself do not have where they can be considered properly. The Minister of State for Tourism, hon. Kiwanda, came to Agago and we visited a certain family in Lapono Subcounty. He saw for himself the damage of elephants on human life. He visited a family where a young girl was hurt very badly by an elephant. She was lucky to survive but was mentally disturbed because of the effect of that attack. The ministry promised, through hon. Kiwanda, that they were going to follow up and ensure that some assistance is rendered to the family. 

Therefore, if we have such regulations and the Act itself provided to the local leadership of these communities, other than just concentrating on the media, we would be able to follow up and make sure that the community is aware of the Act and the regulations and what they have to follow. Hon. Lucy, you wanted to say something -

The Speaker: No.

Ms franca akello: Madam Speaker, can I then finish? Finally, section 86 of the Act provides for implementation of the entire Act. I would like to ask the minister to kindly do justice to this country and present to this Parliament those regulations. We would like to see them and help you. 

As members of Parliament, it is part of our mandate to sensitise the public about the law. When we make laws here, we would like to understand and make sure we own those laws. By owning, we should have copies of them, understand the regulations and make sure that our people are aware of the law and know what to do with it.

Madam Speaker, last year, one of the families in Adilang lost a woman –(Member timed out.)

4.03
The minister of local Government (Mr Tom Butime): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, this Act was passed last year and gazetted in October. Therefore, we cannot repeal it now. It is a little too early to start talking of changing and repealing what is hardly a year.

Therefore, we shall have to make do with what this House passed until it is necessary to repeal some of the sections in this Act. I agree that section 33 talks about regulations governing wildlife conservation areas. It states, “Subject to section 6, the minister may, on the advice of the Board by a statutory instrument, make regulations for the management of a wildlife conservation area declared under section 25.” I will make those regulations.

Section 84 talks about compensation: “Where a person suffers bodily injury or is killed, suffers damage to his or her property by a wild animal listed in the fourth schedule, the person or his or her legal representative may submit a claim to the Wildlife Compensation Verification Committee and the Wildlife Compensation Verification Committee shall verify a claim under this section and submit the claim to the Board together with its recommendations…” That will be done.

As far as the schedule is concerned, “Compensable wildlife species whose damage creates liability to compensation, death and injury by an elephant, a lion, leopard, crocodile, buffalo, hyena, hippopotamus, gorilla, chimpanzee...” That list is done. 

We shall produce regulations for all these and that was in my statement. I did say that first of all, we are working on funds because we are supposed to produce money by compensation - the 2 per cent and also money from the Budget. Once those funds are available, we shall begin compensation. For the time being, that money is not yet available.

For the game rangers, they are not lazy. Soldiers have never been lazy. They must be supervised and commanded –(Interruption)

Ms akello: Clarification -

The Speaker: Honourable minister, please conclude. We have got other work to do.

MR BUTIME: I am concluding my statement, Madam Speaker. Thank you very much. Rangers have supervisors. They will be supervised and they are supervised in their sections, platoons and companies. There must always be somebody to supervise people; soldiers, rangers. They will also not run away. They run away because they are not properly supervised. I will ensure that there is supervision, proper command and control so that these kinds of acts of cowards do not continue to take place. 

About revenue, the formula is there. The revenue will be shared between the communities neighbouring the national parks. 

I have already dealt with the matter of compensation, as far as Queen Elizabeth National Park fencing is concerned. Twenty-five kilometres were fenced. We shall continue fencing in the next financial year and you are aware of this. In Queen Elizabeth National Park and Murchison Falls National Park, fencing will continue. We intend to fence 100 kilometres in the next financial year. 

Hon. Alex Ruhunda of Fort Portal Municipality, we shall continue to review. We shall benchmark and continue to study. We should produce a better Uganda Wildlife Authority in the future. However, for the time being, I can assure this House that Uganda Wildlife Authority is a very competent authority. We are doing very well at national level, international level and all other sister organisations have a lot of respect for the Uganda Wildlife Authority.

As far as Karenga is concerned, there was compensation that was issued by the Uganda Wildlife Authority and it is still running. The person that was granted that compensation is here. Anybody interfering with his rights on his compensation has every right to go to court. If you interfere with his right - all that compensation, as stipulated - he has every right to go to court but that matter will be handled and settled. 

The animals in Uganda are not in cages; even Entebbe Wildlife Education Centre. I would like to advise members of Parliament to visit the Entebbe Wildlife Education Centre. You will find that the animals at Entebbe Wildlife Education Centre literally live in the natural habitat, unlike other zoos where the animals are caged. Those in Uganda literally live in the natural habitats where they could have been living if they were still in the wild. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS ON HARMONISING WITH THE ELECTORAL COMMISSION TO REOPEN THE UPDATE OF THE NATIONAL VOTERS REGISTER TO ALLOW UGANDA CITIZENS WHO WILL BE TURNING 18 YEARS OF AGE TO REGISTER AS VOTERS FOR THE FORTHCOMING GENERAL ELECTIONS

4.12	
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker and honourable members, this item is under the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, hon. Kamuntu, who is dealing with it in liaison with the Electoral Commission. He is not here; so, I request that we defer it to tomorrow or the day after and then he comes and answers to it. 

THE SPEAKER: Members, the instructions were to the Ministers of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and Internal Affairs and the Electoral Commission. Let us defer the matter to tomorrow. 

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT ON THE STATUS OF WETLANDS IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Environment? Next item.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUDICIARY BILL, 2018

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, as you recall, we had stood over a few clauses. I think we should be able to complete them.

Clause 20

4.15
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Chairperson and honourable members, I would like to propose a few amendments to clause 20. 

We would like to substitute for clause 20 the following; 

Clause 20 is service in other institutions

20(1) where a judicial officer or a person in the Judiciary Service – 

    a) Is appointed to an institution outside the Judiciary, that officer or person shall apply to the Judicial Service Commission for leave of absence without pay from the Judiciary.

1(b) where a judicial officer or a person in the judicial service is seconded to an institution outside the Judiciary, that officer or person shall apply to the Judicial Service Commission for leave of absence from the Judiciary.

20(2) subject to sub-section (iii), the Judicial Service Commission may grant to an applicant under sub section (i), the leave applied for in each case of a period not exceeding five years.

Under sub-section 20(iii) the period of five years prescribed in sub-section (ii) does not apply to a judicial officer who is appointed to an institution outside the Judiciary;

    a) Against the national quota of personnel vacancies required to be filled by Uganda and when it is in the interest of Uganda to fill its quota of places on the staff of that body.
    b) In accordance with any law, treaty or convention to which Uganda is a state party. This includes organisations like the ICC and the ICJ.

Under 20(iv) a judicial officer appointed to an institution outside the Judiciary in accordance with sub section (iii) is entitled to leave of absence without pay for a duration of the period for which the judicial officer is appointed.

Under 20(v), the period of absence granted to the judicial officer or other person in respect of service under subsection (i)(a) shall not be counted as part of the officers’ period of service for purposes of computing the retirement benefits under section 26.

Under 20(vi) where a Justice of the Supreme Court, Justice of Appeal or a Judge of the High Court is granted leave of absence without pay, in accordance with this section, the President may, acting on advice of the Judicial Service Commission, appoint an acting Justice of the Supreme Court, Justice of Appeal or Judge of the High Court as the case maybe to act in place of the judicial officer and this should be in accordance with Article 142 of the Constitution.

However, the person so appointed, shall not be entitled to retirement benefits which are granted under this Act.

Under number 7, this section does not apply to a judicial officer or a person in the Judiciary Service who is assigned to perform a specific task in addition to his or her routine duty for a period not exceeding two years - on this one, for example, we had in mind Commissions of Inquiry. I so propose.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, as you recall -

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I thought we had compromised with the learned Attorney-General on three things; one, appointment or secondments to positions outside the Judiciary not exceeding three years; and if it exceeds three years, then the person shall be deemed to have resigned the position in the Judiciary.

Secondly, to restrict appointments beyond that period to only those who are serving the institution in accordance with the existing law or treaty to which Uganda is a state party.

The third thing I thought we had agreed on is in respect of appointment in serving capacity but also for that particular period not exceeding three years. If you concede on that, as we had agreed, then we should be able to move.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, the last time we met, I made a proposal to amend that particular clause. I had suggested two years. However, I would like to confirm what the learned Shadow Attorney-General has just said that we did compromise on three years. If the learned Attorney-General concedes to the three years, then I would concede to what the learned Shadow Attorney-General has said.

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson and my learned brother. It is true that we had a discussion with the Shadow Attorney-General. We compromised with hon. Katuntu. However, you recall, Madam Chairperson, that at the last sitting here, you had proposed that each side uploads their proposal. Now, hon. Katuntu uploaded his proposal and the reason I am stuck to the five years is that that is the item - the compromise of three years, we are in agreement.

However, Madam Chairperson, there are other aspects for which we have a very clear rejoinder. The aspect that hon. Niwagaba spoke about; and I see it in hon. Katuntu’s proposal - the item about the person to be deemed to have resigned; that judicial officer under your proposed clause 4(24): you say, “where a judicial officer accepts an appointment or secondment to an institution outside the Judiciary, for a duration exceeding a period in section 3, the judicial officer shall be taken to have resigned from the Judiciary”.

We disagreed on that because the process of appointing a judicial officer is very elaborate. You cannot - when the judicial officer is simply taking up an appointment that has been given to him; he cannot in and of himself be deemed to resign because the aspect of resignation carries other consequences. Therefore, it is not appropriate because this person has been appointed.

Furthermore, the reason I would like to address hon. Katuntu’s proposal and also to emphasise that we had agreed to the three years - hon. Katuntu, even when you look at clause 4 in relation to your proposed clause 6, both of clause 20, sub-clause 4 and sub clause 6, you go ahead to say that a person appointed sub section 4 - the one you are talking about that shall be deemed to have resigned shall be paid a retirement benefit as prescribed in this Act.

Our view is that once you resign, then you disentitle yourself from retirement benefits. Therefore, it is contradictory and that is why we are happy to say that the person who exceeds the three years may, in consultation with the Judicial Service Commission, retire as opposed to deemed to have resigned for the reasons I have given.

MS RWAKOOJO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I seem to think we should be fair to judicial officers. First of all, when you look at the sort of work that they do, to me it is a triangle. It is home-officer-church. They are so limited in terms of what they do –(Interjection)– I just listen to this, these are the people who go and listen to our cases, they do nothing else, they pass sentences against murderers. 

I do not know whether you remember when Justice Tinyinondi was pushed by somebody at Uganda House. People have negative feelings towards them. What do you do after someone has left office?

Now this is one of the means they have for capacity building. When you look at the Human Rights Commission, it is five years, IGG’s Office is four years: why don’t we look at the period of five years and allow them to have that capacity building and then look beyond instead of the three. Three is too short. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: In the case of two people, the IGG would potentially be out for eight years. Justice Simon Mugenyi Byabakama would be out for 14 years and he is entitled to two terms; so, what would you do with that? 

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to give an example within the House. When some of us who were civil servants opted to accept the appointment of the people, we had to resign. Madam Chairperson, you are aware we have even some people who resigned from their jobs but they are not here. 

So, if you take the other appointment, you should know that it is risky. Our purpose is to tell the appointing authority that look, this is a fragile and very competent force; do not appoint them to the other cases. You get other forces to appoint. 

I would like to propose – and this is what we agreed if you read the Hansard properly; we had come to a compromise of two years. I do not know where the Shadow Attorney-General met with the Attorney-General. Maybe they met in the law school and brought the three years. So, I would like to request Members that we accept two years. Otherwise, when you give somebody three years – Members, let me get information before I complete.

MR ARIKO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson and my senior vice chairman to be. I just wanted to give you information: I would like to inform hon. Waluswaka that Public Service usually allows for officers to take sabbatical leave but it is normally two years. When you take that sabbatical leave, it is typically one year but if it is leave without pay, it is two years. The renewal of it is subject to the availability of space – that you can be able to go the other side and we do not need you here. So, the idea of importing five years is literally almost sufficient time that a public officer requires to become pensionable. 

So, why is it that you hold a position for a period of five years, yet at that time we shall have had another person qualify to become promotable? This is because, for a public officer to move from one office to the other, they need three years in a current substantive position.

So, the five years that you are taking, you are actually blocking somebody who would qualify to serve at a higher position. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Chairperson, I am not surprised that he is from the east and a human resource specialist. We should take that – and that was fruitful information. In a nutshell, leaving alone the NRM elections which are coming, Learned Attorney-General together with the Learned Shadow Attorney-General, please, we had closed our eyes and accepted two years. For purposes of moving together, let us agree on two years. Otherwise, if you insist on the three years, we might request the House that this Bill be taken back in its totality. 

I beg to submit, Madam Chairperson. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, the Shadow Attorney-General met with the Attorney-General and hon. Katuntu plus the other people who proposed the amendments. This is just a matter of procedure and it is not the first time some of these things are done. This proposal itself should be on record that it was not before the committee and we really want to thank you for your indulgence that we are looking deeper and the debate has yielded into this. 

That is why the committee would request Members that when a matter like this comes to the House and a small adjournment is granted and caucusing is done, those people who go and caucus over this should really take time to debate and share opinions. I have never heard or seen hon. Katuntu and hon. Niwagaba getting into – and they support this Bill – but they were so opposed to the rationale of five years that for them to go and meet and come back and say there is a concession of three years – 

The Attorney-General never wanted even to move to four and a half years; he was so hardened and I was a witness on both sides. So, if there is some compromise, I thought that procedurally, we would be fair to those who went out and we go with the concession. It cannot be the best but that is a compromise. Compromises are never the best but they settle the impasse. That is my appeal to the Members.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General, why don’t we meet midway; there is two, three and five? Can’t we take three years? 

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. As the chairperson has correctly pointed out, our position was five years and the position of hon. Niwagaba and hon. Katuntu was two years – and that is when we last adjourned the House. We must make progress and progress dedicates that you make a movement, which is why I moved from five years to four years. Hon. Katuntu and hon. Niwagaba proposed that they would move from two years to three years; I proposed that we move from five years to four years and they proposed that they move from two years to three years. 

I am quite happy to abide by your involvement in resolving this issue, bearing in mind the facts that I have just told you; that I moved from five years to four years and they moved from two to three years.  

Madam Chairperson, I am happy to abide by your guidance.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the consensus is that we meet mid-way. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 20, be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 21

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, on Clause 21, I would like to propose an insertion immediately after the title to part VIII, the following new clauses:  
 
Application 

Clause 21(1) the provisions of this part apply to –  
(a) The Chief Justice, Deputy Chief Justice, Justice of the Supreme Court, Justice of the Court of Appeal, Principal Judge, Judge of the High Court, Chief Registrar, Registrar and Magistrate who retires after the commencement of this Act.

21(1)(b) A retired Chief Justice, Deputy Chief Justice, Justice of the Supreme Court, Justice of the Court of Appeal, a Principal Judge, Judge of the High Court, Chief Registrar, a registrar and magistrate who retired before the commencement of this Act and who, on the commencement of this Act is receiving a pension in respect of his or her service under the Pensions Act. 

Clause 22: General Rule on repayment of retirement benefits

Under 22(1), for the purpose of this Act, service in the judiciary shall – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we are on 21.

MR BYARUHANGA: Yes, I am sorry; just proceeding on 21. Okay, the general rule on payment of retirement benefits - for purposes of this Act, service in the Judiciary shall include the period of service in other service in Government provided that service was on full pay. 

A judicial officer shall not draw any retirement benefits other than the retirement benefits prescribed under this Act. 

Monthly retirement benefits and lumpsum

A Chief Justice, a Deputy Chief Justice, a Justice of the Supreme Court, a Justice of the Court of Appeal, a Principal Judge, a Judge of the High Court, a Chief Registrar and a magistrate shall, on retirement, be entitled to:
    a) A monthly retirement benefit – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think you have gone to clause 22. Why don’t we do 21 first? Let us move, clause by clause.

Honourable members, you have heard the proposals on clause 21. Please speak to clause 21 again. 

MR BYARUHANGA: The justification for it is to make sufficient provision for the payment and computation of the monthly retirement benefits payable to retired judicial officers. 

Secondly, it is to enable the spouse or spouses, minor children and dependants of deceased judicial officers to receive retirement benefits for the period of 15 years where the judicial officer dies before the 15 years. 

Then also –(Interruption)

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, you guided that when we have amendments, they should be widely circulated. We cannot access whatever the learned Attorney-General is reading. It is close to himself and we cannot make sense out of it. So, it will be very difficult for this House to accept amendments that are just brought here without us processing them. The amendments are not circulated. We cannot follow and debate them. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, the clauses that were stood over are the ones that the House had significant concerns about. They are from 20 up to about 26. 

The Government could not – I am not speaking for the Government; I am speaking for the committee – we allowed this debate to go on and what has caused these amendments are purely the concerns you raised here. We had no objection to these proposed amendments because they listened to the representatives of the people in the process of making this law and I thought that it would be necessary that we process this as it is being presented. I received a copy on 22nd February. I do not know why the Attorney-General did not circulate copies. I thought the –(Interruption) 

MR BYARUHANGA: Actually, Madam Chairperson, the amendments were uploaded– yes, they were uploaded.
– (Interjections)

MR NIWAGABA: As your shadow, let us be clean. Read the proposed amendments, clause by clause so that we pass or we reject them since we do not have the proposed amendments in writing. In the interest of time, let us move, clause by clause. 

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Chairperson, I think in their meeting, he might have seen the thing because he is saying, “read clause by clause.” What I would like to propose is that they either upload or photocopy the amendments. Otherwise, they are just smuggling in these amendments. Can we get copies? Shadow Attorney-General, be clear whether you got a copy in your meeting or not.

MR NIWAGABA: Our compromise with the Attorney-General was only in respect to clause 20. We did not talk about any other matters because they were not brought to our attention. However, also bear in mind that we have been on this Bill for almost three weeks. That is why we are proposing that we look at his proposals, at least clause by clause, not handling them omnibus.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Chairperson, there are Bills, which have stayed here like the Marriage and Divorce Bill. Before I came to this Parliament, that Bill was and is still in Parliament. There was only one urgent Bill, the Age Limit Bill, which we handled –(Laughter) - because it had a time limit.

Madam Chairperson, on this one, they either upload or give us copies. Otherwise, hon. Niwagaba, thank you for being honest that they did not share these amendments with you. (Laughter) We have to get the copies. We have our voters out there following the debate. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let me ask the Attorney-General - if you have not yet handed over the soft copy to the Clerk, please give it in so that it is distributed on the members’ iPads, then we can complete tomorrow. I saw there are some formulas. I think Members need to look at them. If there are any other amendments, can you please circulate them?

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. As far as I am concerned, all the amendments were uploaded. However, they have not reflected on the members’ iPads. My people are right now giving another soft copy to the Parliament. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us defer this discussion to tomorrow. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.45
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL: (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.46
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered clause 20 of the Administration of Judiciary Bill, 2018 and passed it with amendments; the other clauses have been deferred.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.47
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

LAYING OF THE HALF-YEAR MACRO-ECONOMIC AND FISCAL PERFORMANCE REPORT FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

4.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the half-year macro-economic and fiscal year performance report for Financial Year 2019/2020.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back.

LAYING OF REPORT OF THE PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION ON THE 3RD EDITION OF THE UGANDA COMMUNITY IN THE NETHERLANDS CONVENTION (UCN) IN AMSTERDAM, NETHERLANDS

4.48
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, Members are scared that I am from Netherlands. (Laughter) I would like to inform you that this is last year’s report and I have not made any recent travel to the Netherlands. 

Madam Speaker, from the 21st to 25th of August, 2019, I led a delegation that was delegated by you. The delegation was composed of six Members and two staff members. The Members were:

    1. Mr Lyandro Komakech
    2. Mr Francis Gonahasa
    3. Mr Bwino Kyakulaga
    4. Mr Ronnie David Mutebi
    5. Mr Peter Ochen
    6. Ms Ruth Katushabe

We participated in the Third Edition of the Uganda Community in the Netherlands Convention. I would like to just give an overview before I lay the report on the Table.

In this convention, for the first time – I think in terms of conventions that are organised by members of the diaspora – we took great concern to acknowledge that the Netherlands convention has become very unique because they pick particular interest in agriculture and health. The convention was well attended by various companies that deal with matters of health and agriculture. 

In the area of health, we were lucky that we got companies that are ready to work with the Government of Uganda – especially the Ministry of Health – on availing up-to-date high-level technology on imaging systems. 

In the area of agriculture, we also took note that the Government of Netherlands is very concerned about our exports to the European Union. We were sad to note that over 750 exports to the European Union, especially in floriculture, have been turned down. I have the record that was properly assembled from our embassy in Belgium, of all these notifications. 

We have lost a lot of money, in terms of our exporters who send their products to the European Union. I feel sad when I do not see the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries as well as the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives represented here because this is a very important area that we need to discuss. I will also be putting it here so that you know that from September last year going backwards, we have lost containers of export goods worth millions of dollars because of poor quality of what we export. 

Many times, the Government of Netherlands has insisted on how the exporters should be guided but the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has been turning them down. This is a matter that we need to discuss as this Parliament. If we know that 80 per cent of our exports is from agriculture, why is it that there is no seriousness in terms of building capacity of our exporters to sell what is very valuable to the European market, especially flowers that are now one of those leading value imports in the European Union.

In that convention, Madam Speaker, we were also informed that Netherlands, especially their companies, are ready to support Uganda in areas of trade, especially on equipment in agriculture – tractors and many other things as well as animal nutrition that are at very high quality level in the world.

Madam Speaker, we also got information on hospitals and medical facilities. We were also fortunate to get a company that wrote to us recently that they are ready to supply northern Uganda with a machine that will be dealing with the issue of kidney – I think it is called the dialysis machine. That machine is almost to a tune of $1.8 million, which is good for this country and it will be supporting the population of northern Uganda. I think this is one of the benefits that these conventions can bring.

We were also informed by the convention organisers that they have wheelchairs that can be appropriately procured to support many of our people that need to be supported. They can be supplied for free. We only need to meet the transport cost. We need to work on these and see how we can benefit, especially for our people who live with disabilities.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, it was also raised that the Government of Uganda should consider giving support to the people in the diaspora. These are young men and women who do these on their own pockets. They do not get money from any source, yet the benefits come to the country. They requested that since this is not a jamboree, where people just go for parties – these are conventions that bring a lot of expertise in various areas. They have petitioned this Parliament to see how best we can support them to organise these conventions. 

In this year, they have put a request of $50,000. We also remember that the President of Uganda, I think some time ago, made a commitment to support these members in the diaspora. We believe this should be spread around. For the members of the diaspora in the US, I think it has always been done but I think it is not being done in Europe. It is important that we take note and see how best we can support them.

Another request that was made from this convention was the importance of Netherlands in strategic diplomacy in Europe. Most of the strategic institutions like United Nationals and other world bodies are located in Netherlands in Geneva and Hague.

Madam Speaker, we do not have a permanent presence in this country. All our member states in East Africa have a permanent presence in the Netherlands. So, the request is that the Parliament and the Government of Uganda should consider not only opening a consulate but establish a fully-fledged mission in the Netherlands. Otherwise, the benefit we get from Netherlands is very important.

Of course, in Brussels, we do exist but in terms of what goes on in Netherlands, I think it is very critical to have a permanent presence for bilateral and multilateral relationships. Those were the issues that emerged in the meeting.

Finally, a request has been put by members - Netherlands and the rest in the diaspora is that we should scale up our representation, especially the line ministries. While we were there, it was very sad that the strategic ministries that should have been there to take critical decisions and notes on issues that were being raised never appeared. The Ministry of Health was at the centre of this convention but they never appeared. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries never appeared.

Madam Speaker, this year, I request that these two line ministries take serious note of this convention especially the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries since there are a lot of benefits that we need the agriculture ministry to take so that we can benefit. 

I will stop here but I would like to lay on the Table the report that has every problem of our exports in the European Union. I believe the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal industry and Fisheries will take this very seriously. I beg to lay on the Table the report of the European Union Notification of confiscation of imports of produce from Uganda July 2014 to date.

I also beg to lay on the Table report of the Parliamentary Delegation to the 3rd Edition of the Uganda community in the Netherlands Convention (UCN) in Amsterdam, Netherlands.

I beg to lay on the Table the report, which was made separately as an addendum to this, from our ambassador in Belgium; Amb. Miriam Black, which arose from the business convention that took place in Amsterdam. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very hon. Komakech for assisting me to do my work. That report of the European Union Notification of Confiscation of Imports of Produce from Uganda, July 2014 to date, is sent to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry so that they can scrutinise it further and guide us on what to do. Maybe the minister has it but still, send copies to the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry and the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

On the issue of supporting the diaspora, I want the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to remind the President since he undertook to support the diaspora in the USA, which he does. He does not support diaspora in Europe; they are on their own.

The President also agreed to support Uganda diaspora in Africa with regular support. Maybe it has not been followed up. Kindly assist us and remind the President to fulfil his pledge. Thank you. Item 5(3).

REPORT OF THE PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION ON THE FIRST TURKEY – UGANDA TRADE, BUSINESS TOURISM AND DIASPORA AWARENESS EXPO IN TURKEY

5.01
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, PWD REPRESENTATIVE, WESTERN): Thank you, Madam Speaker for the opportunity. I am presenting a report of the Parliamentary Delegation to Istanbul and Ankara-Turkey, who attended the 1st Turkey-Uganda Trade, Business Tourism and Diaspora Awareness Expo in Turkey from July 28-3rd August 2019.

Madam Speaker, in the interest of time, I will bring highlights of this trip. The trip was initiated by the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda. I really wish to extent our thanks to the Speaker on behalf of the Uganda Parliamentary delegation, which I led. The delegation consisted of members of Parliament and staff of the Parliament of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, the expo was organised by the Ambassador of Turkey to Uganda, H.E. Fikret Kerem in collaboration with the Ugandan Ambassador to Turkey, H.E. Stephen Mubiru. They worked in collaboration with the private sector.

Madam Speaker, there were series of meetings held during this expo. I would like to, therefore, implore Members that this report has been uploaded on the iPad. You will have time to read extensively what we did.

Madam Speaker, the objectives of this expo was to –

    1. Create a platform for engagement between the businessman and manufactures from Turkey and Uganda; 
    2. Promote and showcase Uganda’s products to the Turkey market; 
    3. Mobilise the diaspora to create business partnerships for investment in Uganda.

Observations, findings, discussions and recommendations 

Madam Speaker, the delegation interacted with the Ankara Chamber of Industry. In this meeting, the Ankara Chamber of Industry hosted members of Parliament from Uganda and delegation of prominent businessmen and company representatives from Turkey. They made presentations on the business and trade opportunities that exist between Turkey and Uganda.

There were remarks by high-level profile people in the Government of Turkey including, among others, the Chairman of the Ankara Chamber of Industry, Mr Gürsel.

Madam Speaker, there were remarks made by Mr Ata, who heads the Uganda Business Council of the Foreign Economic Relations Board of Turkey, (DEİK), which is the foreign economic relations board of Turkey mandated to organise and manage foreign economic relations of the Turkish private sector, in particular, with respect to foreign traded, international investments, services, contracting and logistics and analyse investment opportunities at home in Turkey and abroad. It is also mandated to boost the country’s exports and coordinate similar business development activities.

Madam Speaker, Uganda and Turkey have taken important steps to increase trade relations between the two countries and currently have a trade volume of approximately $5 million.

Deik is ready to support Uganda to improve the business environment in terms of infrastructure, food processing and construction. 

The colleague I went with is hon. Mangusho, the Vice Chairman of the Committee on Trade, Industry and Cooperatives who also had an opportunity to deliver a message to this congregation and he said that Uganda had much untapped resources that required investors to tap into and cited agro-processing as one of the potential investment sectors.

We also had an honourable member of Parliament of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey and the Chairman of the Uganda-Turkey Parliamentary group.

I would like to extend my sincere thanks to you for leading us to form the Uganda-Turkey Parliamentary Friendship Forum that is playing a proactive role in supplementing efforts of the Executive.

To ensure whatever issues agreed on by our executives and Parliaments, can always make good follow-up to realise the benefits as fast as possible. You led this and we have a Uganda-Turkey Parliamentary Friendship Forum in place. We thank you for this.

We also had remarks from our ambassador, His Excellency Stephen Mubiru, who has done tremendous job linking Uganda to Turkey. Among the issues that the ambassador raised was that Uganda and Turkey have shared over 50 years of good friendship upon which the Turkish Government has provided support in the areas of education.

He said that the Government of Turkey has provided 50 scholarships to Ugandan students who are attending Government universities in Turkey each year. 

Secondly, various memoranda of understanding were recently signed to train students in forensic audits at Mbarara University and you also appreciated the council for Higher Education for Turkey for offering additional scholarships during their recent visit to Uganda.

Ambassador Stephen Mubiru extended gratitude to the Government of Turkey for her effort in training men and women of the Uganda Police Force. 

On tourism, the ambassador urged both Turkish and Ugandan citizens to take advantage of the daily flights between the two countries to visit tourist sites. He added that Uganda has very many natural tourist sites that citizens of Turkey can take advantage of.

Madam Speaker, as a leader of delegation, I appreciated the Ankara Chamber of Commerce and Deik for granting Uganda an opportunity to learn from Turkey and how it has built her economy in a very short time.

The Turkish Government was applauded for the bilateral agreement that was signed in Uganda between Uganda and Turkey during the visit of His Excellency President Recep Erdogan in 2016 and emphasised that Uganda cherishes commercial and economic diplomacy and is very eager to increase her cooperation and investments of Turkey.

The people in Turkey are anxious to have reciprocal visit by His Excellency, President Museveni and we believe that it will be realised in the near future.

We held various meetings with the Minister of Trade of Turkey, Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; and the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Speaker, Parliament of Turkey.

All these discussions were centred about boosting our bilateral relations and cooperation in trade and commerce between Uganda and Turkey.

Various MoUs had earlier been signed and a joint economic commission had been established between Turkey and Uganda. We hope that it will benefit the people of Turkey and Uganda.

A delegation was also hosted by the Director General of European Union and Foreign Relations Ms Aylin Çağlayan Özcan, who informed the delegation that her Ministry of Agriculture was in charge of food livestock, water recourses as well as promoting bilateral relations, coordinating institutional and legislative alignments and international relations.

Of interest to note is that the Government of Turkey initiated and formed an agricultural bank called Ziraat Bank. It particularly boosts the agricultural sector on value addition in agro-processing. We believe that this is a good move that Uganda can undertake to improve on our agricultural production and productivity.

Madam Speaker, I informed them that Uganda is one of the producers of organic products and I called upon the Turkish companies to explore more opportunities in agribusiness especially in agricultural modernisation, mechanisation and postharvest handling like cold storage and silos.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, it seems you are reading the whole report.

MR KATURAMU: Madam Speaker, this is the way forward and recommendations. The Memorandum of Understanding for the Turkey-Uganda Parliamentary Friendship Association; I am aware that you paid a visit there and that this MOU would be accomplished and finalised.

The Parliament of Uganda should follow-up on the joint economic commission and the ministry is involved in carrying out the tasks that were given to them, should accomplish them and report back to Parliament.

The Parliament should consider establishing a semblance of a small town that represents the tourism sites in Turkey in one place so that once you visit Turkey, you will find all tourist attractions in that place; so, then you can make a decision on where to go. We could also emulate that and have one here.

Lastly, the Government should support fruit drying and processing for export. From the meeting, the following resolutions were made;

(i) 	That the two governments, that is, the Government of Uganda and the Government of Turkey, promote agricultural cooperation.

(ii) 	They should support training and internships.

(iii) 	They should establish a model farm, which they agreed to fund.

(iv) 	Agricultural financing, through windows of existing banks, should be established to emulate the model of Ziraat Bank, specifically financing agriculture. 

(v) 	To encourage Turkish investors to invest in contract farming and post-harvest handling.

Madam Speaker, we would like to thank you very much for enabling us to represent Parliament. We should continue to build the values and knowledge generated during the meetings and conventions for Ugandans living outside the country. Our interaction with them, through the convention, informs us of their challenges and opportunities.

The trip was a big success for both the Government of Uganda and the private sector in Uganda. I appreciate the organisers - that is Vijana. It is a group of Ugandans living in Turkey who collaborated with our Ambassador and the Ambassador of Turkey here to prepare this forum. We thank them for their efforts.

On this note, I recommend to Government to interest itself in such companies in different countries for partnerships in promoting Uganda. The delegation wishes to express its sincere gratitude to the Speaker of Parliament, Rt Hon. Kadaga, for having entrusted it with this responsibility and for sanctioning this trip. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker and I lay the report on the Table. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs. I think the only comment I have on that is the issue of the scholarships. This country deserves to know what happens to those scholarships. Who gets them? How are they distributed?

I went to Serbia and was told that they had been giving us 10 scholarships per year. Because we did not take them, they withdrew them; they are now only two. I do not know whether they will be taken. I do not know where they are. India gives over 100 every year but nobody takes them. Why? There are Ugandans here who need those scholarships.

MR KATURAMU: Madam Speaker, this has been a touchy issue. Our Ambassadors are playing a critical role in securing many scholarships for the people of Uganda. However, the procedure of handling these scholarships has more questions than answers.

When the scholarships are secured, they are entrusted to the Ministry of Education and Sports by the Central Scholarship Committee. I, therefore, propose that with your guidance, Parliament plays a more proactive role in ensuring an even distribution of these scholarships to all the people of Uganda in all regions, so that we guide the Central Scholarship Committee. 

It is the Ministry of Foreign Affairs that is lobbying for these scholarships and therefore, Parliament can play a more positive role in ensuring that we distribute them fairly.

THE SPEAKER: I think what we need to do is to call the Minister of Education and Sports to explain to us what has been happening to these scholarships. When I travel, they tell me, “We gave your country.” Now, we are informing ourselves. 

5.20
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am personally excited about those scholarships and indeed, this could be a relief to those bright children and young people who are there and do not have capacity to meet their dues in different universities, locally and internationally.

I am of the view that our Committee on Education and Sports should have that responsibility of addressing Parliament on a quarterly basis - on how far they have gone in working with the different stakeholders like the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Education and Sports to make sure that those scholarships are well aligned along with our education programmes.

Once Parliament opens it up, like regularly or quarterly, we shall be able to tap into them. Otherwise, they come, find people in office who are busy – maybe doing local staff – and no one cares.

THE SPEAKER: No. When their relatives do not qualify, they hide them.

5.21
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like my colleague has said, we know how members of Parliament are suffering with sponsoring children of their voters and even our relatives and yet, some of them really perform very well. We have very bright students in our villages.

Before the Committee on Education and Sports goes out to find out the truth about this, may I request that the Minister of Education and Sports and the Minister of Foreign Affairs come up with a list of those who have been benefitting from these scholarships?

We also want to find out why Parliament is not aware of these scholarships; those who have been benefitting from them and what the procedure of giving out these scholarships to the students has been. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.22
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka County North, Luuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My request is not so much different from my colleague’s. I want to task the Ministry of Foreign Affairs: Is there a way they can help us? I wanted to come up with only one country that I know about.

Algeria offers Uganda a very good number of scholarships in oil. However, I want to task the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to come up with a list of the beneficiaries of those scholarships and the criteria they use to choose such people. Thank you.

5.23
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a big problem with our ministries because various companies offer us scholarships. Just recently, Italy offered Uganda over 30 scholarships for students to go and pursue Masters degrees in fisheries and agriculture in the World Fisheries University. This information never went out to the public and no single Ugandan took it up. I got that from one of the officials from Italy and they were complaining.

However, just recently, in March 2019, a delegation of officials from the National Council for Education of Turkey came to Uganda and offered that they would be partnering with us and give us scholarships. From that time, the memorandum that was left in the Ministry of Education and Sports to just sign and Ugandans to benefit from such an offer, has not been signed up to now.

Therefore, I would like to suggest that let the Minister of Education and Sports and the Minister of Foreign Affairs come to this House and tell Ugandans how these scholarships are distributed. Otherwise, the country is losing out. Thank you.

5.26 
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We need to be given enough time to debate this report because it has very important issues. He has talked about agriculture and the agricultural bank. We have all along been looking at ways and means of how we can revive the cooperative bank. I think this would be an opportunity, if we are given enough time, to debate and make recommendations on how best we can benefit from our interactions with such countries.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to suggest that we be given sometime, because one minute will not be enough, so that the House can debate this matter and come up with recommendations. We will then follow them up because forming an agricultural bank or reviving the defunct Cooperative Bank is very critical for this country, well aware that most of Ugandans are engaged in agriculture. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, I have plans to have a date set aside for that part. However, I wanted the scholarships issue to be handled first. I want a comment on scholarships before we appoint a date to debate that report because it has many issues.

5.26
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, it is not the first time this House is complaining about issues of scholarships. Ever since this House was established, I do not think there is a Parliament, which has not complained about this matter.

I am thinking of bringing up a Bill - and the House should support me – that will make all information public. If, for example, we are getting anything from abroad, there should be a register for scholarships so that information is available to everybody. We asked about scholarships in State House - we do not know how they are going to be done.

Madam Speaker, there are many students who are stranded at universities. Recently, we were at the Uganda Christian University and we saw the situation there; students are crying. They are many students sending me messages saying they are stranded because they have not paid tuition; yet, some few people are taking everything. Who are these people entitled to people’s stomachs in their own stomach? I think it is too much.

Therefore, it is high time we introduced a law that compels everybody to bring information to one system that we all access, even online. We should be able to tell that there are these scholarships; if they are from South Korea, how many? And if you have already got, we tick you off so that the next goes to another person. However, the same people who got yesterday will get today. They are getting tomorrow and get every day; they have owned everything - who are these people?

5.28
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I keep wondering because when it comes to taxes in this country, all us are compelled to pay but when it comes to privileges, other people are side-lined and just very few people benefit. By the way, I made it clear to this House that the Rwenzori sub region should not be counted among the people who have dominated and swindled the resources of this country; I have put it very clearly.

Therefore, Madam Speaker –(Interjections)– you know it very well; they are seated there –(Laughter)– I concur with hon. Aogon  that we need a policy and a law that guides the country so that even when the Central Scholarship Committee is doing its work, they have guidelines and a clear roadmap covering the different sub-regions.

For example, we have 21 sub-regions in this country. If well catered for, we can have balanced development in all the 21 sub-regions. However, the challenge we have in this country is that from number one up to the last person, all of them come from the same place. (Interjection) You know the place.

Therefore, the Minister of Education and Sports, this time round - like this year is still on - should be tasked to come and explain to this House how they intend to manage scholarships of this year so that people can get to know what to do. However, I would like to register this officially –(Member timed out.)

5.31
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I start from where hon. Nzoghu stopped. We need regular updates from the Minister of Education and Sports and Minister of Foreign Affairs on the scholarships that we have. Some of us only got to know that we have many Ugandan students in China when Coronavirus stroke, which is very unfortunate.

Secondly, I would like to give information to this House. In November 2019, I was in Hungary for a private conference. I had been invited in my capacity as the Chairperson of the Catholic Members of Parliament to attend a conference on Christian persecution.

However, while there, I was surprised by the number of Africans benefitting from scholarships in Hungary and they are very good scholarships. How did I get to know? The Kenyan students came to meet with their members of Parliament; they were very many. 

Therefore, these opportunities are open to African Governments and for all of us but I am not sure whether this information was shared with our Government or they decided to keep quiet.

THE SPEAKER: You can be sure that they got it but they just throw them in the dust bin.

MS LUCY AKELLO: Yes and so, I was shocked and disappointed yet, we have many of our children who are intelligent and could have benefited from these very good opportunities. This is the information I wanted to share and we can pick it up from here.

5.32
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Information is power and so, I would like to thank the people who gave us the reports and the highlights and especially for this same report. I remember that the agreement between Turkey and Uganda on Trade was signed in 2010.

However, I am now surprised that some Members of Parliament who have been here do not know what has been taking place. It was Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire, the then Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives who signed on behalf of the Government -

The Speaker: What did he sign?

MS BAMUKWATSA: The bilateral agreement between Uganda and Turkey on trade in 2010. However, as members of Parliament and policy makers, we do not know what it contains. My prayer is: can we have a copy of that agreement in this House? That will help us to know what it contains and we give information to our people so they can start trading with Turkey. That will help the people of Uganda to know what they can send to Turkey. It will help us to know how the people of Uganda can benefit from that agreement other than signing and we keep it or it benefits some individuals; may be those who signed it. Thank you.

5.34
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): I would also like to thank you for this opportunity. It is true I have benefited but I do not want to tell you the source. By way of giving information, there must be a way of streamlining the method of announcing these scholarships. Some of these scholarships or announcements are sometimes fictitious.

Madam Speaker, you may be aware that I am a member of the International Association of Members of Parliament for Peace and Security. And so far, under that forum I have moved to three countries. Of recent, we travelled to South Korea.

And before, we had got information, through you, Madam Speaker, that South Korea had given us 100 scholarships. However, when we followed it up while in South Korea, this information was not there. The information we have here could be different from the truth. We had a letter from you reminding the organisers and those who promised. When we gave the letter to the person to whom he directed us, he was speaking in tongues.

Even these other pronouncements could be erroneous and some of them could be true. We must follow the pronouncements correctly for us to ascertain whether or not it is true that these scholarships are there. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Certainly, the ones of Government to Government exist. For the one of Korea, I went and they made that offer. When they invited me to go back, I said, “I am not going until you have delivered those scholarships.” I told hon. Okoth to go and tell them that I would not go until they delivered the scholarships. 

5.36
Mr deogratius kiyingi (DP, Bukomansimbi County South, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank hon. Katuramu because your report has opened people’s eyes and minds. 

However, I would like to comment on one thing. Scholarships have been available for a long time but people who benefit from them are those who get the information. Now that information has come from you, some members of Parliament can disseminate the same throughout their constituencies.  

Most of the scholarships, which are available are in science subjects. There are technicalities that some people miss out simply because they do not belong to a certain category of field where these scholarships happen – (Interjections) Before you give me information, there is something, which I also wanted to inform hon. Katuramu about. 

We have had a lot of scholarships from Turkey but a majority of them have benefited a certain sect. I do not want to appear like I am being sectarian but it is somehow based on religion. For that information I know.

The Islamic Republic of Turkey has been offering scholarships –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Point of order. That is the Chairperson of the Uganda-Turkey Friendship Association.

Mr akamba: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Turkish Government has deliberately extended its willingness to partner with Uganda in a number of ways. Indeed, like hon. Katuramu said, the diplomacy has existed for a good number of years.

The recent MoU, that I talked about as pending the signature of the minister, does not have any provision that such scholarships will benefit only the Muslims.

I know of many students in Turkey - Madam Speaker, recently, we were in Turkey on a delegation that you led yourself. We found there many Ugandans on scholarships and they are non-Muslim.

Is it in order for my colleague, therefore, to impute it on Turkey that it only caters and provides for the Muslim community when he does not have any evidence to that effect?

THE SPEAKER: Can you substantiate quickly? If you do not, withdraw.

Mr kiyingi: Madam Speaker, I think the honourable colleague did not get me well. I said, please, do not quote me as being sectarian. 

There are certain scholarships, which are based either on faith – we have it even in the Catholic world in Rome. People have benefited based on religion. You are just taking it in bad faith but I was not giving it in such faith. They are all Ugandans whether you belong to the catholic or Muslim community. What is important is for us to benefit.

Therefore, we need to pass information that the scholarships are available in such and such a country so that Ugandans can benefit. Whether you are a Muslim, from Ankole region or Buganda; what matters is that people can benefit. I beg to submit.

5.41
Mr Elijah okupa (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): When it comes to the issues of scholarships, I do not know why Government keeps it a secret. 

Madam Speaker, you remember how we laboured in the last Parliament to ask for the list of  scholarships from State House so that we could know where the students came from. Now, it has come to the outside scholarships.

I know very well that a number of countries offer scholarships to Ugandans namely; Italy - The Norwegian Government gives scholarships every year for Masters in Economics. They are over 40 - Japan, South Korea, Algeria; Canada, Turkey and Russia. 

Even for some honourable members here, if it were not because of the transparency of the UPC Government, hon. Byabagambi possibly could not have studied a degree. He benefited and that is why he went to Russia. There are scholarships in India, Australia, China and Malaysia. 

What we need is for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to come and declare which countries offer us scholarships and how many. We must demand that. 

To the committee chairperson, it is your role. Summon the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Let them produce the list of countries and give us the information such that we know that every year at this time, there are these scholarships.

Secondly, the Ministry of Education and Sports must come and declare those who have benefited and are in these countries. It is very embarrassing when we go out there and we are told – Madam Speaker, again you remember when we were in the Netherlands. It was the same country where they asked us; “We gave these scholarships but your country has not yet offered any, why?”

There are very many needy students. Is it possible that because some people are well-to-do, they do not mind about others? At least, the poor Ugandans would benefit from these scholarships. That is what we need. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs must declare the countries that offer scholarships and their numbers, such that we know. 

The other is the Ministry of Education and Sports. Hon. Obua, you are here and so, you should be able to help us. There are those scholarships that are given based on sports. We must know how many children are benefiting from this. 

Those are the two things that we must demand from the Government side to declare.

THE SPEAKER: The annoying thing is that sometimes, I travel and they tell me, “Your country failed and so, we gave it to your neighbour. We increased their quota."  There are Ugandans walking on the streets without school fees.

5.44
Mr Johnson MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support my colleague. It is puzzling; apart from our colleagues who benefited from the Chinese scholarship those days. 

There are many scholarships. This should not be about just coming with a report. Let it be a detailed report. Even locally, scholarships are many but they are given to schools of the ministers. 

The concern is that we should come to know the methodology first. How can Members apply? Members of Parliament are suffering with many applications from children. Now that senior six results came back, we have many applications. We should know how to get those scholarships - from State House and foreign countries. 

There are many from Germany and United Kingdom. We cannot keep here and say they come with just a report. Let it be a detailed report, which can be discussed fully for us to know. Why don’t they even inform us in time so that we can help our children who are suffering?

5.45
Mr Apollo masika (NRM, Bubulo County East, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am one of the beneficiaries of the scholarships of those times. I got a Government scholarship in 1988 to go to China. While I was there, I learned how other people benefit from scholarships.  

During that time, they would advertise those scholarships in newspapers and the only radio, Radio Uganda. Through that, all Ugandans would get information on how to apply for those scholarships and I was one of the beneficiaries. 

When I was in China, things changed a little bit because people looked at China as a stupid and poor place. They instead applied for scholarships in Canada, Australia, and UK, which were very hard to get. We went to China and it picked up. Many people then looked at studying from China and even encouraged their children to go there. 

When we were there, they would first of all send some students from those people who got the information. They would send them to come earlier than the scholarships given in Uganda. Those people would first of all get the scholarships before the Ugandans. As soon as they gave 20 scholarships, then, 10 who would have already arrived in China, would get those scholarships. Then, the other 10 come from other places. After getting that information, we saw that people were coming through the behind door. 

The information is that all the scholarships should be put in one basket. They should be brought to Parliament here, announced and then all the members of Parliament would know of the available scholarships from certain countries. Thereafter, we also inform our people to come for interviews at the same time. 

Again, that is a tricky situation. When they are advertising for these scholarships, the people that come for these scholarships are told that they were done the previous day or they do interviews and instead other people’s names are shortlisted for those scholarships –(Interruption) 

MR TIMUZIGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The fact that knowledge is power still stands. That makes the issue of scholarships very serious. These countries have dominated Africa because of their knowledge. If they decide to give you a chance to go and study in their universities or colleges, you should rush there. 

At the moment, we know that countries do not want their knowledge to go to other places but this is our chance to use diplomacy to get knowledge from those countries and make sure we use it to develop our countries. 

Madam Speaker, it is a very important issue for us, as members of Parliament, to make sure that the ministries of Education and Foreign Affairs bring those reports periodically to this House. This is in order for this country to benefit from that knowledge and develop, just like any other developed country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

5.49
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the issue of scholarships is quite serious. It is true that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has really tried its best through the bilateral agreements that we signed with these various countries. In most of those agreements, it has actually been on human capital development, through education. We have got scholarships through that. Most of our embassies have also lobbied for scholarships for this country. 

However, the unfortunate bit of it has been on the distribution of these scholarships. Indeed, the information on the beneficiaries of these scholarships has been scanty and I think it is high time we got this information. 

As the vice chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, we would like to take it upon ourselves that, indeed, we task the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to give us this report. This is so that we distribute these scholarships equitably to benefit our people. We shall be able to get it. 

Let me provide this information to this House. We have not been getting this information. After they lobby for these scholarships, they are handed over to the Ministry of Education and Sports. That is the information we get. However, at the end of the day, you do not get to know who the beneficiaries of these scholarships are. 

Since it is the demand of the House that we need these brought on the Floor of Parliament, I just want to say that the committee would like to take it upon ourselves to task the ministry, first, to be able to get us scholarships from all these countries. 

We have had an opportunity of interfacing with most of these countries like Canada, Korea and Egypt. They even tell you about the scholarships, regardless of religion. They tell you the number of scholarships they are providing for this country but when you come back home, the information is very scanty. 

Indeed, we would like to promise that we shall be able to avail this so that we take on the discussion from there. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I think it is important that we get the information on the scholarships. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is required to come and give us an update on the scholarships received throughout the world in the last three years. Let us look at the last three years because it will give us a clear picture.

Then, the Minister of Education and Sports should also explain to us how the scholarships have been distributed. They should also come here. Minister, you should come with that information. 

5.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Hamson Obua): Madam Speaker and members, I have keenly listened to the concerns raised by honourable members on the available opportunities for scholarships in Uganda. 

I have also taken note of your directive, specifically, on the available opportunities with the Ministry of Education and Sports and the procedure or criteria of giving out the scholarships, including the beneficiaries. The names of a number of countries have been mentioned; Serbia, India, Turkey, Algeria, Italy, Hungary, South Korea, Japan, Canada, Russia, Australia, Malaysia, Germany, United Kingdom, Egypt, to mention but a few. 

On behalf of the Minister of Education and Sports, we undertake to brief Parliament, by Tuesday next week, on the available scholarships, the countries providing these scholarships, the procedure and criteria of giving out the scholarships by the Central Scholarships Committee and the beneficiaries.

Madam Speaker, give us time and I will definitely report and officially notify the respective offices within the ministry to compile information related to the four critical areas. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The Minister of Foreign Affairs should similarly come to us on Tuesday with their part of the information. Thank you. Let us go to item 5. 

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you know, under the Public Finance Management Act, you are required to hand in your statements by 15 March, which will fall on a Sunday. This means that you must now do it by Thursday or latest Friday. I do not know whether you have any commitment to make, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

5.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, the ministries are working day and night to ensure that we beat this deadline and indeed, the Ministry of Public Service is now ready to submit. We pledge that by Thursday, we shall have finished all the ministries.

5.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (LANDS) (Ms Persis Namuganza): Madam Speaker, in accordance with Section 13 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, on behalf of the Ministry of Public Service, I beg to lay the ministerial statement for the Financial Year 2020/2021. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Is the Certificate of Equity Compliance here? You should come with the Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance. Is it attached? 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we have been submitting one certificate for the entire Budget.

THE SPEAKER: No. You are assessed, ministry by ministry.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we need to check, on that issue.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are two areas, which I had wanted to point out. One has been raised by the Members and the second is the standard, which this House requires of a ministerial policy statement.

I remember hon. Nandala last week raised an issue to do with the standard of the documents that are supposed to be submitted and laid on the Floor. This still rotates around what Members have been objecting. This is spiral bound and it implies that anybody can pluck out any page and it lacks chronological flow.

Madam Speaker, premised on those two standards, one, the certificate -(Interruption)

MR OTHIENO: The information I wanted to give you since you are on the Floor and you are submitting on that matter is that during the last Budget process, ministries submitted documents similar to what the minister has just submitted and it turned out that they were just dummies.

When they were referred to the committees, they could not process them and we ended up losing a lot of time because the ministries had to go back and reproduce the real documents.

Therefore, I am informing my colleague that we set a standard last time and we rejected all these dummies. We cannot even be sure about the authenticity and the contents because as my colleague has said, it can be changed anytime.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, premised on those two grounds, I move that this document be withdrawn by the ministry and reasonable documents that meet the standard of this House be submitted at later time but also with due regard to the Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I just wanted to draw the attention of the ministers to section 13, which provides that “the minister responsible for a vote, ministry or the head responsible for a vote shall by the 15th of March submit to Parliament a policy statement for the proceeding financial year for the ministries or other votes as the case maybe and the statement should be accompanied by:

    a) Certificate issued by the minister responsible for finance in consultation with the Equal Opportunities Commission certifying the policy statement in gender and equity responsive
    b) Specifying measures taken to equalise opportunities for men, women, person with disabilities and other marginalised groups.”

So, it is ministry by ministry.  Now, the quality - 

MR BAHATI: The Minister for Lands, Housing and Urban Development was laying this on behalf of the Minister of Public Service, now that the House - though you have not seen the quality, you seem to be a bit suspicious about the quality and given that also we do not have the certificate, we are requesting that we lay it again tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Together with the certificate.

MR BAHATI: But all the contents are there -(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you very much. Let us go to the next item. The matters will continue to come on the Order Paper until you have complied and submitted all of them. Go to item six.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON THE FINDINGS OF ITS FIELD VISIT TO THE MUSUBI AVOCADO FARM

6.04
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Janet Okori-Moe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on Table the report of the sectoral Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the oversight visit to Musubi Farm, Mayuge District.

I beg to present the report of the committee on its visits to Musubi Avocado Farm in Mayuge District.

During the 15th Sitting of the 2nd Meeting of the 4th Session held on 1l December 2019, the Rt Hon. Speaker directed the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to visit the Musubi Avocado Farm in Mayuge District to learn best practices in avocado farming.

The committee undertook the familiarisation visit on 6 February 2020 and held meetings with:

1) 	The managers of Musubi Farm.
2) 	The area Member of Parliament. It is always the practice by the leadership of the committee, whenever we are going to a particular area, we write to Members of Parliament from that area to inform them so that if they have time, they can join the committee. So, the area Member of Parliament joined the committee.
3) 	District councillors.
4) 	Sub-county councillors.

The committee also conducted a guided tour of the Musubi Avocado nurseries and farm. Madam Speaker, Musubi Farm is a private agricultural enterprise located in Bukabooli sub-county in Mayuge District. The farm is implementing a Hass Avocado Value Chain Development Project with a core mandate of:

(i) 	Supporting the Uganda Hass Avocado industry by championing the supply of grafted quality avocado seedlings.
(ii) 	The project also engages in commercially viable growing of the crop; and
(iii) 	Value addition through the production of avocado oi1 for the export market.

The farm sits on 2,500 acres of land of which 1,600 acres are used for sugarcane growing while 400 acres are used for avocado growing. The projection by the project managers in the next two years is to have covered 1,600 acres of land of avocado. They are currently uprooting part of the sugarcane plantation to prepare land for avocado. By the time the committee visited the farm, 120 acres of land that had initially been having sugarcane was already cleared. By 2025, the project hopes to have been done with the 2,500 acres all planted with Hass avocado variety.

The committee learnt that when the farm was opened in 2009, it was used for maize growing but it did not make any profit; one acre of maize yielded just Shs 4 million. The project then changed to watermelon and then to sugarcane farming but the returns were very minimal. On one acre of land, the farm was earning about Shs 6 million. 

The Hass avocado growing was piloted by Musubi Farm in June 2018 and the project was commissioned by the Rt Hon. Speaker. The farm employs 850 staff out of which 150 are permanent workers while 700 are casual employees. The proprietors of the Hass avocado project benchmarked from Kenya and the studies revealed then that avocado is a high value crop with huge returns. 

Currently, Kenya is the leading producer of avocado in Africa although it does not produce on large scale. The avocado is grown on small scale on individual farms. The studies revealed that under normal circumstances, with rain fed agriculture, they can earn an income of about Shs 30 million per harvest out of the 160 plants. 

The farm operates its own nursery where they graft the Hass avocado. The grafting ensures that the desired variety is connected to the hardy rootstock thereby increasing plant resistance to soil borne diseases, improving yield and increasing its adaptability to different soils.

The nurseries have a capacity of supplying one million high quality seedlings per year. The seedlings produced at the farm are maintained without any agrochemicals and are sold out to out-growers to ensure the production of a critical mass of avocados for export and raw materials for processing in the future. Like I said earlier, one acre of land can accommodate up to 160 plants with a recommended spacing of 5x5 metres between the plants. Farmers to whom the seedlings are sold have their gardens monitored by the Musubi Farm because finally, it is the farm that will buy the fruits. The farm carries out soil testing on the land of the intending farmers before they sell the seedlings to them. 

Currently, the soil testing is carried out in Kenya. So, the farm managers take the soil samples to Kenya because Kenya has a well-developed soil testing technology.

Hass avocado can survive well under Ugandan weather conditions according to what the committee discovered. It can easily adopt and survive the drought although it is advisable to irrigate the plants during severe drought. 

Hass avocado is a high value crop with a lot of demand from Europe and the Middle East. The demand for this avocado variety has been growing internationally at a rate of 10 per cent for the last 15 years. It is important to note that Uganda has been relying majorly on food crops as a commercial activity but there are several problems associated with these food crops. For example, one time, when we had a bumper harvest of maize, prices went down. Therefore, the alternative that the country could take up is the Hass avocado.

The committee also learnt that by 2017, the world-leading producer of this variety of avocado was Mexico. Mexico currently generates income equivalent to 30 per cent of Uganda’s national Budget. Within a period of two and a half years, a tree will be fully developed with a recommended height of 1.8 to 2 metres. This avocado variety can be differentiated from its darkness in colour. When it gets ready, it turns dark and if well maintained, a tree can yield 30 kilograms every season and there are two seasons in a year. When the plant is not maintained, the committee learnt that it can only yield about 17 kilogrammes. 

Therefore, it is a crop that can change the livelihoods of our citizens if taken up. After every harvest, the plants are pruned and these are formalities of how to manage the plants. 

I will go straight away to the benefits of avocados: 

    (i) It has high protein and mineral content compared to animal protein and it has 21 food nutrients. 
    (ii) It is also an essential source of good cholesterol, which is recommended. It also has very healthy soft drinks. 
    (iii) They are used in cosmetics, for example, in the manufacture of facial and hair oil. For those who are struggling with pimples, the best solution is to try out avocado.
    (iv) Economically they are a good source of income for farmers, apart from earning foreign currency to the exporting country. 

Benefits of the Farm to the Community

    1. The farm has created jobs for some of the people in the community who are employed on the farm; both skilled and unskilled employment. There are 850 employees.
    2. According to the management of the farm, some of the people residing near the farm are now involved in avocado growing as out-growers. The farm encourages out-growers by giving them seedlings. The nearby communities are given five free avocado seedlings per household but seedlings are sold at 8,000 per plant.
    3. The farm has led to people acquiring both practical and skilled knowledge in avocado planting, spacing, spraying, pruning and pinning.
    4. The community is getting sensitised and more convinced to change from sugarcane growing to avocado growing. When the committee visited the place, we found many trucks stuck with sugarcane with no option of where to sell it. Since the Musubi farm is there, most of the community members are getting interested in growing avocado. 
    5. The management of Musubi Farm helped and constructed a structure for a police station, which has accorded security to the community.
    6. Musubi Farm also constructed a water reservoir thereby providing safe water to the community. The farm management also constructed a mosque and feeder roads.

The rest are just general facts about avocado growing. It is uploaded in iPads and Members can read on their own.

Challenges

The committee was informed that the farm is faced with the following challenges:

1) 	Impassable roads during the rainy season. 

The committee also suffered the same fate during the visit. The Parliament bus failed to drive on the road because the road was very slippery. We had to get Double Cabin Pick Ups to take Members from the main road to the farm. This shows commitment and I would like to thank Members of my committee for always being very committed, brave and thorough in their work. 

2) 	The farm is desirous to form the Uganda National Avocado Growers Association, which will enable certification of only qualified nurseries to supply the seedlings. The association will also boost production of quality avocados. However, the farm cannot do this without the support of Government.

3) 	The farm is currently trying to acquire international certification but need support from Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to first certify all their nurseries. 

Recommendations

The committee, therefore, recommends as follows;

1)	Members should interest themselves and their constituents in avocado growing because it has market internationally. The demand for avocado is growing at l3 per cent per year internationally, yet, the production is growing at l0 per cent. There is a gap of three per cent between production and demand.

	Honourable colleagues, we encourage you to start small. You can even start by purchasing a few seedlings for your schools and other establishments within your constituencies. 

2) 	Hass avocado farming is a worthy investment for commercial farmers. Avocado growing should be promoted countrywide. Uganda should be part of the avocado growing and exporting countries. Kenya currently is the largest exporter in Africa where it gets up to $ 100 million in foreign exchange annually. It produces about 115,000 metric tonnes per year and 70 per cent of what it produces is grown by the small-scale farmers. 

3) 	MAAIF should inspect and, thereafter, certify the farm's nurseries to enable the farm process the international certification so as to be more competitive on the market.

4) 	There is need for Government to embrace avocado growing and even plan to have nucleus farms and demonstration gardens preferably at regional levels.

5) 	In order to promote avocado growing countrywide, the committee recommends that Hass avocado seedlings be part of the inputs supplied by NAADS to the farmers. Instead of supplying an old woman in Karamoja with orange seedlings or mango, of which she may not see the benefits as soon as Hass avocado would do, it is better to supply one with avocado seedlings.
 
Madam Speaker, I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson and the members of the agriculture committee. 

6.23
MR ANDREW KALUYA (Independent, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for the wonderful report from the farm. 

I am privileged to have visited this farm in Mayuge, especially the time when you were invited to launch this project. I was there and I managed to go around this farm. 

What I saw at that time is exactly what the committee is reporting. This project is something that is going to transform not only the region but the country in very many ways. As we are aware, avocado is a source of food but also a very big commodity when it comes to income earning, if handled properly. 

I would request that we try to make this information known to very many other people through different ways. We set up model farms at regional level where we can have this information disseminated and encourage our farmers. 

We, in Busoga, have been unfortunate that right now, we have only one cash crop – we also have coffee but it is on a smaller scale. We could increase our chances of earning by taking up the growing of avocado in our region. Now that it is a bit drought-resistant, as per the report they have given us, I think this is a big opportunity for our region. If we encourage our farmers, we can achieve from it. 

However, as I said, we need more information. We also need trainers and seedlings. If we have that in place, this is going to be a very good project for us.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have planted eight acres. 

6.26
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the very good report she has presented. Indeed, this particular variety of avocado is the best world over. I remember I first saw that avocado in Kenya and at that time, we did not have that particular type in Uganda. It is a type that can last for over two weeks on the stalls without rotting. We can even export it to various countries. The last time I checked its price in Dubai, it was at the equivalent of Shs 10,000.

In a situation where Ugandans are trying out on several crops that they think could get them out of poverty, they have attempted mangoes and oranges and apparently, all these are not proving to be crops that can help Ugandans to get out of poverty – this comes in handy.

In Busoga sub-region, for instance, almost everybody has cleared the ground in a bid to plant sugarcane and this has in a way destroyed the environment. Planting avocado would encourage good climate. In a situation where we are fighting climate change, this would also act as a solution. In that regard, I would encourage and recommend that this House resolves that it is one of the cash crops that the country will take on. 

After establishing these centres in the various regions, we need by-laws that each household should have a minimum of 10 avocado plants. The Government should come up with a deliberate effort to establish processing plants –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR AKAMBA: If we could have at least four or five processing plants in every region, we would be assured of markets for the avocado both internationally and locally. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Mawanda comes, in the past regime of the late Habyarimana, the former President of Rwanda, they had a system whereby every home had to have an avocado tree in Rwanda. I think it is still there.

6.29
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. This report has come at the right time.

Almost every two months, I receive a letter from avocado growers from Ankole. They have also written many correspondences to my colleagues with respect to this. You do not even need to legislate on avocado. Even if they ask for the product now, you can fill trucks and trucks full of avocado. 

In western Uganda, everybody has an avocado tree. What we are lacking is the market. They have organised themselves to put up a factory. In fact, they have called for a meeting in May and they have invited all members of Parliament from western Uganda to go and sit with them and look at ways and means of setting up a factory for avocado.

Avocado has very many advantages –(Interruption)

MR KALUYA: Thank you colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that whereas we have been growing avocado for many years, the particular type of avocado that attracts international market is different. It is a special species. Therefore, as we look at the international market, let us look at the specific type. Of course, its period of growth is much shorter – they grow in less than two-and a half years.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, honourable member, for the information. I would like to inform the House that for us, we are getting the seedlings from Kenya. Therefore, we have the right type of avocado that the market wants.

Madam Speaker, in China, one piece of avocado is $50. We were sharing with a student who is studying in China. For him, he takes four avocados. He packs them inside the bread –(Interjections)- Yes, inside the bread because it is very difficult to take fruits –[Mr Masika: “Information.”]- Information from the China man. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, China man. (Laughter)

MR MASIKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. People are talking about avocado costing $50 but it is beyond that because they are leaving out something, which is special - the seed. The seed inside is more than $50 because the Chinese have a way of making powerful medicine out of that. The seed makes more money than the avocado you are talking about. I have the experience and I know where they make it from. (Laughter)

MR MAWANDA: Thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, I think it is a high time Parliament resolved that a serious action be taken. We need to pronounce ourselves in respect of setting up even various factories, like you see with sugar factories. We can set up as many factories as possible. 

Secondly, in form of the benefits of avocado, we have stunted growth in Uganda. Avocado gives very good nutrients. Stunted growth is now at 29 per cent. When we talk about stunted growth, we are talking about stunted brains. You would rather deal with uneducated people than deal with people who have stunted brains. They are very hard to manage. 

Madam Speaker, we also need to spare some time and discuss the issue of malnutrition in Uganda. It is coming up seriously, yet we have the opportunities and resources. 

I remember that Operation Wealth Creation brought very many oranges to my constituency but nobody grew them. If they had asked us, first, about what items we had wanted to grow, we would have advised them. They brought oranges and mangoes, which were not grown. If they had emphasised avocado and created the market, our people would have benefitted much more from it.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, we need to look at the quality and financing of the products. This brings me to the question of financing the cooperative bank. Unless that is addressed, we shall continue to come here and make resolutions, which will not take us anywhere.

All over the world, farmers have benefited from cheap credit from agricultural banks. Very soon, we need to take a strong stand as Parliament to establish a cooperative bank or an agricultural bank to assist people who disturb us during elections. They literally come begging for Shs 2,000. Why should someone come to me for Shs 2,000, when they can sell their avocado at Shs 20,000? We need to take a decision that will help our people and for the development of this country. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.35
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for opening our eyes, especially those of us who come from agricultural constituencies.

Madam Speaker, right now, the best we can do is to request the ministry to organise its team and do soil testing. We may all go for avocado but in the end, you will find that the soil may not support the best quality avocado. I would like to give an example. In my district, watermelon grows abnormally. Our soil is too fertile for it but you may have a very huge watermelon, which is not sweet at all. We need to do soil testing to prove which soil is best for which crop.

Secondly, I think the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) should learn from this. We are wasting too much money on NAADS. They are supplying orange and mango seedlings in the communities, yet some of the seedlings are not called for. They take and dump seedlings at subcounty headquarters yet they are not used by the communities. We should do a feasibility study and get to know which kind of crop can do well in a particular area.

Madam Speaker, instead of giving us maize seeds time and again, NAADS should give Members of Parliament avocado seeds so that we can test them in our areas. They could give each Member 100 seedlings of avocado to plant. In fact, I am very proud to learn that the Speaker planted more than eight hectares. I think you are leading by example. I would like to thank you very much for that. Members of Parliament should also plant them in their areas.

For people who come from northern Uganda, right now it has become very hard to predict the weather. The weather forecast has become a major problem in our area. As we talk, people are thinking about whether to plant or not. Last year, we had abnormal rains and this year, people are just confused. Therefore, I think we need to come up with crops that will stand the test of time. I am very happy to hear that avocado may not be affected by the weather either during the rainy or dry seasons –(Member timed out.)

6.38
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the committee for the report.

There seems to be a sure market for avocado. Last year, I was interacting with a colleague who told me that they were going for a conference on avocado. I wondered what kind of conference this was. This really shows the seriousness with which this plant is taken. Therefore, I think it is very important that we encourage our farmers to diversify the economy so that they do not get stuck with one crop.

It is unfortunate to hear that soil testing is being done in another country. I have been asking myself whether it is only soil meant for avocado growing that is taken to Kenya for testing. We have the National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO); I thought it was NARO’s role to help Ugandans test the soil so that the farmers get to know on which soil to grow which crop.

Madam Speaker, I come from Amudat District, which is basically a cattle-keeping area. As I speak, our people have now learnt how to eat avocado. We have a market day every Saturday and on that market day, business people from Mbale, Sironko and Soroti bring their produce, including avocado. The commodity my people consume very fast in the market is avocado. You find women giving their young ones avocado. One time I asked them, “What is that?” Of course, they have their own local way of calling it. They said these children enjoy the avocado since it is very nice for them. I think it is important for us to encourage our farmers.

I would like to also thank Musubi Farm. Within the shortest time, they have done a lot of corporate social responsibility. Unlike the sugarcane growers, whom this House has discussed a number of times, Musubi Farm seems to be helping farmers since they have been able to provide them with water, constructed roads and even a mosque. I think together with the communities there, this farm needs to be supported. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.41
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, PWD Representative, Western): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank my colleague, the Chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, for this exploration.

Madam Speaker, the greatest challenge in Uganda has not been production but marketing. Our people produce in abundance but in the end, they cannot market their products. That also applies to avocado. On 28 October 2018, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, hon. Vincent Ssempijja, and I represented the President in Abu Dhabi. Uganda signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with United Arab Emirates to open market for Uganda’s agricultural products, and avocado was among the priority products that they wanted from Uganda.

Madam Speaker, the market is available in that country. I would therefore request that you implore the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to come and lay on the Table this memorandum of understanding that was signed between Uganda and United Arab Emirates to open markets for Ugandans’ agricultural products.

I would like to concur with my colleague; if you are in Dubai and you ask for one fruit of avocado, you pay an equivalent of Shs 10,000.  (Interruption)

MR EITUNGANANE: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that avocado oil is the best oil that has ever existed. It is ten times better than olive oil. It is very healthy.

The level of investment that Government needs to critically take on is how best to develop it because this can be a very critical source of revenue for Government. However, the challenge we have is sustainability of the product; how can the country maintain the supply? That is the problem. Thank you.

MR KATURAMU: Thank you, honourable colleague, for this information. I suggest that this effort that has been made in Mayuge should be turned into a demonstration farm for avocado so that all Ugandans can come and study the improved quality –(Member timed out.)

6.44
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for the good work that they did and particularly for this initiative, which will help to address climate change. Assuming every household planted 50 avocado trees, the effects of climate change would be history. 

When I was in Makerere University, there were soil scientists who were very good but now from the report of the chairperson, I heard that they were testing the soil from Kenya. Is it because of lack of personnel, equipment; what is the problem? -(Interruption)

MR WAMAKUYU: Thank you, honourable. We have Dr Zaake, a soil scientist based in Makerere University. 

MR NZOGHU: Why should we take our soil to Kenya when we have serious soil scientists here? We used to move around the Faculty of Agriculture and we would see them doing serious work. The committee needs to visit some of these research centres, including Makerere University, so that they establish whether this work cannot be done internally. Once it is done internally, it will help many Ugandans to understand whether they can grow this type of avocado or not.

Secondly, as Parliament, we have the mandate to appropriate and we know very well that this type of avocado can do very well; even the investment does not require a lot of money. Therefore, why can’t the committee research into –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a district farm institute in Ikulwe, Mayuge District, but the Government decided that the research for Busoga should be done in the highlands of Mbale, in Buginyanya. That is why the other day I said, “Liberate us from Buginyanya”. Ikulwe is there; it could do that.

6.48
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I add my voice in thanking the chairperson and the committee members for doing a great job. 

As a little child my grandfather, Donasiano Obina, who was a prisons officer, introduced what we called a strange plant in our village. Later, we learnt that it was an avocado tree and up to now it is still there, and there was a jackfruit tree. These are two important trees in our home that are giving especially the old women good money, let alone these new species. This is how good planting trees at home can be.

Here in Seeta, my home is very cool because I have several plants. I never buy avocado, I have a lot of bananas and some other trees. Members, you may not have very big land but I think that you can plant one tree and it will do wonders in your life.

The chairperson talked about the challenge of bad roads. I would like to appeal to the Ministry of Works and Transport that priority be given to such places. If we have such a good example, why can’t we have a good murrum road which is accessible? If people are getting stuck, then how will an investor find value in what they do?

Where I come from in Amuru, there is a place called Lakang where most of the big investors are doing agriculture. When it is time to bring the harvest to town where they can sell the produce and make money, the roads are completely cut off for about two to three months and the farmers are forced to sell their produce at a low price, for example a kilogramme of rice is sold at Shs 800. It is unbelievable, but it is what people do out of desperation. I hope this will not go to that level. However, if they are so desperate and they cannot access the market, I am sure that the prices will go so low.

Avocado is perishable. Much as we said that it can take two weeks, there comes a time when it will rot. If the roads are bad, the investors are going to make loses and move to another place. I do not think that we want to go in that direction, so I appeal to the Minister of Works –(Member timed out.)

6.51
MS MARY KABANDA (DP, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to those who have thanked the chairperson and the committee for the good report. 

I recommend that we adopt avocado as a cash crop in Uganda. First of all, it is food; even if it loses market, we can eat it and it is medicinal. However, we have to emphasise on soil testing because they type of soil changes the size and the taste of the avocado. 

I have ready market in the UK. They asked me to produce 100,000 avocados every week. I moved around Masaka, as the Woman Member of Parliament for Masaka District, but I could not get that. I had to turn down the offer, but they are always “on my neck” saying that there is market. 

As the chairperson explained, the type and size which they saw at the farm seems to be the real size that they are talking about. We have avocado in Masaka but it is not the type and size that they want. Therefore, we should emphasize soil testing and give it priority. Now that the price of coffee has gone down, our people can reap from growing avocado. Thank you.

6.53
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (Justice Forum, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I equally appreciate the committee for the very educative report that they have presented. 

We can help farmers of this nature through programmes that Government introduced. I would like to specifically refer to the agricultural credit facility that was introduced by Government in 2009. Unfortunately, that facility has not been accessible especially to the eastern and northern parts of the country for two reasons: the participating financial institutions are very limited that side of the country but more seriously, the bureaucracy in accessing that facility is so high. Government should, therefore, consider making that facility accessible to farmers, but also ensuring that there is limited bureaucracy. 

I think the rationale of Government was to help farmers of this nature but that facility is not helping them. Now that we know that this farm is capable of producing seedlings, we should even go ahead to ban the importation of avocado seedlings into the country, so that that particular farm is given capacity to produce and supply.

You hear people saying seedlings are being imported from Kenya and other countries, yet there is production in that place. The only way that farm can be supported is if there is restriction on importation of seedlings and capacity is given to that particular farm.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, maybe our Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development should take an interest in that money. I tried to get that money for my farmers but I gave up. I tried and tried and gave up.

6.55
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me join colleagues in thanking the chairperson and the committee for this very informative report. 

I have been going through an extensive list of the benefits of avocado and I am very impressed, because it even includes drugs for the impotent. If you were to make a comparative competitive study in the region, Uganda stands an advantage, compared to our neighbours, especially when it comes to marketing organic agricultural products like the avocado now. I am sure we are a country whose soils, crops and environment have not yet been contaminated by genetically modified organisms, so market for this particular crop would be very high.

Much as we focus our efforts on production, the past should give us some lessons. There was a hype to produce moringa in Uganda one time and Ugandans produced moringa. There was a time when it was vanilla, which was the magic crop, and they produced lots of it. There were rabbits and oranges in Soroti. Eventually, there was no market.

The question therefore should always be: Is the production directly proportional to the market? There should be market and this must be emphasized. A lot of efforts must be focused on market. 

Madam Speaker, Operation Wealth Creation should go avocado now, because it is an operation like Operation Thunder or Operation Iron Fist. Operation Wealth Creation is where the wealth for the citizens of Uganda could emanate from but that they bring seedlings of Eucalyptus trees to distribute to mountainous regions, when there is now avocado which  –(Member timed out.)

6.58
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and the chairperson for a good report. I would also like to thank you very much because you are the one who gave a directive for them to go and do the study.

I would like to start by supporting what my colleague from Bugiri Municipality was saying, that we ban the importation of avocado seedlings to Uganda. We now have an opportunity to export the seedlings beyond Uganda because I know even the demand for the seedlings is going to be high. Like my colleague, hon. Nambeshe, said in Teso, we normally plant a lot of oranges and a factory was put there. It is now a white elephant. I want to begin from there. 

As we speak now, they are not buying any oranges or fruits from the farmers. Remember, there was a petition here. Since that time, the committee has not even visited those farmers and they are still crying up to now. I would even appeal that you request the committee to go to Teso to do the needful, as they have done in this one.

Thirdly, if you read the Bible very well, especially if you read Genesis 45:18, God was commanding man to eat the fat of the land. When you look at avocado, by the way, it is actually a natural fat, high in vitamin E. That is a reality. Even God is actually encouraging people to eat but you cannot eat unless you have planted. That is basically one thing that if God is supporting, who am I to oppose what He is talking about? (Laughter)

That is why I am appealing to all of us, Madam Speaker, that we must actually support this. However, at the same time, we should be mindful that markets should be available. Remember the other one called moringa; it was moringa all the time. I remember on UBC, it was moringa, moringa, moringa and we planted but there was no market. So, I am sure if that is to be sorted out, I will be one of those people who going to –(Member timed out.)

7.01
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to those of the rest of the Members to thank the chairperson and the members of the committee for the report. 

From the words that have been spoken by the other colleagues, you can see why we are emphasising the fact that we wanted agriculture to be one of the compulsory subjects in Uganda. However, when you look at the curriculum, that is not what came out.

I remember way back in 2015, the eastern region suffered a lot of malnutrition, especially among the children, and the local communities were calling it olunyanja. Very many children died because our people were ignorant about such things that we are now talking about.

Madam Speaker, when I heard that you had planted eight acres, I looked at it as a very good demonstration farm, especially for our region where we lack very many things. You know that most of our people are not really empowered when it comes to our incomes.

Everybody is talking about the market but I have been asking myself here that what exactly we are benefitting from the East African integration. Let us market this to the East African countries. I am sure this is not what they are thinking about. We have the East African Legislative Assembly. I think we should begin with our own before we think about the UK, France and the others. We have the markets. Even when we have not sold to other countries, we still do not have enough food in our homes and I am sure we cannot lack market.

Lastly, when you look at the level of unemployment in Uganda, we have been looking at how we can involve youth economically and I am sure this is a good initiative. If we sell it to Government and say that this is part of what we want to employ the youth in, I am sure it can work for us. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

7.03
MR EMMANUEL KALULE (NRM, Gomba County East, Gomba): Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity. I would like to thank the chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for this very exciting report. I have also been impressed by the information given to us by our Chinese colleague, who says that in China, the seed alone can cost over Shs 10,000.

Therefore, I am under the impression that we already have the market. The problem in Uganda has been that we produce before getting the market, but the market is in China and the Chinese are over one billion people; I do not think we can even produce enough avocados for them.

I would like to request the Government now to take an interest in this project. Instead of limiting the demonstration farm to Mayuge, why don’t they also start one at Namulonge Research Station, so that some of us from the central region can get our seedlings from there instead of running to Mayuge?

Madam Speaker, he also talked about avocado oil. If avocado oil can be used for women’s hair and for cooking, I am sure this crop will be the salvation for Ugandans. This is a way of getting out of poverty - (Interjection)- Not for men; men do not normally put oil in their –(Laughter)– Madam Speaker, men are not supposed to put oil in their hair. That is a reserve for women.

As our colleagues pointed out, let Government, instead of giving us mangoes, start giving us avocado seedlings. If each Member of Parliament plants at least two to five acres, I am sure that within a short time, this crop will spread throughout the country. I know that Uganda’s soil accepts most crops. In my constituency, for example, I have been growing apples and they are doing well. If apples can do well in my place, I am sure this avocado will do very well too.

I would like to suggest that the Government should move fast and assist us to multiply the seedlings. We need to take up this crop because we already have the market in China. Let the Government carry out more market research. If we know that the Chinese can consume tons of –(Member timed out.)

7.06
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was so happy when I entered this House and found the chairperson reading this report because I have a history of trading in avocado. Before I came to this Parliament, I was selling avocado to exporters in Kampala. At the moment, I have friend who exports avocados but he cannot get enough because he is a small business person.

The problem I found is that they did not want avocados with scratches because they fear and think that such avocados might be having some insects inside them. Therefore, we have to be very careful when we are growing those avocados.

I am so happy that Uganda has a variety of fruits that are liked all over the world. Kenya has had it but now, it is in Uganda. We expect this variety to change the livelihood of Ugandans because they have been depending on coffee, cotton, sugarcane and other things which require a lot of land for production. From the report read by the chairperson, avocado does not need a lot of land because of the spacing that I heard of. That means we shall use limited land to have more production and Ugandans can get rich using the small pieces of land they have.

My suggestion is that Members of Parliament who never went there, - I have already written to the chairperson expressing interests to go there and see - can use their own time to go there to see, if we can be allowed. Madam Speaker, we can even go to your farm if the farm can accommodate all of us. 

We need to learn so that our people get this information early enough. Kenya has been growing this for so many years and we had not accessed it. It is now our time and I believe we cannot fail to get money for avocado. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.09
MR WAMAKUYU MUDIMI (NRM, Elgon County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We should not talk about market because recently, I got a person in Europe who can buy between 10 to 14 40ft containers of avocado per month. I have the documents and if you have capacity, I can give you the documents now.

I engaged the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries when I went there and they said the Ugandan market cannot sustain this. I talked to hon. Ssempijja and the quality assurance officer, Mr Mwambu, and they said no, I should not take that risk to sign the contract because we do not have the capacity. Therefore, right now, we do not have the product.

Colombia is one of the economies, which produce in large quantities. However, the supply there is not enough. Government should reduce on its effort to give people coffee seedlings and other seeds and begin dealing with avocado.

I come from Buginyanya, a place with good soils for avocado growing. However, we grow these traditional ones and we normally supply Amudat and other areas. However, as I speak, in Bulambuli alone, security for avocados is a challenge; people steal. So, once the crop flowers, people now normally sell it at this stage, leaving the buyer to take care of the security. Right now, there is insecurity and theft of avocado fruits in my place.

I implore Government to shift from citrus crops to avocado growing because there is a global market for it. Thank you.

7.12
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee for the good work and indeed for their guidance. I am starting to confirm that this is the best Parliament that Uganda has had. I would like to confirm to my voters in Butemba that next term, I will be doing more wonders because I belong to a group that is doing wonders in terms of sorting our social-economic challenges. I know my voters are watching me. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, there is no doubt about the health benefits of avocado. Of great importance to note, as a professional clinical nutritionist, is the fact that we are faced with a challenge of too many pimples especially among young people and those partiers who want to eat a lot of fries. However, do you know that avocado provides an adequate solution to that problem, especially when one eats it and smears it on the face? People would actually save a lot of money, instead of buying those jellies that, at the end of the day, bleach them. Avocado is a solution and we are living with it.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that from listening to our debate on avocado growing in Uganda, the advances happening in Busoga and the available market, everyone might start thinking of growing avocado, although it may not be possible for the whole country. That is why we need - and we have talked about this before - to zone our country and know which regions do better in what. There are so many economic avenues that we can engage in. After that, we shall be able to produce according to what we can and in terms of what our soils can manage. 

Of course, there is no doubt that such an avenue should receive very good support. However, Madam Speaker, it is also greatly important for us to be systematic in a way that will ensure that what we shall do today can stand the test of time. 

Our people are failing to work because they are working as individuals; it is an individual, a family or a small group, moreover unsupported. In other countries, what is happening is that people have cooperative societies. We need farmers’ cooperative societies - those SACCOs are working everywhere, even with boda bodas - so that people stand as a team. It is better to mobilise resources and get market or raise a voice when you are together as a unit but not as an individual.

Secondly, the chairperson talked about –(Member timed out.)

The Speaker: Half a minute to conclude.

Mr kamusiime: The chairperson talked about certification that would open our international markets. We need to promote such, to make sure that our people acquire it through help from the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives.

Finally, we need affordable financing so that our farmers’ associations, the SACCOs, can have money, which they can use and make a profit to make them move. Without those, we shall not move far. Thank you.

The Speaker: Join me in welcoming our Ambassador, Mirjam Blaak, the head of mission in Belgium. She is accredited to Netherlands, Luxemburg and the European Union. We have been talking about the Netherlands this afternoon. You are welcome. (Applause)

7.15
Mr james baba (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for an excellent report. 

I would like to confirm the statement she made in that report. On 14 February, I was at Namboole during the Harvest Money show. It is a huge agricultural show organised by the New Vision and the Netherlands Embassy. I was shocked that private entities can organise better shows than our Government. It was well done.

I went specifically for this Hass avocado. Who were the presenters? Musubi Farm. It was a very impressive presentation. They were very organised. They started this farm on the assurance of the market - 100 metric tonnes required from Uganda per week - which we cannot meet. They were doing sugarcane on 2,600 acres but they have abandoned it. Now they have planted 1,600 acres of Hass avocados and they are raising seedlings. They started this thing in 2018, so they are in a position to supply seedlings to whoever wants. 

They have gone into this to fight poverty in Busoga. Madam Speaker, you have been agonising about poverty in Busoga like all of us are agonising about poverty in this country. Avocado is a game changer for now, given the market conditions.

Another crop I was very impressed with in Busoga was cocoa. Five years ago, I was in Mayuge and when I saw a cocoa plantation, I started shivering. I saw cocoa, which is better than what I saw in Ghana or Cote d’Ivoire. Why are we poor? Cocoa is doing so well in Mayuge, Mukono and Buikwe. Now Hoima, Kagadi and Kikuube are producing some of the best cocoa the world demands. There are over 10 international buyers competing for cocoa in Bundibugyo. 

Our National Development Plan III (NDP III) must revisit their priorities. They must see the market indicators of the products the world demands instead of promoting useless things through NAADs and Operation Wealth Creation, which have no market. Hon. Abala has gone home to sleep because of rotten oranges. (Laughter) There is no market for the oranges –(Interruption)- I will take the information. 

Mr mwiru: Thank you, hon. Baba, for giving way. The information I would like to give to the House is that this House passed a resolution that we should have a national seed bank so that all seeds, which we give our people for planting, have been tested and proved to be appropriate. However, Government ignored this resolution to establish a national seed bank and they are still expecting miracles to happen. Thank you.

Mr james baba: Musubi Farm must be supported to develop a seed bank for Hass avocado for the whole country. Now they are the best. They showed us at Namboole on 14, 15 and 16 February. Secondly, NDP must be revisited in terms of our priorities in the agricultural sector. We must get focused.

Thirdly, hon. Basalirwa talked about the agricultural credit facility. That thing is a dead end. No commercial banks are interested in that facility. The facility was created by Bank of Uganda. They provided the financial institutions with 50 per cent of the money and the commercial banks provided 50 per cent. It should be lent at 12 per cent interest rate. The banks are not interested. They want to lend their money at 20 or 22 per cent and not this miserable 12 per cent. You can walk to financial institutions for ever and you will never get that money.

Therefore, Bank of Uganda and my Government must revisit this agricultural financing. Mayuge farmers are not going to afford the Shs 8,000 per seedling of this Hass avocado. They need financing.

I thank the chairperson of the committee for bringing this to our attention. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should take this up and put it in our priorities. If the National Development Plan III is out, it should be taken back for revisiting, especially in the agricultural sector. I thank you.

7.21
Mr Isaac MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Colleagues have been thanking the chairperson but I think the right person to thank is you, the Speaker, who directed the committee to go and rediscover this powerful cash crop of our country. 

Almost everything has been mentioned, apart from the two that I have highlighted. According to the statistics given by the report of the committee about Musubi Farm, on their 2,500 acres they had tried out maize and were getting Shs 4 million per acre; they then went to watermelon and tomatoes, getting Shs 6 million per acre. In 2018, when they decided to venture into this new cash crop, planting 160 plants with a spacing of five by five metres per acre, they are reaping Shs 30 million per harvest. On average, every plant gives them 30 kilogrammes. 

I have calculated that if an acre is 160 plants, multiplied by 30 kilogrammes, that gives you 4,800 kilogrammes per harvest. If we get Shs 30 million from 4,800 kilogrammes, that means each kilogramme is Shs 6,250. As we speak, a wet kilogramme of coffee goes for Shs 1,800 and a dry one ranges between Shs 2,000 and Shs 3,000. Avocado now supersedes this. 

Madam Speaker, you have discovered a new cash crop for Uganda. If that is the case, I only have a fear of what they taught us at school of the cobweb theorem where farmers never learn from their experience in that we may rush into this countrywide only to harvest when there is no market. That is my major worry.

I would like to appeal to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to put in more resources and do thorough research. The former USA Vice-President, Joe Biden, once said, “Do not tell me your values; simply show me your budget and I will tell you your values.” If we value agriculture and our people, it is the time to increase our budget allocation to agriculture. When you look at – (Member timed out.) 

7.24
MS PAULINE KEMIREMBE (NRM, Woman Representative, Lyantonde): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. According to the committee findings, the Hass avocado can do well in most parts of the country. We are looking at our grassroots people but the challenge is that most of our people do not have this land. 

One time, people were told to grow tea in Kabale, Kigezi region. People went into growing tea but after some time, around 2017/2018, they were hit by hunger. In my opinion, we need to sensitise these grassroots people. I see that when this avocado gets to the market, it is going to be taken up by the well-to-do people, if I may say. There is a lot of land grabbing so you find that even the poor will not benefit from this avocado species. 

One of my recommendations would be to sensitise the grassroots person on how to partition their land. If one has two acres of land, they can get one acre for avocado growing. I will give you an example. I also went to that exhibition in Namboole with my dad, who is an agriculturalist. He brought his soil for testing and they told him it can do well. As I speak, he has cleared 20 acres of land. He has a dairy farm but when he heard about this, he picked interest. He is an 85-year-old man but he wants to try it. I think it is a very good venture that will get us out of poverty. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

7.26
MR WILSON KUMAMA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We right away see that the problem in our country is basically planning. The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should go ahead and help us come up with a comprehensive map of all these crops that are actually grown in our countries so that we know which crop does best where. Like my colleagues said, agricultural zoning in this country seems not to have taken root. We should know which area can grow what, other than us randomly growing crops, which do not take us far.

I think the ministry should take interest in guiding this country on which crops should grow where. Under Operation Wealth Creation today, they are throwing mangoes and oranges all over the place where they may not even grow. I think there must be keen interest in zoning agricultural production.

If the Speaker cannot access great facilities, then I do not know who can access them. That is a point to note. This means that financing agricultural produce or production in this country must be taken serious, because we cannot just look at crops and farmers helplessly being tortured by the financing aspect. 

The President has been emphasising commercial farming. This subsistence farming is actually dwarfing us. We need to do commercial farming. When you talk about avocado growing, it must be at a commercial level and not one to three trees or a few trees in your compound. If you can grow 20 or 30 acres of avocado, I think that is something to think about. However, if you think of subsistence farming and one or two trees, that will not take us far. 

I also emulate my friend who brought up the issue of cooperative groups because individually, people may not take farming very seriously but if they are growing in groups – the youth, elderly and cooperative societies - they could go a long way. Thank you.

7.29
MR APOLLO MASIKA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have talked a lot about the avocado, which is very important. First of all, if I was allowed, I would straight away give the chairperson of the agricultural committee - the one who has just presented this report we are talking about - a doctorate, but I am not able to. Also, I would make the President of Uganda a professor in this field because he has been telling people to grow fruits at home. However, people have been taking it for granted. 

I would like to tell you that I was in China and I saw how these people had jumped from poverty to high class society, and the whole is getting threatened by this. When I came here and fell sick, I learned some technology from China. When we grow the avocado you are talking about and sell it abroad, we will lose a lot of money. The President has been emphasising that we should make everything here, up to the least product. 

I saw the Chinese mixing avocado peelings, mango leaves and another fruit. When they boil it, they get a liquid which they bottle. One doctor would just write and scratch on the paper. When I asked him what it was, he said it was a magic way of transmitting the message to another doctor. Our doctors here also do it; they use a handwriting that only another doctor can understand. However, I followed it up. 

When I came here, I fell sick. I was anaemic and I lacked blood in hospital. The doctors would run around trying to bring blood and they gave me only one pint. When I thought of that, I told my people to boil for me the avocado leaves and peelings and the mango leaves. When they did it, my blood was over flooding within two weeks. (Laughter) The doctors had checked me and my tongue and they saw that I lacked blood but when I used this, it over flooded. They asked me which magic I used. You can ask Dr Nakwagala in Mulago for proof – (Member timed out) 

MR MASIKA: May I conclude? 

THE SPEAKER: With the blood -

MR MASIKA: I have finished with that. We can also export the important ingredients of the avocado, which I saw in China, but the main ingredient remains the fruit

For fish, people even cut the fish and remove the maws and then the useless things are thrown away by the fish monger. The main ingredient is the fish maw, which is almost 50,000 to 60,000 US dollars. The avocado seed is the most important. I told you it is $10 but it is $100, after they make some medicine out of it. 

Therefore, we are on the right track. Leave the gold and petroleum alone. Petroleum will get exhausted but when we grow the avocado, the lemon and the other fruits, we shall move our country in a very high gear of development. Thank you very much. 

7.33
MR MOSES NAGWOMU (NRM, Bunyole East County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me join my honourable colleagues to thank the chairperson for the enriching report presented to this House. 

Madam Speaker, in a special way, I cannot fail to thank you for your strategic thinking for this House. You have consistently maintained your oath, which you took while taking that seat. You said Ugandans deserve the best. Whatever you have done by empowering this committee to come up with this good report is because you want Uganda to move from one level to another, and you have not stopped on that but you have also participated by walking the talk, when you said you have eight acres of avocado.

Honourable members, sometimes I sit and think about how we shall get out of poverty if our technocrats do not really walk to the ground to find out what is feasible for our people.

Madam Speaker, the avocado plant has many products which we can take as an advantage to move from poverty and take off. Right now, our honourable colleague from Buginyanya has told us the demand is to the level of ten 40ft containers, which we cannot afford according to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

What is the problem? The problem is that the wealth creation experts do not know what is feasible for the population. In my place in Butaleja, they have brought things which they have not even discussed with the population or consulted on whether they can afford to raise, for instance, heifers, exotic cows. These require somebody with an income. Exotic cows need a constant income. 

Madam Speaker, if we were given such an avocado project, we could do better. I request your good office to implore these people to come to the ground and always do a feasibility study with the people and even take keen interest in the soils, so that they can give the right medicine for the right disease. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries said this is not possible without even trying. They simply said “do not touch the contract”.

7.37
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think our Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is not a serious ministry; maybe we need to get people in some ministries who hold the profession at heart. However, if you just pick someone who goes and picks cows from the National Animal Genetic Resource Centre (NAGRC) and takes them to be slaughtered instead of replicating, I think that is where the problem is.

Madam Speaker, the name Hass comes from the person who first grew those types of avocado. That gentleman was called Rudolph “Rudie” Gustav Hass, who was born in 1892 and died in 1952. He first planted the avocado tree in 1926 in California, in the La Habra Heights. The lifespan of an avocado tree is said to be 400 years. The first tree, which that gentleman grew in California in 1926, still bears fruits up to date. Members, you may wish to crosscheck that information. It is a tree that gives income to a person for a long time. It is from the species called Persea americana and it is from there that it went to Mexico and then Africa.

Madam Speaker, I think our Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, like you heard Members here debating and saying they will grow it, do not know the species. We do not want them to fall into a trap that the people of Teso fell into as they were not guided by NAADS which just dumped the seedlings. We did not know whether they were Hamlin or Washington species and what the factory needed. So, we all went and grew different species of oranges without being guided. Therefore, it is very important for the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to really guide people. 

Members are talking about research being important, like testing the soils. It is like mangoes; they cannot grow in any part of the country. That is why you find that in central Buganda, you may not be able to do well with mangoes and oranges but in Nakasongola or Kasese mangoes do very well. Therefore, I think the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries needs to guide people.

Madam Speaker, I think Members should pick from the example you have shown in starting this project. Let us be role models in our constituencies. Let us start this project and see how we can be able to help the population. They can learn from us.

I also went to Namboole. I went there because Mr Kabushenga invited me and the Gateway avocado growers are my personal friends. I saw what these people do. I have been to their factory in Mayuge. Of course, they have the challenge of power and they asked me about that. They had even paid money to Uganda Electricity Generation Company but up to now, they have not been supplied, and that is what is stalling the official opening of that place.

They requested me to tell you, Madam Speaker, to ask the people of the Ministry of Energy to help them; otherwise, their production is going to stall. They also said I encourage Members to visit the place. They are also selling seedlings. It is one of the ways in which we can be able to help them grow but also advance and make people benefit.

Avocado has 12 benefits. I do not want to go into that; just Google them and you will read for yourselves. Government should stop doing things the ad hoc way. That is where the problem is. However, for us who can be able to have an acre, for example, let us start and live by the example Madam Speaker has set. I have started a small farm of just six acres. They are still young. We can start from there and see how we can be able to move. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought I should be able to give that information.

7.42
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I join Members to thank my former vice-chair of the foreign affairs committee for the work well done. I know that she does work with total dedication. I stand to support this initiative that you started. I think we may need to begin thinking of changing these words we talk about, like “Uganda, gifted by nature”. I think Uganda is gifted by God. It is from God that we derive nature.

We are talking about avocado today but when I visited South Africa, I found a white man talking about our pineapples at a conference. He said that there is no pineapple in the whole world that is so sweet and juicy like the Ugandan pineapple. They thought we used to put sugar in it and then serve in hotels. He came here, went to the market, cut his pineapple and tested it and it was natural. However, we do not promote them.

When you come to avocados, actually the scientists are saying that the best avocados are from the belt of Busoga, across Luweero to Bunyoro. They say that there is a species which is sugary but not quite sugary, it just in the middle there. They say that it is the best that can reduce heart disease and obesity because it contains vitamins C, A, K, B and E. However, our people think that when you eat meat every day –(Interjections)– I am giving you scientific information. There is a belief that when you eat avocado, you are a very poor person and anything which borders on desserts is for other people. However, this is where the nutrients are. 

Now that we have discovered that this is very important, it is no longer a food crop. Many people talk about cash crops and this is a better cash crop than any food crop. In our primary school days, we learnt about how Europe learnt about Africa, but Africa has never learnt about Europe, even if we studied about them in primary school. This is the first time to have all the focus on some of our products beyond avocado, and they are there. 

How can we make Uganda the central hub of exporting agricultural produce that is from the real tropical Africa? Uganda is astride the Equator and I do not know why we have never talked about utilising our being astride the Equator as the best opportunity to market Uganda in terms of agricultural produce. It is a very big challenge. 

As we speak now, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, as I said earlier, are loudly absent in this House and when they come, they speak with arrogance. I think that it is high time we looked at that ministry. If it means beginning to hit on them in this House, we should do so, because such a very valuable report cannot just be left to lie in the Hansard. We must discuss the implementation strategy of this cash crop called avocado. I beg to submit.          

7.46
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your time and for leading us very well. 

It is unfortunate that the minister in charge of finance is not here. However, if it means getting a loan immediately, let us get a loan and we help the farmers to start growing avocado. As a member of the climate change committee, I would like to say that we have been moving around encouraging people to plant other species of trees instead of only eucalyptus and other trees. Let us tell them to plant avocado trees. Even if you have a small piece of land, once you make it around your small piece of land, you can plant 20 trees. When the big ones with acres are selling theirs, you can also sell yours.

Let us change the mind-set of the people and the farmers. From today, let us tell the NAADS people that instead of taking these small goats to our farmers, let them cancel all that and take avocado seedlings to the farmers. The farmers should plant them and get the same harvest and supply to export to other countries and all Ugandans get rich at the same time. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

7.47
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chair for the report. It has taken politicians to discover the magic for our survival. It has taken our own Rt Hon. Speaker to open the eyes of Ugandans. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for being a model and practising what you preach.

Madam Speaker, you know my compound very well since you have been there. You have seen that my avocado tree is very tall but producing almost nothing. It is just for shade and beauty. I am going to uproot them and plant this wonderful tree.  

I have noted the benefits and they are very convincing in terms of jobs, medicine, food, incomes and environment. The challenges are there but they should not discourage us - the bad roads, the need for international certification, the need to ensure quality, soil testing, thefts in some places, the need for irrigation and the lack of power, among others. However, the committee has made very good recommendations and I have captured quite a number here.

Madam Speaker, if I show you my notes, I think that I have almost written my own committee report. We need demonstration farms regionally, processing plants, our own soil testing, and we need to rollout this initiative, we need research, affordable credit and cooperatives, among others. The task ahead is very clear; we need to look at the bigger picture, not just looking at one or two plants of avocado and some trucks here carrying some avocados across the border. 

We need to look at why we are here as leaders, why the Government exists, why I am here as somebody in charge of local government. Our responsibility is to turn around this country to end poverty. This song of 68 per cent of the population in subsistence agriculture, over so many years - we are talking the same language. 

It is not the problem of land, it is not the problem of people but it is the problem of knowing what to do and we have got the example. One acre of land brings Shs 60 million per annum. So, for the Rt Hon. Speaker, who has 80 acres, people should not be surprised if at the end of the year, this lady has over Shs 480 million and people start wondering where is she getting the money; is she going under the lake? No, this thing is very clear. If we are going to change Uganda, then we must look for the right combination of products that lead to income generation and this is one of them.

I see my task very clear. Today, I think I have covered this Front Bench alone without competition. So, my responsibility is to awaken the interest of Government in this project and its by-products. Somebody said, “Show me your budget and I will show you your values.” We are just at the time of budgeting and this is the time to see where we are allocating our resources. I would not hesitate – I have seen in the Ministry of Local Government that we have very many projects; why not have a project, even if it requires a loan, to pilot this in the region where it has started? Let us go to the eastern region and give them support. Buy these seedlings from that nursery bed, distribute them, give them the trucks, give the storage, buy for them the processing plants and assist them with the market and that region will change. If we can do it in one region, we shall do it in the other regions.

I have to immediately tell hon. Vincent Ssempijja, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, to come and make an official statement in response to the committee report and give concrete actions on what to do in order to take this forward. This cannot stop at a mere committee report. 

It is coming to 8.00 O’clock, Madam Speaker. However, I do not regret sitting here with you up to this time. This is the benefit of sitting up to the end. Maybe you should always keep the best for last as a certain singer said. Maybe that is how you will get Parliament full up to this time. How would we have known that hon. Masika is a doctor who knows how to create an overflow of blood for patients of anaemia? (Laughter)

Thank you, Madam Speaker. I pledge to play my part in informing the Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. Arising from the discussion, I think there are some eight points we agreed on, in addition to what the minister has said, and these are: 

1. 	Government to adopt the avocado as both a food and a cash crop;

2. 	Consider providing an agricultural facility to promote avocado growing;

3. 	The population be sensitised to take on avocado growing. I think, since you are here, Minister, the local governments could also make local by-laws to have homes grow avocado;

4. 	Review NDPIII to accommodate avocado growing in the agricultural sector;

5. 	NAADS to consider availing avocado seedlings, under the OWC programme;

6. 	Soil testing be undertaken in the different regions to determine its suitability for Hass avocado growing and advise the farmers. In particular, in respect to Musubi, I think the agriculture minister should empower Ikulwe District Farm Institute (DFI) in Mayuge to undertake research on the soil; 

7. 	Musubi Farm should be considered as a model farm for farmers to draw lessons from. I think they are the pioneers and so, we should give them support; and 

8. 	The agriculture ministry should draw up an implementation strategy for avocado growing in this country. I think those were the – 

MR ISAAC SSOZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I propose that we should add that because of the high protein and vitamin content of the fruit, the Ministry of Education and Sports should direct that all our schools plant some avocado plants. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, all our schools to have some avocado plants to give nutrition to the children. 

MR WAMAKUYU: Madam Speaker, there was a challenge of power faced by the demonstration farm. Parliament approved money for the extension of power under the Isimba Dam. Can we direct that UREA extends power to that farm? 

THE SPEAKER: It is very important. Actually, when I came back, I wrote but it seems they have not acted. I am going to do the needful tonight. 

Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the committee, its recommendations and resolutions of this House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. 

7.57
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (MS Grace Okori-Moe): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you and the honourable members for the overwhelming support for the report and recommendations of the committee. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have done enough for the day. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 7.58 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 11 March 2020 at 2.00 p.m.) 

