
Wednesday, 26 March 2014

Parliament met at 3.07 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I will begin by adjusting the Order Paper; item 3 will move to tomorrow because the mover is not available. 

Secondly, I wanted to announce that the Parliamentary Commission has organised a two-day retreat for all committee chairpersons and as you recall, we approved them yesterday. The retreat will take place in Imperial Resort Hotel, Entebbe on the 28th March and 29th   March. So, you are expected to check in tomorrow evening at Imperial Resort Hotel. We have already circulated this to you through the pigeon holes and so, we expect all of you, without fail, to attend the retreat. 

We have in the public gallery students of Kakola High School, Luweero – but this information is not complete as I do not know which constituency they come from. But I know that hon. Brenda Nabukenya and one of the MPs – anyway the MPs of Luweero are their MPs. They are welcome. It is really important that you tell us the constituencies whenever you are writing this information. Yes, the retreat is for chairs and the vice chairpersons, okay.


Hon. Members, yesterday, I forgot to inform you that we commemorated the Commonwealth Day by holding a debate here with students from a number of schools in Uganda in the Plenary Hall. It was quite interesting and the young people were happy and excited to be in the Plenary Hall of Parliament. I want to thank the Members who engaged them in that debate. I thank you very much. (Applause)

Hon. Members, yesterday, there were some pressing issues that were raised and the Government Chief Whip said that some ministers would come. I would like to invite the Minister for Health to handle the issue of switching off something at Mulago Hospital.
 
3.11
THE MINISTER FOR HEALTH (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to make this short statement on the death of four patients in Mulago Hospital alleged to have died because of lack of oxygen.

As all of you know, Mulago National Referral Hospital has facilities for emergency patients who are admitted through casualty where we have the Accident and Emergency Ward 3B. Ward 3B is divided into two; the medical and surgical emergency units.

On 22 March, 41 patients were admitted in Ward 3B. Of those 41, 21 were males and 20 were females. Most of these patients were in critical condition. A total of 37 patients were stabilised and admitted to their respective specialised wards. Unfortunately, four patients died due to serious complications as detailed below:

A one Kizza, who was a young male adult was admitted as a case of advanced HIV/AIDS with CD4 cell count of 20. He had wide spread TB affecting many organs of his body and many other opportunistic infections like severe pneumonia – this is a special type of pneumonia, which is fatal and affects patients with advanced HIV/AIDS. He had laboured breathing and was very sick. On examination, this patient had his lungs non-functional as oxygen uptake measure was only 76 percent partial pressure of oxygen compared with the normal of 94 percent.

He had been started on anti-retroviral drugs three weeks before and was treated for severe pneumonia and also put onto oxygen since he was not breathing well. However, he sadly died an hour later.

The second patient was Awor. This was a young female diagnosed as a case of advanced HIV/AIDS with severe anaemia and was in heart failure. She was transfused and in addition, was put onto oxygen. However, because her condition was irreversible, she died two hours later.

Patient number three was Nakawuki Zaituni. This was a 35-year-old female who presented with cardiogenic shock with a very thick and rapid pulse, which was difficult to feel, very low blood pressure, very faint heart sounds and the extremities of this patient were cold. She was referred from a peripheral health centre, Kawolo Health Centre in Mukono after treatment with Aminophylline probably because the chest was wet and she was wheezing. She had complained of heart failure-related symptoms during her last pregnancy, which was two months previously. 

At that time, she was diagnosed with peripartum cardiomyopathy, a form of heart disease –(Laughter)- Madam Speaker, peripartum cardiomyopathy is a form of heart disease that usually starts in late pregnancy and in some cases, continues after delivery. At the time of her admission, she had oedema – swelling of the extremities and the like – an enlarged, congested liver and spleen, congested lungs and was in a tractable heart failure – severe heart failure. She was started on intravenous diuretics to drain excess fluid from the body and toxins, which are anti-cardiac failure drugs. She was also put on oxygen. Her condition worsened and unfortunately, she died four hours later.

The last patient is Walusimbi, an adult male referred from Kiwoko Hospital and admitted in a semi-comatose state, 24 hours after having been bitten by a cobra on the head. Health workers, during examination, noted that the neurogenic toxins – toxins that were particularly focusing on the nervous system had spread to the entire body as evidenced by difficulty in breathing and retraction of the neck, signifying paralysis of the airway. There was also a weak, irregular pulse, signifying involvement of the heart and the semi-comatose state indicating that the brain was affected. He was given anti-snake venom antibiotics and also oxygen but sadly, this patient passed away about 30 minutes later. 

So, in such circumstances –(Interjections)– Okay, I will just give a summary of circumstances surrounding the death of these patients. It is not true, Madam Speaker, that six patients died due to lack of oxygen as reported in the media; the deceased are the four mentioned above, whose cause of death was not directly linked to lack of oxygen supply.
 
Two patients may share an oxygen cylinder; this is not unusual nor is it abnormal because the cylinder is fitted in between the two beds with a gauge measuring how much oxygen is being delivered to each patient and each patient is monitored by a pulse oxy-meter. This saves space and it is cost-effective and does not compromise oxygen supply to any patient. In such circumstances, filled oxygen cylinders are always on standby to replace the one being used in case it runs out. The statement by the nurse that “Oxygen aweddewo” (Interjections)– Thank you, hon. Maria Mutagamba – was a call for urgent replacement and not that the hospital had run out of oxygen.

Madam Speaker, I would like to add one additional point; that we have received quite a number of conflicting reports on this matter and that there is a continuing investigation to establish the exact details and circumstances on this point. Oxygen availability in Mulago National Referral Hospital; the hospital has a constant supply of oxygen as detailed below:

On 22 November 2012, Mulago installed a state of the art oxygen plant; this facility is fitted with a back-up system with buffer tanks that can store oxygen for 72 hours and can fill up to 240 cylinders. It has a manual system that pumps 20 cylinders at ago to the wards in case of power interruptions. It has a system of filling six cylinders per hour that are then distributed to the wards as back-up. The hospital has four standby staff to ensure that there is continuous supply of oxygen to all areas, where it is required. The hospital has a 10-year maintenance contract with the supplier and there is a technical staff attached to the plant 24 hours a day in order to ensure functionality. This oxygen plant has never failed since its installation in 2012.

Before I come to the conclusion, these are the laid down standards and modalities of operation: The continuing investigation I am talking about is to ascertain that actually what is on paper is what was in practice and details actually done.

In conclusion, on behalf of the Ministry of Health and Government of Uganda, we convey our heartfelt sympathies and condolences to the bereaved families. I wish to reaffirm the commitment of Mulago Referral Hospital to serve the Ugandan population. The hospital has enough piped oxygen and at any one time, oxygen cylinders are available for use. It is important to note, however, that the majority of patients referred to the national referral hospital are critically sick. I believe the health workers did their best in the circumstances and further inquiry investigations will be able to settle this matter. Thank you for listening to me.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let me have the Minister for Disaster Preparedness.

3.26
THE MINISTER FOR DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Mr Hillary Onek): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a statement to Parliament on the Lake Albert boat accident that involved refugees from the DRC. (Interruption)

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to thank the Minister of Health for this statement. And it is not unusual that a statement given by a minister is debated. I wanted to make some comments as Shadow Minister for Health, including the one who raised this important issue.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Members, this was not the ordinary kind of statement; this was an emergency issue – they wanted an emergency answer, which has been given. Let us proceed.

MR ONEK: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling.
Dear colleagues, because of the relative peace and stability in Uganda and instability among the immediate neighbours, especially the DRC, the Republic of South Sudan and other surrounding countries, such as Somalia and others, refugees have continued to flock into the country. So far, the refugees being hosted in different settlements in Uganda are 374,539. We have attached that on the report. 

This report was delivered yesterday to the Clerk to Parliament and –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, the hon. minister, is making a pertinent statement to the Parliament of Uganda. And as members of this House, we are expected to have copies supplied to us, yet we do not have them. Is the minister in order to proceed and just saying that he delivered copies to the Clerk while the Members have not been served with copies?

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, you know it was me who raised that issue because I wanted Government to assist our Members from Ntoroko who are feeling a lot of pressure dealing with these dead bodies. So, it was really an emergency and I do not know whether the minister had the time to write – since it is a short one, let us listen to it. 

MR ONEK: Madam Speaker, this was an emergency response to the question. (Interjections) I never lie, I delivered a copy to the Clerk to Parliament. If you do not need the information, I can withhold it. 

You recall that in August 2013, Government started relocating Congolese Refugees from Bubukwanga Transit Camp to Kyangwali Refugee settlement with a view to settle them and provide other social services and other related humanitarian assistance. 

We have so far relocated over 19,000 Congolese refugees in Kyangwali Refugee settlement. It is from this population that an estimated 150 persons boarded a local passenger boat from Kyenjojo landing site near Kyangwali heading to Kanara landing site in Ntoroko spontaneously returning home thereafter. 

This was after the mid-February 2014 United Nations intervention force entering various areas of Eastern Democratic Republic of Congo that dislodged the various rebel groups including M23 and ADF rebels that were occupying Kamangu County, which is near Uganda, Bundibugyo and the DRC border. 

The king of Butalinga Tribe, in DRC His Eminence Bamukoka alias Saambili Kamugo made various radio announcements on Radio Bukya and other radios requesting his subjects who fled to Uganda as refugees to return to DRC Kamangu because peace had returned to their areas of origin. He further made it clear that the number of Non-Governmental Organisations were in Kamangu to provide them with the necessary settlement packages. Besides, an IDP camp had been established to assist those who felt unsafe to return deep inside Congo. 

Many refugees, at Kyangwali, on receiving this information have since spontaneously made secretive movement across Lake Albert via Kanara and Ntoroko landing sites returning home. 

This accident that happened on Saturday between 10.30 and 11.30 a.m. was as a result of one of those spontaneous returns. The exact number of passengers on board is yet to be established. However, these are so far the numbers of bodies recovered – they are totalling 107. Of those, 44 are female and 63 are male, 53 are children. 
It is not true that refugees were fleeing due to lack of food. Indeed, those involved in the boat accident were the new caseloads that receive 100 per cent ration food, equivalent of over 3000 calories per day. 

Around January 2014, there was random reduction of food of 50 per cent and this affected only the earlier caseloads. They were given land and they had grown food; so, they were self-sufficient with their own food. But still, they were given supplies equivalent to 50 per cent of what they would normally consume. 

I physically went to those refugee camps and I have seen the refugees selling some of their harvest. The reduction to 50 per cent was due to another influx of Southern Sudanese refugees that needed to be fed by the World Food Programme and UN High Commission for Refugees. 

The situation of half ration for all refugees returned to normal from the beginning of this month and they continued to receive 100 per cent. The projected World Food Programme needs for 2014 to feed 370,000 refugees in the country are estimated at about $50,777,537.

Government of Uganda and the Office of the Prime Minister, the police, UPDF and district authority, the UNHCR, Uganda Red Cross Society and other partners are working together on this tragedy and so far, 19 bodies were retrieved, identified and handed over to DRC Government on Saturday, 22 March for burial. Of those 19, 15 were children and four adults. 

On Saturday 23, March, more bodies were retrieved and taken for handover. On Monday 24, March, 82 bodies had been retrieved by 2 p.m. details of gender and age were being identified at the hospital and they were handed over to the Congolese authorities. 

Forty five people have been rescued alive; that is, forty one Congolese and four Ugandans. Refugee survivors are being relocated to Bubukwanga Transit Camp in Bundibugyo where food and medical attention are available. 

All bodies retrieved are being transferred from Ntoroko Landing Site to Bundibugyo Hospital where post-mortem is being done together with identification before handing over to relatives from DRC who have been coordinating the return of the dead since the other day from Bundibugyo.

However, after having written this, as of now, 19 more bodies are at the border to be returned to DRC but the natives have refused to receive them. They said they cannot take bodies that stayed beyond three days. So, we are now looking for ways on how to bury those in Uganda.

The Uganda Police Marines are continuing with the search for more bodies though the hope is not much now. We only recovered one body yesterday but that is the state of affairs as of now.

Way forward
Government is stepping up efforts to ensure orderly repatriation of refugees wishing to return to their countries. Already, a tripartite meeting has been arranged between the Government of Uganda, UNHCR and that of the DRC Government to take place on 14th April to discuss modalities to facilitate and organise the return of the Congolese refugees. This is owing to the fact that many of them wish to go back home.
In the meantime, we have been sensitising the Congolese refugees on this matter and the dangers of escaping from the settlement without notifying authorities. This exercise has now been strengthened. We do not wish to see a repeat of what has happened.

Government had deployed the Uganda police, the UPDF Marine unit and the civilian fishing boards to continue with the search efforts to recover the remaining bodies. The Regional Police Commander, Mr Charles Ssebambulidde is at the site at Kibale Landing Site ensuring continuous progress of the search efforts. The Office of the Prime Minister and UNHCR are providing fuel for the motorised boats to carry out search and to transport bodies to Ntoroko Landing Site.

Fisheries Beach Management Unit needs to keep records and we have advised them to do so. We have also advised them to segregate data of people who board boats through L. Albert to DRC. They have to ensure the right number of people on each boat that leaves. This is because the boat that capsised was overloaded three times the normal capacity.
On behalf of the Government of Uganda, we definitely expressed our deep sorrow to the DRC Government and with the help of UNHRC, we are working hard to ensure what happened does not happen again. We want the refugees to return home in an orderly manner so that they can arrive home safely.

It has been a painful period for us because when we see bodies of children floating on the water; it has been very painful to us who are handling this matter. That is all I had to report, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

3.41
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also wish to thank the Minister in Charge of Disaster Preparedness. Something worries me about the way we handle safety of people in this country, no matter whether it is the safety of Ugandans or the safety of refuges who come into this country.

From the statement of the minister, it is very clear that the cause of the accident was overloading. And that in the process about 180 lives were lost. So, the question I would like to ask is: how is Government handling safety issues especially at the landing sites? These are landing sites that are gazetted; that are known and so activities over there can be controlled.

It is strange that the minister now says that well they are going to put safety measures in place. Where were they to put these safety measures whether for emergencies or free travel situation? Where was the safety that was put in place? That is the question that I float to the entire Government and probably, the Prime Minister to respond to it so that there is no repeat of senseless accidents like this one, which could have been avoided. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.
3.42
MR BIRAHWA MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Madam Speaker, as a Member of Parliament representing part of the region and who has traversed that lake, including the Kyenjojo-Kanara-Ntoroko-Rukwanzi stretch, I would like to first of all say that we are only dealing with the symptoms. Every month, we get disasters on that lake. People from West Nile in places like Arua, Nebbi and Buliisa, die in that lake every month. 

On many occasions, as area MPs, we have raised this matter. First of all, this is because people do not have any alternative route. For seven years, I have been requesting for a lake side road, not only because there is now oil but just from the time I joined this Parliament. These people do not have any alternative route – what they should do by road for a short time, they have to do it via the water though very recklessly.

Secondly, we do not have any regulations or controls of traffic on the lake.

Third, we do not have visibility of emigration throughout the lake. It is fluid.

So, the additional question I would like to raise to the minister – and it is good he was also a minister of Internal Affairs, is: in the absence of any control by Marines or any emigration officials or in the absence of any alternative route, would Government come up with a comprehensive plan? This is because even now, people are travelling across that lake, yet the season now is windy; this lake is very hostile. So, how do you assure our people about the future of not only those people you are calling Congolese – but humanity – there are our citizens who are earning a living on this lake on a daily basis?

Madam Speaker, I would be happy if that matter is clarified as we talk about a long term solution.

3.45
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. I have always asked myself whether if this country is faced with disaster, we are really prepared. I have asked this question over and over but without getting any adequate answer to my fears to rest.

My heart goes out to those families that lost their beloved ones; it was very unfortunate; it should not have come to that. First of all, where was the police? Where were the refugee settlement officers? How were they supposed to move in and out? Honestly, that was a very unfortunate occurrence.

In Orukinga Valley Refugee Settlement Scheme, just about two weeks ago, the officers from the Office of the Prime Minister known as Refugee Settlement Officers went out on rampage and cut down people’s gardens and banana plantations. That is on record. Newspapers correctly documented this occurrence. Unfortunately, nobody from the office concerned has come down there to settle the minds of the people. Any time, we are likely to break our patience. This is unfortunate especially now that it touches our own people – the refugees that we have looked after and settled with for many decades in Orukinga. 

The Office of the Prime Minister employs a very cruel team of officers called refuge settlement officers who do not listen to community leaders; who do not have any working relationship with community leaders and yet, these are the people who are supposed to cater for most of the needs of these refugees.

I would like to know what action the ministry is planning to settle the minds of the communities around these refugee settlements especially Nakivale- Orukyinga refugee settlement scheme.
 
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I know the Members from Ntoroko are not here but I have been in touch with hon. Mujungu since Saturday. She gave me the impression that there were serious problems that were forcing these people to move out of the camp. That is the impression she gave me, that there were reasons why they were leaving in a hurry. I think you need to find out how a group of 100 people is leaving and nobody is watching. An army of 100 people is big; it is a third of this parliament. 

3.48
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Madam Speaker, when these refugees ran from Congo, they found me in Bundibugyo and I was at the forefront of receiving and organising them at the schools where they camped first.

From there, we organised a place called Bubukwanga where there is Bundibugyo prison. Land was identified to hold them since they were in critical need. When I informed the OPM, the challenge was that the number, which came, was overwhelming and the Prime Minister’s office by then could not have enough facilities to host all these families at ago. 

The families were forced to live in a general tent, because of that situation, the Prime Minister’s officer promised that they were going to move these people from Bubukwanga to Kyangwali where they would have enough accommodation and enough preparations to feed them.

Our neighbours in Congo behave the same as the Bundibugyo people. We are farmers, we have a lot of cocoa and we are used to getting a lot of money. We are not used to begging. The food from the OPM was not enough; they would give them 10 kilograms for a family of 12 people, for one week.

This food could not be enough; they would feed them on beans but beans, which are served at a cafeteria. The food was served once, they would feed on one meal everyday, which situation they were not used to. When they went to Kyangwali, the conditions were like that and the same situation is in Rwamwanja, where some refugees from Kabale and other places are.

They give them one tent for every family; this is a head of household with a wife with 9 children all living in one small tent. There is a problem there as a family.

The other one is about the little food they get, which cannot sustain them. They are forced to go and dig for the neighbours and the Shamba they were given to dig is not yet ready. 

MS ANYWAR: The lamentation of my sister about the short supply of food from the OPM during such crisis is not limited to Bundibugyo. I remember that when I sent out a cry for the nodding children, they were only three mugs of beans and then five kilos of posho despite the fact that my brother also comes from there and they were also stranded only that they could not go outside the country. That is how bad the situation is.

MS NTABAZI: They could cultivate two acres for the neighbours looking for just Shs 2,000. They could not continue like that when the situation in Congo is a bit calm and their cocoa is now ripe.

They informed the commandant of Kyangwali but he could not allow them to go. Yet, when they were bringing them, they were bringing buses, vehicles to carry them. When they wanted to go home, nobody was willing to give them transport to go back. So, their relatives across who remained there were sending them money to make sure that they go back and camp at least nearby their shambas.

So, the problem was because of the hard situation which they lived in, in those camps, which they were not used to, which forced them to face this tragedy.

THE SPEAKER: Then this is an indictment on the UNHCR and ourselves.

3.55 
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): I would like to find out from the Minister for Disaster Preparedness. Uganda is a member for the UN and we have UNHCR; what contribution does the UN make towards the refugees in Uganda.

I would like to find out from the Minister of Transport, do we have markings in the lake where these boats can move; have they surveyed the lake?

Has the Ministry of Transport enforced the movement procedures, these people moved without life jackets? Accidents are happening everywhere and they are merely looking on.
 
3.55
THE MINISTER FOR DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Hilary Onek): Thank you very much. I share the same concerns raised by Members. I know that the refugees are to be paid by UNHCR, that is their duty under the UN. Refugees are to be served food, given shelter and so forth by the UNHCR. As Government, our duty is to ensure security; to ensure that they are safe and protected.

It is not our obligation to give them food. However, in a dire situation, we chip in and give them food. Recently, we had to apportion some budget, while the UNHCR supplies are still coming from New York or wherever they are coming from, the funding and so forth. 
Whatever you are sharing here, I know the challenges are very big for us as a country. I know that the refugees have overwhelmed us in OPM and particularly my department. We are overwhelmed because the numbers are big. I will give an example of the refugees coming from South Sudan. These are the groups that are fighting each other. We have to get ourselves involved to ensure that they are put in a manner that they do not start descending on each other’s plots because at the refugee point where they are to register, some were even starting to fight and kill each other. We had to get Police reinforced; so the problems are big and we are battling with them. Somehow, we have managed to contain those challenges.

I think from what you have raised, I will put all these positions to the United Nations High Commission for Refugees that we are concerned about the inadequacy of whatever level of service the refugees are getting.

With respect to this accident, they were not 180 as hon. Amuriat mentioned. The figure is about 150 for those who were on the boat and those who were rescued. However, that is now a matter of semantics. Lives have been lost and even if it were one person, to us, it is very painful. We do not want anybody to be lost through drowning.

Regarding handling safety, my colleague the Minister of Works and particularly, those who are handling water transport could have a say in it but I know Ministry of Agriculture has a big management unit that normally regulates the loading of the boats. These refugees who were involved in the accident escaped from the camps because they were being prevented from leaving. We wanted them to go in an orderly manner but they must have taken a quick leave without the authorities knowing what was happening –(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I am seeking from the minister comes from his statement where he says, “The refugees just left.” I am wondering whether there is security and whether there are border issues involved. These are people who are foreigners; they have come into our country and you know they are boarding a boat that is going to another country. It shocks me. This is how some people become Ugandans when they are actually refugees and they maintain dual citizenship without formalisation, which is a very bad thing.

I think we must have a system and I would expect the Minister of Internal Affairs to inform this House where immigration and security were when these people were just streaming across the lake and going to another country and nobody was there to see yet they know that this is the spot that goes across to another country.

MR ONEK: Well, some of those concerns cut beyond my current responsibility but what I know as a former Minister of Internal Affairs is we do not have enough Police; the required number for our country. We need to get Police recruited to safeguard- [Mr Mwiru: “Order”] – Where is the order coming from? I do not understand what order.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have been informed in this House that the Government of the Republic of Uganda has deployed Uganda Police Force in Chad and Somalia. I even raised a motion for this Parliament to debate that issue. Is the minister in order to tell us that as a country we do not have enough Police yet they have deployed Police outside the country illegally? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I do not have the statistics of where our Police are. Let us hear from the minister from that side.

MR BATARINGAYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I happen to be the area MP where these refugees camped. We had three camps, one in Busunga just half a kilometre from the border. The other one is Kalera, which is three kilometres and Bubukwanga, which he talked about.

These refugees were transported by UNHCR and the Government of Uganda to Hoima and they used buses to transport them. By then the situation was still tense in Congo but they could cross because they have their crops there like cocoa and other things. The ADF would sometimes kill them but they continued to move.

In the meantime, the Congolese forces together with other forces have been able to flush out some of the ADF. That is why you heard the minister here talking about a chief called Bamukoka who has been telling these people to go back. In the process of going back, these people do not know the procedure. Because they were taken to Hoima officially, they should have also requested to register to go back but they were trying to go through a different route, the lake, because they did not have enough money in terms of transport – [Hon. Member: “Order”] – Now, which order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, what you are saying is not answering what hon. Byarugaba asked. Where were the camp commandants when these people left? Where were they? That is what hon. Byarugaba was asking.

MR ONEK: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS NTABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and my colleague, the minister for giving way. The information I want to give is that these refugees never run away from the camp; that is out. They asked for permission to leave and the commandant together with the UN official who was in charge of that camp refused them. After refusing them several times, he eventually started conflicting and quarrelling with them. Eventually, he said, are you going out? If anything happens to you, you will be regarded as non-refugees - Are you going out on your own so that you give me back my ID cards? 

These people had identification cards given by UN, which eventually were received from them after the UN man registered them. He said, register here and go on your own. If anything happens to you, that is your business. He registered them, took the cards and they went away. So, it is not true that they run away because Police was not there. Police was there, but the manner in which they were released is the one, which was fishy.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, please conclude.

MR ONEK: Madam Speaker, we are currently investigating. We have investigations going on, on the circumstances, which brought about this calamity on the refugees. When it is complete, I will bring this report here because a lot of information is now being volunteered. I request that you give this information to those involved in the investigations.

However, we are all unhappy with what has happened. We shall take note of all that you have brought here and as investigations are going on, I would wish that you cooperate and give whatever information you have. I will be –(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Meanwhile, where are you keeping these bodies - because you have said Congo is not accepting them and there are no mortuaries to keep these bodies?

MR ONEK: At the moment, those bodies are at the border; they have refused to take them. We are looking for where to bury them. (Interjections) By now, they must have buried them. So, I think there –(Interjections)– well, I am not in charge of Congolese but I know that there is an issue at hand and we have to bury them. You cannot keep a dead body around as it can create other problems. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I have finished my submission.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Members, it seems to me that the situation of management of refuges in this country is extremely fluid. I do not know which of our committees is responsible. I think you need to take an interest in what is going on as it seems there is a lot of fluidity in how we are managing – is it is Presidential Affairs?

HON. MEMBERS: Human Rights.

MR ONEK: Madam Speaker, we are under the Committee on Presidential Affairs –(Interjections)– because the same committee visited the refugees in the West Nile refugee camp. 

MS ANYWAR: You have already failed and that is why we want human rights.  [Hon. Member: “Human rights - we shall handle it there.”]

MR ONEK: We are talking about refugee status and if you talk about human rights, that is not under my portfolio.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us task our Committee on Presidential Affairs to examine that issue and give us a report and assist the minister to organise the issues of the refugees better. I thank you. Let us go to question time.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

THE SPEAKER: We shall take 45 minutes. 

MR OTADA: Guidance. 

THE SPEAKER: It is question time, please. Hon. Osegge.

MR OTADA: My question of yesterday, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Aronda Nyakairima will answer your question tomorrow. He rang me and informed me that he will be ready for tomorrow. 

MS AOL: What about Gulu Market.

THE SPEAKER: Oh, you are there. Gulu Market. 

4.10
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Gulu Main Market is one of the seven markets, which Government is renovating, rehabilitating and constructing at a cost of Shs 28 billion – (Interjections) - yes and in order to do that, Government, working together with the Gulu Market Vendors Association agreed that the vendors should relocate to Kaunda Grounds temporarily as Government reconstructs their market.

Now, we got reports that the site where the vendors were relocated to pave way for the development at Kaunda Grounds was destroyed by fire on 21st March this year.

Madam Speaker, the cause of the fire is still being investigated by the Police but from the preliminary findings, which we have received, the fire damaged property in form of stalls and vendors’ merchandise estimated at about Shs 100 million. 

A total of 67 vendors have been affected. These vendors, of course, require assistance to enable them to rebuild the destroyed market stalls and to restock their merchandise.  

We have submitted a report to the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister and the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister is definitely going to take appropriate measures to respond to this problem. 

I would like to use this opportunity to update the members on the progress of the new market, which Government is redeveloping. The works on the new Gulu market have been done in two phases with a physical progress on the first phase being at 90 percent, which is the finishing stage and the second phase is about 38 percent on the super structure level. I have already said that the total cost of this market once completed is Shs 28 billion.

It is expected that both phases will be complete by July this year and at that time, we shall have opportunity to return the market vendors like we have done in other markets. This market – [Ms Anywar: “Clarification.”] If I can I complete – this market is expected to accommodate a total of 4,400 vendors when we complete it in July this year. It will include facilities like well-planned stalls, lock ups, banking halls, a conference hall, cold rooms, a day-care centre, clinics, offices, adequate parking and offloading bays, restaurant and a police post for security. 

So, after 1st July this year, we expect to hand over all planned markets to the vendors and of course, this will rule out the constant fires that have been burning this market because part of the problem is the poor planning of the temporary structures, which vendors have had to build on their own. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Clarification on the same.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Aol. 

MS ANYWAR: Clarification.

THE SPEAKER: That was hon. Aol’s question. I will come to you. 

4.13
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for responding to this issue. However, I would like to say that on the amount of money involved we really need to compare notes. Also, the timeframe for helping the vendors; the women and youths of Gulu who lost their things in the fire should also be properly clarified. I would like to say that this is not the first time that this Gulu Main Market – the temporary site is getting into problems. It got into problems and some people came up to Kampala and discussed with the ministry but nothing happened at all. 

So, if we just leave it without putting a timeframe to the response by maybe the Prime Minister, I think that our people will wait but our people have loans they have to repay from the financial institutions and banks. So, they are going to disturb them and so, we need a timeframe in which you are going to respond very quickly to these people’s plight. I thank you.

4.15
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am happy to learn about the amount of money that the Government is going to spend on the rehabilitation of the markets that the minister has mentioned. 

In my small work with the Uganda Red Cross Society, I have had an opportunity to visit Gulu and also the market. According to the information we have received from the minister, they are going to construct restaurants, police posts, food stalls and others. If you go to Gulu market and the surrounding areas, the roads are so dilapidated, dusty when it is shining and almost impassable when it is raining. I would like to learn from the minister whether he is, from the money he is mentioning, considering rehabilitating the roads and infrastructure around the market. 

But also the bigger picture of Gulu Town - I think that it is one of the dustiest towns with road infrastructure broken down. I do not know whether that should be because the minister or the Prime Minister but something should be done for that city having come out of the war, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yesterday, I was asking the Minister for Works who is in charge of the infrastructure project for the 14 municipalities - the loan we passed here long ago because nothing is happening and it includes Gulu. Nothing is happening. (Interruption) You are the last one.   

4.17
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I still also seek clarification from the hon. Minister concerning the market because the same arrangement of constructing the new market was also extended to Kitgum District and the project is almost coming to a standstill because of the conflict between the LCV chairperson and LCIII chairperson whereby they are pulling ropes, threatening the implementation of this good project. One is already holding onto the title and the project cannot proceed. 

Is the hon. Minister aware of this and could he, please, intervene? Otherwise, the project implementation time is running and the money could easily be returned.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I cannot put a timeframe to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Perhaps, he will guide us on how and when Government will intervene but certainly, Government will respond to the problem our people are experiencing.

The vendors in Gulu - “The roads in Gulu town are dusty and poor.” That is truth but as the Speaker observed, this Parliament passed a loan of $150 million to work on the municipal road infrastructure and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is managing that loan. And at an appropriate time, the minister should be able to come here and brief Parliament.

On the question of the Kitgum Market, yes, there was a small disagreement but we have taken a decision as a ministry to build a market in Kitgum. It is not part of the first phase but rather in the second phase, which will start towards the end of this year. That is the information I would like to give you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. But the Minister for Relief and Disaster Preparedness, there was something on hailstorms; I do not know whether you are ready to respond to hon. Kabajo.

MR ONEK: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to clarify on the temporary market in Gulu that caught fire – 

THE SPEAKER: No. Please, respond to the issue of hailstorms raised by hon. Kabajo in Mubende, Kiboga and other places.

MR ONEK: Okay, on those hailstorms, I also have a response. From November last year up to-date, we have responded to a number of disasters. For example, in Rakai, Sango Bay, we responded by sending 200 kilogrammes of maize flour. (Interjections) No, we responded to all of them and there are many, apart from Rakai – Isingiro –(Interjections) You wanted a clarification on response to disasters, which I am making. (Interjections) It depends on the number of people affected. (Interjections) You know that we cannot feed everybody but only those affected by disasters. However, let me go back to my response. I think you are just making jokes.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, hon. Kabajo had problems in Lwamata sub county in Kiboga and also the neighbouring district of Mubende.

MR ONEK: Yes, we responded to those and we sent supplies to the affected areas in Luwero and we responded to all those. And I have a write-up here –

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, the minister told us a while ago that they sent 200 kilogrammes of maize flour. I remember when I had just come to this Parliament, in my maiden speech on this Floor, the people of Bududa had suffered a landslide and his Ministry sent only 200 kilogrammes of maize flour. So, you can see what is happening to people who are suffering due to disasters. That is why, when I was talking about aid on this Floor, I said that we cannot do without it because we get such disasters; 200 kilogrammes cannot help people in such a situation at all. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, are you responding to hon. Kabajo’s issue of Lwamata sub-county in Kiboga? Maybe, we shall give you time to go through the Hansard so that you are able to give a proper response. Let us hear from the Minister of Trade.

4.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (INDUSTRY) (Mr James Mutende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There was an issue raised concerning PVOC. I would like to give you an update by clarifying that the major complaint has come from the motor vehicle importers and not the other importers who are also involved in PVOC exercise like the importers of foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and the rest.

Madam Speaker, as you may recall, the PVOC programme was reinstated on 01 June 2013 and this was followed by a strike by the business community for a number of issues, including, among others, the high inspection fees charged. But the Rt Hon. Prime Minister called a meeting on 28 June 2013, which was attended by representatives of KACITA, UMA, Private Sector Foundation of Uganda, Uganda Clearing and Forwarding Association, the Ministry of Trade and Industry and the Uganda National Bureau of Standards. It was agreed that my ministry should instate a joint committee with all stakeholders, including PVOC service providers, to examine service contracts, review the fees charged and address all the loopholes.

Madam Speaker, we held another meeting on 01 July 2013, with all these stakeholders, including the three service providers. We negotiated with the service providers and agreed that the minimum inspection fees for general goods be reduced to $220 and for used vehicles to $140. 

It was further agreed that the implementation of PVOC be done in a phased manner and the joint steering committee review the implementation progress every three months. Used motor vehicles were part of the categories to be subjected to the PVOC programme. All traders were encouraged to utilise PVOC services in order to avoid the payment of the 16 per cent on the CIF value as penalty for noncompliance.

Colleagues, much as the programme commenced on 01 June 2013, not all importers of used vehicles were subjecting them to PVOC at their country of origin. However, recently, UNBS obtained support of the Uganda Revenue Authority in enforcing this PVOC programme. They made certificate of road worthiness which is issued by the PVOC service providers as one of the requirements for customs clearance. This has led to the current strike by the importers of used motor vehicles, who have been taking advantage of weak coordination between UNBS and URA in enforcing the PVOC programme at entry points. 

Used car importers’ protest on 24 March 2014- The importers of used vehicles are now giving the following reason for this strike:
    1. That the cost associated with the PVOC programme are too high and therefore, should be reduced. 
    2. They want the surcharge for units that come without certificates of roadworthiness reduced from 15 per cent of the CIF value.
    3. They want inspection done in Uganda at the border and not at the country of export. 
    4. They want UNBS to hire more PVOC service providers in order to make the service competitive and hence, bringing down the cost or the fees. 

Responses raised by car importers
    1. The fees being charged are subject to a contract, which has been revised three times downwards since the programme was started. Fees can only be renegotiated during the next review or upon expiry of the current contract. Similarly, more service providers cannot be added on to the current three for general goods and for motor vehicles until the current contract expires, otherwise, there will be a bleach of contract. 
    2. The 15 per cent surcharge is created as a penalty under the law for non-compliance and is meant to act as a deterrent measure. Therefore, it cannot be reduced. 
    3. Inspecting used motor vehicles in Uganda defeats the purpose of the PVOC programme, which is meant to prevent dumping of vehicles with dangerous radiation and those that are not roadworthy. This is to protect the health of our people and our environment. 
    4. UNBS is not available at every entry point due to capacity and infrastructure challenges. We request importers to ensure all goods are inspected in the countries of origin to avoid challenges of disposing those that do not comply. 
    5. In the long term, UNBS hopes to build a centre of Excellency for motor vehicle inspection in Uganda as part of capacity building within UNBS when we get the necessary budgetary support. 
In light of the above, we recommend the following:
    1. That the PVOC programme for motor vehicles like any other general goods continues because this is very critical for the health and safety of Ugandans. Currently, the information and data reviewed from the service providers indicate that 45 percent of the inspected vehicles do not meet requirements. 45 percent of the inspected vehicles do not meet requirements and PVOC is the only way through which junk vehicles are kept out of the Ugandan market. 
    2. PVOC service providers are Government of Uganda agents and are working under close supervision of UNBS.
    3. Motor vehicles, which were shipped before 1 June, 2013 are exempted from this new surcharge.
    4. UNBS will deploy an officer or set up a desk at customs business centre in Nakawa to quickly address queries. 
Colleagues, the war of eliminating substandard goods is a fight for the health of all Ugandans. Uganda is part of the East African Community and we must ensure that Uganda is not a dumping ground for substandard goods. It is the duty of our Government to ensure that the citizens are protected and to ensure that our society is healthy. 
Any effort to derail this programme will have enormous financial, economic, environmental and health consequences on our country. We, therefore, implore that the scheme be fully supported particularly by the legislature here and all importers. We are cognisant that as any system that comes into place, will always meet with resistance and we pledge to continue engaging all stakeholders to address concerns that arouse in the course of implementation. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I noted that you did not address the issue raised that Government had lost considerable revenue – that is what hon. Katoto alleged. 

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

4.33
MS ANGELLINE OSSEGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to know from the Prime Minister why Government continues to look on while the Uganda police force consistently continues to abuse the rights of well-intentioned Ugandans who gather together for the good of this country to disseminate good information to Ugandans who would otherwise not get it; to the extent that they exercise excessive force, courtesy of the Public Order Management Bill, including live bullets shot at gatherings; tear gas canisters hauled at private premises and denying private persons access to their private properties. Madam Speaker, this happened to us over the weekend – (Interjections) We had agreed on this but it is okay. 

To give a background to the situation, which occurred in Soroti and Mbale over the weekend, my colleague hon. Wamanga-Wamai has shells of live bullets that were shot at people who were gathered. Thank God they missed the people – nobody got hurt. But we are concerned that Government, in spite of the publication of this happening, has not made a statement or showed any concerned, yet these were expressly authorised meetings with letters written as far back as February 13th of this year informing the police particularly, Gen. Kale Kayihura that these meetings were going to take place across the country. 

My question is, why is Government intentionally suffocating the rights of citizens and potential leaders of this country from exercising their rights; by exercising excessive force and abusing us? 

4.35
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, I do not have a report yet on what may have happened in Mbale and Soroti and I will ask the minister responsible for police to come and give a statement on that. 

However, I would like to state very categorically that Uganda is now a full democracy – (Laughter)– and all Ugandans have the right of full expression. Therefore, I would like to urge the Police, in exercising their duties of maintaining law and order or maintaining peace, to be cognisant of this right of our people and to fully –(Interruption) 

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I am saddened to rise on this point of order. When the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, who is also the Leader of Government, claims that citizens in this country are free to express themselves, yet, he knows that even some NRM youth are being arrested throughout the country, including those in my district - is he, therefore, in order not to recognise what is taking place across board in this country?

THE SPEAKER: Maybe he will answer by himself. I do not know how to rule on that order. He will answer. (Laughter) Yes, hon. Sabila.

4.38
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Members who have had opportunity to speak on other issues, please, allow others to ask their questions.

MR SABILA: In this country, we have two areas. We have hard-to-reach and easy-to-reach districts. Bukwo District happens to fall in the category of the hard-to-reach and it is not only hard-to-reach but also hard-to-stay in. Within those hard-to-reach districts, we have urban areas –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I do not think I have understood your question yet.

MR SABILA: We have hard-to-reach and easy-to-reach areas in this country. Bukwo District happens to be one of those hard-to-reach areas. Within those, it is also hard to stay but easy to live. Within those hard-to-reach districts, we have areas gazetted as urban councils. But the conditions have failed to change. The same urban councils are within the same hard-to-reach areas.

Government came out with a wonderful idea of paying a hard-to-reach allowance to all civil servants working in those areas. But they exempted civil servants who work in urban areas within those hard-to-reach areas, for example, the town councils.

Now, my question - before I come to the question, civil servants working in those urban areas have deserted work preferring to go and work in rural areas of those hard-to-reach areas. My questions to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister are: What factors do they consider to segregate the civil servants working within the urban areas, yet, they are within the same setting? Two, what urgent measures is Government taking to ensure it retains civil servants working in the urban areas so that they do not keep migrating? Thank you very much.

4.40
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (MR Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, to the best of my recollection, Cabinet had indeed considered this matter. I will try to crosscheck but we took a decision that urban centres in hard-to-reach areas also qualify as hard-to-reach areas. Therefore, civil servants working there should be entitled to the benefits of allowances that are meant to provide for public servants who work in those areas. This is because it only makes sense that if you live in Bukwo with that kind of road network, which we hope to work on – we hope to start tarmacking that road by the end of this year so that Bukwo can be joined to the rest of the country. And I hope Kanungu will follow. So, as long as those conditions persist, our view is that it is a hard-to-reach area in its totality. Thank you.

4.41
MS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have a school to which I went sometime back called Akany Primary School in Erute South Constituency. Four classroom blocks of this school had their roofs blown off during the third term of last year. So, for the last two terms, children who used to study in those classroom blocks study under the tree; and when it threatens to rain, the children are just sent home.

One time, a team from the Ministry of Education and Sports visited that school to do an assessment. But up to now, no feedback has been given to us. The four classes cannot take on adequate teaching because of this situation. My question is: What is the fate of these children? What is the Ministry of Education thinking about the future of these children?

4.43
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Well, I will have to check the facts and response to that. Ordinarily, when a disaster like that one occurs, Government responds by using funds under SFG. That fund is sent to the respective local governments. So, we will have to find out what happened because we do not have information on whether the money was already sent to the local government and what happened to it.  We will let the honourable member know. Thank you.

4.45
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, on 19 November last year, arising out of the demand of this House, it was agreed or it was directed that the Minister of Finance should furnish this House with the details of the process from the disposal of public assets. 

At the time, we sought to know how much money was realised from the divesture programme. We also wanted to know how many Ugandans have benefitted or accessed that money. But we also wanted to know how much money is available as of now. This report was supposed to be tabled in this House before we got into last year’s recess.

So, I am still wondering why this report has not been produced in this House. If it is to be produced, when is it coming? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.46
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMNET BUSINESS (MR AMAMA MBABAZI): Madam Speaker, I was still trying to update myself on this. Okay, I will take it up because, obviously, the Minister of Finance has not done that. Actually, I would like this to come to Cabinet first so that we all know the details about the disposal of public assets; I mean a comprehensive report. So, we will take it up and make sure this report is ready for presentation to Parliament as soon as possible. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I thought what the honourable member wanted to know is in the divesture fund and how many Ugandans have benefited from it. The Act said after the divesture, Ugandans should be able to access that money; that is what we wanted to know.

4.47
MR IGNATIUS BESISIRA (NRM, Buyaga County East, Kibaale): Madam Speaker, Government extended power to Kibaale some years back but of late, there has been spate of theft of transformers. This line was privatised to one company called Padsult, we have talked to these people many times and they seem not be interested in continuing to supply that part of the country with power.

We do not know what plans Government has for the people of that part of the country because after seeing power, people had invested heavily in buying machinery to improve on whatever products in that part of the country but now, the power is there, the transformers have been stolen, the people with the machines are stuck. We do not know what is next. Padsult is not helping us. I do not know what Government has to do about it.

4.48
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): First of all, I am very saddened to hear that in Kibaale transformers are stolen because it is terrible. I will ask the ministry because I had not received that report yet. I will follow it up and find out what exactly happened.

But Padsult, which is a Ugandan Company that is growing and I know it is doing a very good job because they are in Kanungu and they are in another place where I am. I know they are doing a very good job and are not responsible for the infrastructure because transformers and things like that are the responsibility of Government, Rural Electrification Agency and therefore they must take care that public assets are properly protected.

I would like to make a call to the public generally with in the country and to people in Kibaale, please, protect public assets, these are for the benefit of the community as a whole. So, when you allow individuals to benefit from these at the expense of the community, you are setting us back and it is right and proper that institutions of Government should have responsibility such as Police to make sure those public assets are protected.  

4.51
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman representative Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like the Prime Minister to assist me in this problem. In my district, we have land conflicts, which have resulted into clansmen killing each other; as a district and elders, we have sat and tried to solve the problem but in vain. The clans have gone to court and the cases are dragging.

The onset of the rainy season, people are planting and people are already fighting. How can Government help us to resolve such a problem amongst clans and even tribes, which are persisting and will never end?  One example is in Koboko where we have the Madi and Acholi; they are really continuing to fight without any solution. How can Government help us? Thank you very much.

4.52
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): As my hon. Colleague and friend knows, this Government has done as much as it could to respond to the question of land conflicts not only in Koboko but throughout the country because what is in Koboko is common in many other places in Uganda. It was this Government that gave the jurisdiction or the power to resolve land conflicts with local leaders. We gave judicial powers to LC1 and the LC system to resolve these conflicts. There may be a problem now as hon. Anywar knows very well especially where she comes from. 

Where these committees may not be effective, we did not elect LC1s up to now, thanks to the intervention of Anywar and her friends, they stopped it. She is happy that they stopped it.

We are doing everything possible to put these committees back in place and of course, there is a traditional court system where there are land disputes; we know the courts are overwhelmed by the volume of work relating to land disputes.

There is a big problem; that is why in the first place, we gave judicial powers on land disputes to community committees and we hope that this pressure, which is on because of either non-existence of committees or questioning their legitimacy and legality will be over when we organise these elections.

At the national level the president indeed set up a committee on illegal land evictions which is chaired by the hon. Nantaba but this committee cannot handle those questions at village in Koboko and other places for the  reason that the problem is overwhelming.

So, we look forward to achieving the level of tranquillity in society, which we did when we gave powers to the committees to resolve these issues. All the backlog was almost handled in all the villages of Uganda, to the best of my knowledge. Now, they have been piling up. We received reports of these conflicts almost from everywhere and we look forward to having this election as soon as this Parliament passes the law making special provisions for elections of LC1 so that it is manageable.

4.56
MS JULIANA AUMA MODEST (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The question I would like to ask the Prime Minister is about the restocking programme, which has been on-going in the Northern part of Uganda, where the district, which I represent, belongs. There is restocking taking place in Acholi, Lango and Teso sub regions about the proposed restocking to take place in Karamoja and West Nile. It is unfortunate that out of all these regions, Abim District has not been considered. 

I would like to know from the Prime Minister because if it is about the wars in the North caused by LRA, Abim District suffered. If it is because of the cattle rustling, Abim District was the first to go to IDPs before other parts of the Northern region. 

It is question time and my question to the Prime Minister is, how come Abim District, which has suffered both from the NRA and the cattle rustlers, has been omitted from restocking and yet, even to date, the people of Abim District are still in IDPs? 

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of procedure?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. The procedural issue I am raising is that Government is supposed to re-stock. As you are aware, I come from Sironko and in parts of Sironko, Karimojong raided the cows. They raided Teso, Acholi and Lango. Now, they are saying Government should restock. 

Is it procedurally right for the Member from Karamoja who raided our cows to come and stand up and start asking, “When are they restocking cows?”

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, she has a right to ask her question. I think you have finished.

MS AUMA: I have not yet finished. The categories of re-stocking taking place are two and Abim does not fall under any of them.

THE SPEAKER: You have already said that.

MS AUMA: Yes, I want to know from the Prime Minister where we fall. And for the information of my colleague who is saying we are raiders and we are asking for cows, I would like to assure you that the people of Abim are never raiders and they will never be raiders. They were the first to suffer from cattle rustling and they are in IDP camps up to today. These people are in IDP camps and they have never been resettled.

5.00
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The programme of re-stocking is going to cover as many places as were affected but for the time being, the restocking is for Acholi, Lango, Teso and West Nile and Abim does not fall in any of those. Sometimes, people think Abim is in Acholi but actually, Abim is in Karamoja even if hon. Okumu can speak to them in vernacular and they understand. (Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, everybody is aware of the history of this country. Everybody is aware about the migration and ethnic settlement in this country and that Abim who are Acholi Lamwo are actually Acholi and that they were taken to be part of Karamoja by a deliberate policy against the Acholi people during Amin’s time.

Is the whole Prime Minister, who is mature, well-educated and knowledgeable in order to distort history with an imaginary thought that Abim or Acholi Lamwo is not part of or was not even part of Acholi District and yet, the people who gave independence to this country are made up of 18 districts including Acholi District where Abim belonged? And when you look at the symbols on the gates of Parliament, you find that it is actually the elephant where the Abim people belong. So, is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the Prime Minister was confirming that the Acholi Lamwo are related to the Acholi. (Laughter)

5.02
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister is in relation to a response given earlier by hon. Dr Rugunda on the issue of loss of life in Mulago due to insufficient oxygen.

This afternoon, we in the health committee were sitting and one of our colleagues, hon. Rusaniya Barumba called an attendant who lost a patient as a result of that calamity. She narrated that the attendant lost an old woman and she is trying to transport the body to Kenya but also alleged that about 11 or 12 other people who were younger died because the cylinders run out of oxygen and the person who was supposed to replenish the oxygen did not come.

Speaking as a doctor, I get perturbed having listened to that report and with what the minister also gave us here, I feel –(Interruption)

So, the question I am putting to the Prime Minister is whether he agrees with me and a number of others that this matter be referred to the heath committee to examine the issues and look at what happened and report to us maybe within one week. This is because it appears that the reports from Mulago and what we heard from an attendant do not add up and some of us are on a set road until we get what exactly happened. There could be a problem, which we are covering as Parliament and we are not getting to.

So, I want to know whether the Prime Minister agrees with me that this matter be sent to the Committee on Health to report back within one week.

5.05
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Well, I am sorry I thought hon. Baryomunsi was going to ask me about domestic issues, so, I had intimated to him that we are better off sorting this outside Parliament. But again, I am sorry to hear from him about this report that further loss of life at Mulago may have been caused by insufficiency of oxygen stocks in the hospital.

Well, the Minister of Health just responded to that a short while ago. As the minister said, Government, the Ministry of Health and the Mulago administration continue to further investigate those reports of the insufficiency of oxygen, even in the other case that had been cited before and they will continue to do so including this one.

I have no objection to the committee on Health also looking into this because the two would simply complement each other. It is clear that where life is concerned, no stone should remain unturned until we have everything in place to protect our people. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, the Committee on Health will examine the minister’s statement, take into account the information coming from the Members and then give us an update. 

5.08
MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Budadiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question is in relation to Mt. Elgon National Park. By 1936, we had Mt Elgon National Game Reserve and by 1986, Government created Mt Elgon National Park from the game reserve. We had a number of people who were by then in the game reserve and Government was to compensate those communities, families and homesteads, which were by then in the land that Government took over by creating the national game park. But up to date, much as Government recognised only the 48 families by then and said it was to compensate them – I am asking the question from there; when is Government effectively going to compensate the 48 families plus other families that were residing in the game park by then? 

Question number two, in relation to that. There has been a continuous conflict between the communities and UWA over the boundary to the extent that even UWA is not very certain of the boundary and they say that they requested Government if there were funds, which can help them in the demarcation process that the communities and UWA can know very well where the boundary stops. When is Government going to expedite the process to ensure that the boundaries in the Mt Elgon National Park have been clearly demarcated to avoid the conflict with the communities? I thank you.

5.10
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): The process of demarcation is on-going, if I can start with the second question. We have to go back and look at that history that the honourable member has narrated those that were affected by the 1986 decision to create the Elgon National Park and displace people who according to him, were entitled to compensation and have up to-date not been compensated. I will look into that and get the current status of that situation and brief this House. I thank you.

5.12
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have three questions and I do not know whether you will allow.

THE SPEAKER: No, only one.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: My first question is to do with electoral and constitutional reforms. We would like to know whether the Government plans to bring in electoral and constitutional reforms to this House and when is that supposed to be? When do we expect them? 

Secondly, we have been hearing donors cutting aid to us. We would like to know how this is affecting our budget, social services and the economy generally.

And lastly –

THE SPEAKER: No.

5.13
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): It is a good idea to always have an alternative. On electoral and constitutional reforms, as the honourable Leader of the Opposition in Parliament knows very well, Government is open to proposals about this. 

I did open a meeting of stakeholders together with all the political parties that are represented in this House at which this question was considered. I made a categorical statement that we look forward to this interaction to producing proposals on possible electoral and constitutional reforms and we are still waiting. 

The Attorney-General has informed me that indeed, the Leader of the Opposition has been contacted to say that the process is on-going and if you have any proposals, kindly present them. 

On our part on Government, this process is in motion. We have a committee of Cabinet that looks at these and they are already doing so. I have written to the Attorney-General to liaise with the Uganda Law Reform Commission, which in turn has some ideas. I hope you will not wait for a time when it may be too late for you to make any timely intervention.

Donors cutting aid – well, we hope this will not happen. We are engaging our development partners intensively to tell them that we value our relationship with them and we are very happy with their contribution to the development so far achieved and that now, we are able to finance up to 82 per cent of our budget. (Applause) We truly appreciate their contribution to building this capacity internally. The 18 per cent that we get plus the support we get through NGOs and other indirect methods are obviously valued and are most welcome. 

We will engage to say that when we exercise our sovereign right to pass our laws, we expect them to engage us in discussing but fully respect the sovereign rights of our people to exercise the freedom of what they think is best for them.  

So, my expectation, therefore, is that we will not – I know Government generally, the President and myself and others have been engaging development partners and I am happy to tell this House that interactions are very cordial and positive. I do not expect development partners to reduce their support for our development projects. If they do, then I will again state what I have stated elsewhere: We will come back to the drawing board and re-draw our priorities and ensure that they are funded by 82 percent of the funds, which we already have. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have exhausted the 45 minutes but I would like to appeal to Members that in the House of Commons where we got this practice from, the Prime Minister answers over 100 questions in 30 minutes. But when you start with the preamble; you justify; answer yourself and by the time you ask the question, you have used seven minutes already - A lot of time is used up in explaining the question before asking it. Let us move to the next item.

RESPONSES ON THE REPORT OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON ENERGY ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE ELETRICITY SUBSECTOR IN UGANDA

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would not have risen on this issue – 

THE SPEAKER: But are you the Minister for Energy? I called the Minister for Energy.

5.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MINERALS (Mr Peter Lokeris): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have just been consulting outside the House and we are about to bring the statement. Can I be allowed to rush out and the minister comes in? They are just in your consultation room. Within three minutes, we should be here.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Let us handle the next report as they prepare to come.

MOTION FOR THE PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON HEALTH ON THE FINDINGS FROM ITS ASSESSMENT OF ABIM HOSPITAL IN ABIM DISTRICT

THE SPEAKER: Where is the chair or vice chair of the committee?

DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, all chairpersons and deputy chairpersons of committees have been invited for a meeting in the lobby.

THE SPEAKER: Who invited them?

DR BITEKYEREZO: Hon. Tashobya. But the report is ready. We wrote it and its precise – 

THE SPEAKER: You mean you cannot present it?

DR BITEKYEREZO: I can present it but I do not have it now.

MR KENNETH LUBOGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure, under Rule 34; the rule we base on when asking questions to the Prime Minister. Under this rule, sub-rule (5), it says that; “The Leader of the Opposition shall have the right to comment or reply.” And since we started this “Prime Ministers’ Time” we have not had the comments or reply by the Leader of the Opposition.

I am, therefore, seeking your guidance whether we should not be having the reply of the Leader of the Opposition. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Members. Maybe, he does not want to reply. Let us receive the report. How do people get opportunity here? Please, proceed. 

5.22
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Following numerous complaints to the Speaker by the local leaders and area MPs as well as press reports that the condition of Abim Hospital was deplorable, the Committee on Health conducted an oversight visit to Abim District from 29-30 January 2014 to assess the condition of the hospital.

Specifically, the objectives of the visit were to:
    (1) Assess the physical condition of Abim Hospital as a general hospital.
    (2) Assess the number and quality of human resources at Abim Hospital; and
    (3) Assess the supply of medicine and condition of medical equipment at Abim Hospital.

The committee employed the following methods to collect data on the hospital:
    (a) We made a guided tour of the hospital.
    (b) We had intensive discussions with the health workers at the Abim Hospital – 

THE SPEAKER: The Members can read the methodology; go to your findings.

DR BITEKYEREZO: I will now go straight to our findings:

Physical state of Abim hospital

Abim Hospital was constructed and completed in 1971 and officially opened on 6 January 1973. The hospital serves a population of over 100,000 people and serves five districts of Abim, Amuria, Kotido, Otuke and Agago.

Over the years, the hospital got dilapidated; the situation worsened in 1984 when it was turned into an Internally Displaced People’s camp due to the invasion of the Jie warriors and in 1990s when the LRA attacked the area. The shutters, door frames, ceiling boards and other hospital furniture were used as firewood. The renovated hospital that is dilapidated has no running water.

In 2002 up to 2005, Government contracted Excel Company to renovate the hospital but the renovation left the hospital worse off. Obviously, there was no value-for-money at all, Madam Speaker. The doors are broken, the ceiling boards have fallen down, the sewage system is broken with the pipes, taps and sinks all broken down. And the main water tank is leaking and the hospital has no running water at all.

Theatre

The committee found that the hospital had recently received two new delivery beds from donors. However, the delivery suites had no windows at all; in the theatre, the ceiling boards had fallen and branches of thorny trees had been improvised to stop bats from converting the theatre into their dwelling place. There was no oxygen in the theatre room and obviously, such kind of environment is not suitable for surgical operations.

Toilets

The hospital has no functioning toilet – whether water-borne or pit latrine. On entering the hospital corridors and wards, one is greeted with filth and stench. The members of the committee were first given nose-covers to be able to inspect the wards and theatres. Dr Omona has one of the face-masks that we were given – I think he is going to bring it. But it was a very painful situation in Abim. The mortuary had no doors and fridges; it had no water and electricity.

The committee found a heap of donkey dung in the mortuary; in spite of its dilapidated state, the mortuary has a beautiful post-mortem table.

Madam Speaker, when it comes to the drug store, the committee was impressed with the management of the drug stores. Each medicine had a card, which made the monitoring of drug supply and usage very easy. As a result, cases of expired drugs were minimal. However, the drug store had no ceiling and due to high temperatures, there was a possibility that the drugs could easily get damaged by high temperatures.

The committee also found that there was a store containing expired drugs that had not been disposed of since 2008. The committee was informed that efforts were made to inform the Minister of Health to come and dispose of the drugs but with no success. 

Hospital Beds and Mattresses

The committee found that the hospital had broken and rusty beds that were procured in 1971 and the mattress were tattered. They were rotten and some were covered with black polythene bags. 

Hospital Equipment

The committee found that the hospital lacked essential equipment such as x-ray. Consequently, the hospital did not have a functional laboratory that could perform vital test like complete blood count. 

The hospital also lacked furniture. For instance, in the consultation room, there were no chairs for both patients and health workers. In one room, the committee found a patient squatting as he consulted a health worker. You can imagine a health worker is trying to diagnose a disease and the patient is squatting. The ambulances had broken down and their engines had been stolen, maintenance and fuel funds were diverted. 

The committee was informed that the hospital had no functional ambulance that could transport patients to the nearest better facilities like Kalongo Hospital or Lira Regional Referral Hospital. 

The committee also found that some equipment had been taken to Soroti for repair in 2007 but up to then, it had not been brought back; yet, funds for transporting them to and fro had been requisitioned and paid. 

Madam Speaker, when we go to the human resource in Abim Hospital, the hospital is staffed at 72 per cent of its required level. However, 50 per cent of the staff are junior and support staff. For instance, while the hospital is supposed to have one principal medical officer, one senior medical officer, three medical officers and one dental surgeon, the district local government has failed to recruit and retain any medical doctor at the hospital! The hospital has only three doctors that have been recruited and supported in terms of allowances by a USAID funded project. 

The hospital lacks critical cadre of health workers such as medical superintendent, principal nursing officer, orthopaedic officers etc. 

The health workers in Abim looked miserable. Majority of them had no uniform. The few that had uniform had purchased it using their meagre salaries. They work under difficult conditions. They seemed to be silenced and they lived under fear. One health worker commented that they feared to raise their grievances because they would be interdicted by the CAO. 

Break Down of Health Management in the District
The committee found that there was a health management break down in Abim Hospital. First, the district health officer of Abim District was also the same District Health Officer of Aleptong District. As a result, she was hardly in the district. For example, the committee was not able to meet her, yet, she was aware about the committee’s visit. Even when the committee requested the LCV chairperson to prevail on her to attend the meeting, the efforts yielded no effort. To be precise, she was attending a contracts committee where there was some bit of allowance to be given. So, she could not attend to the health committee of Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, the CAO does not offer the necessary support to the hospital. He was responsible for the deterioration of the health care delivery at the hospital. He had failed to procure cleaning services for the hospital yet funds for that activity were available. As a result, the hospital compound had not been slashed for more than six months. The whole place was littered with rubbish; cleaners had not been paid for the services they rendered to the hospital previously. 

The intervention by a group of women volunteers to clean the hospital had not yielded improved hygiene. Actually, a neighbouring lady opted to provide cleaning services to the hospital without any payment as a well-wisher of the hospital. 

The CAO and the DHO were staying in two of the houses meant for the doctors, thereby, forcing the three doctors at the hospital to stay in one house. The committee got reports that the CAO was shielding the DHO from rendering accountability to the interested stakeholders. The two officers were accused of indulging in corruption and abuse of public funds. Unfortunately, the committee was not able to hear from the accused as they did not attend the meeting. In one case, the DHO was accused of creating ghost health workers in Abim District. 

The committee also found that some of the recruited health workers had never received their appointment letters and had not accessed the payroll. Some decided to go back to their previous jobs. The committee was not able to get the details of the affected persons as the CAO and DHO, the custodians of such information, were not available. 

Madam Speaker, on Government plan to renovate general hospitals, the committee noted with concern that the local leaders in Abim felt that there was no commitment on the part of Government to renovate Abim Hospital. The leaders asserted that in 2008, they were informed that there was a list of hospitals to be renovated under a World Bank loan and that on top of that list, was Abim Hospital. However, the list was changed and Abim Hospital was deleted. 

The committee inquired from the Ministry of Health about the plan to renovate the general hospital. The committee was informed that Abim was planned to be renovated under a second World Bank loan a loan that is yet to be secured. 

Creation of other health centres in the new settlement sites
The committee was informed that in the last 30 years, there had been conflicts in the area that caused displacement of people from their homes. Recently, after the return of peace, the affected communities came back and were resettled. 

However, in the newly created sites, there are no easily accessible health facilities. The district authorities appealed to the committee to request Government to establish and budget for the health centres in the newly established resettlement sites to bring health services closer to the communities. 

Madam Speaker, the committee observed in general that in its current state, Abim Hospital does not merit to be called a district hospital due to its dilapidated state. It is not a place that offers hope of recovery to the patients that seek medical care from it. 

However, the physical structure of the hospital still looks very good and strong. This means that through renovation and proper management of this facility, it can offer quality health care. The problem is, therefore, that of neglect, by both the Central Government and the district authority. The Central Government failed to renovate the hospital or even properly supervise the attempted renovation. 

The district authorities failed to supervise and hold the managers of the hospital accountable. The committee noted that local political leaders believed that the managers, particularly the CAO and the DHO were installed by political authorities at the centre to swindle funds and steal equipment and drugs meant for the hospital. 

Recommendations

We recommend that a forensic audit should be conducted on the renovation of Abim Hospital from 2002 to 2005 to ensure that those who mismanaged the project for their selfish ends are brought to book and funds be recovered from the culprits. 

The Government should urgently mobilise funds to renovate Abim Hospital as a matter of priority and equip and staff it through retention incentives. In the meantime, Government should urgently identify funds to fix water and toilets at the hospital because there is no toilet in Abim. 

The current Chief Administrative Officer and the District Health Officer should be investigated for incompetence and abuse of office. 

The Minister of Health and the Ministry of Local Government should urgently cause the removal of the Chief Administrative Officer and the District Health Officer from the Abim Hospital houses meant for doctors.

Having found out that the DHO of Abim, Dr Betty Apio, works for two districts at the same time namely Abim and Aleptong, the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Local Government – the Aleptong District Public Service Commission and that of Abim should work in tandem to ensure Dr Betty Apio settles in one district as the district health officer.

We recommend that affirmative action should be instituted to facilitate recruitment, motivation and retention of health workers in the hard-to-reach areas such as Abim. This is because the three doctors at Abim Hospital are all paid by NGOs.

The monitoring authorities in Abim District including the RDC should be cautioned by the relevant appointing authority for failure to monitor the healthcare programmes and utilisation of healthcare earmarked funds in Abim.

The government should renovate all district hospitals given the fact that most of these were constructed in the 1960s or 1970s; they require urgent overhaul.
Madam Speaker, I beg to report and move that the House adopts the committee’s report. I thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to thank the committee and to report to the House that when we went out for the parliamentary outreach programme in Moroto, the leaders in the Karamoja Sub Region unanimously agreed that the situation in Abim is bad. That is why we undertook that the committee goes there.

But before I could send the committee, the list of hospitals to be renovated was published in the press. The leaders of Abim District stormed my Office with no appointment agitated and angry at being left out. So, the situation is quite difficult for them.

5.40
MR MICHAEL AYEPA (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your concern about the affairs of Abim District. I also thank the team that went to Abim. I would like to confirm to you that the observations that were made by the committee are true. Indeed Abim District is in a very sorry state. Can you imagine having a hospital without a toilet and running water? Can you also imagine running a theatre without running water? Nurses carry jerrycans and basins for about two kilometres to look for water.
 
In 2010 a strange person went to the hospital - because there are no doors. He started administering injections to patients claiming he was a doctor whereupon actually one woman suffered a miscarriage. The issues in Abim as reported here are really true. There is a lot of corruption in Abim Hospital. For example, Shs 153 million was given by the Wildlife Authority but I think the CAO and the DHO just misused that money.

Madam Speaker, the critical positions in every district like the DHO, the Medical Superintendent and that of the principal nursing officer in Abim District are not filled. The people working in some of those positions are those who have just qualified like medical assistants and most of them are just certificate holders. The DHO is the same medical person who works in Alebtong. She has been secretly working both in Abim and Alebtong. I have a document here indicating that Dr Betty Apio who has over acted in Abim – somebody is supposed to act in a position for six months according to public service regulations but Dr Betty Apio has been in acting position as DHO for six years. And she is at the moment a DHO in Alebtong and also a DHO is Abim – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute for you to conclude.

MR AYEPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In addition to the recommendation to renovate Abim Hospital, I want to move the following recommendations: The CAO should be interdicted; the CAO should give appointment letters to the DHO, Dr Dennis and the Deputy DHO who passed the interviews that were conducted by the District Service Commission - because at the moment the District Service Commission is not on good terms with the CAO because his person wasn’t given the position that he really badly wanted.

There is a recommendation that the CAO should leave the houses for the doctors. Indeed I want to inform you that when you sent a team to Abim, it was ignored by the DHO and the CAO – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Ayepa has something to lay on Table? Okay, come lay it.

MR AYEPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have these documents to lay on Table indicating Ms Betty Apio is the DHO for both Aleptong and Abim districts. The first is the appointment letter appointing her on promotion and transfer of services, which was written on 3rd May and handed over to Ms Betty Apio whom the CAO denies having knowledge about being the DHO of Alebtong yet he is the one who handed over these documents to Dr Betty Apio.

THE SPEAKER: What is the date of the letter?

MR AYEPA: It is dated 3rd May and it was authored by the CAO of Alebtong.

The second letter was from Dr Betty Apio, written on the 14 June 2013. This is the acceptance letter to show that she was accepting to be the DHO of Alebtong. The CAO of Alebtong received it on 14 June 2013, which was the same day when the letter was issued to her.

The third one is about the hand over report of the District Health Office by Mr Sameul Okello, the outgoing DHO, to Dr Betty Apio as incoming DHO. It was written on 31 October 2013. It was also signed by Dr Betty Apio. Among the things handed over were five accounts of Alebtong District Local Government.

The fourth issue is about reporting on duty. After denying being the DHO of Aleptong, when the MPs came, she hid herself. Also, when the First Lady went there, she again hid herself. But after realising that her tricks had been discovered and after I brought out this matter in the Kyankwanzi Retreat that she was the DHO of Aleptong, she wrote to the CAO of Alebtong declining to take up the position. She wrote a letter with a title “reporting on duty” in which she stated that she was unable to take up the job because she allegedly had not been released by Abim District yet she had already been working in Abim since last year. This letter was written on 30 January 2014 when she had already worked there for six months. 

There was a letter written by the CAO of Alebtong to Dr Apio rejecting her request not to take up the job. In that letter the CAO stated to her that she was not being serious by saying that she would not take up the job because she had personally partially implemented some of the funded activities in January. The CAO also told me that Dr Betty Apio had withdrawn Shs 30 million from the accounts of Alebtong and had not accounted for it. I lay these documents on Table.

Now there is an issue on employment status. This is a letter in which Dr Betty Apio tried to – when she realised that things had gone bad because we had started calling her, she wrote back. The CAO also denied that he did not know that Dr Betty Apio was the DHO of Alebtong. But when she came under pressure, the CAO asked Dr Betty Apio to explain herself? And yet he was the one who gave the appointment letter. So, I also lay all these documents on the table, Madam Speaker.

5.47
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. As a former Resident District Commissioner of Kaabong District in Karamoja region, I worked in that sub region for about three years. I must appreciate the committee’s report and I am in support of their recommendations. I personally visited Abim district some five years back and the situation has not changed at all but there is something that the committee has talked about – the issue of staff houses. There is a very big problem about staff houses in Karamoja. Personally when I was RDC in Karamoja, I used to stay in a doctor’s house because there was no house for an RDC and you cannot even access a guest house where to sleep. So, as we do this we must look into this because most of the people that are deployed in Karamoja have no staff houses. 

Another problem for Karamoja is attraction of health workers into this region. We looked for a District Health Officer in Kaabong District for over five years without attracting them. Whenever we wanted to take health workers in Karamoja, they always wanted a top up in hard-to-reach areas. It is very difficult to retain health workers in Karamoja sub region. The poverty in Karamoja is still very high. The need for these public facilities is on high demand because it is not like any other region where people can access private services.

In areas like Kaabong, Abim, Kotido, Nepak, Nakapiripit, we really need these public facilities if our people are to survive and the civil servants deployed in this region need special training. Maybe about nationalism but it is a very big problem not for only health workers but also for teachers and other administrators –(Member timed out_)

5.50
MR PETER BAKALUBA MUKASA(NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Members of the Health committee for this good report and it is really touching to see that Abim Hospital is in a very sorry state and not only Abim Hospital but maybe many hospitals that were left during the period of Obote’s regime are really suffering in this kind of situation. When you come to Lugazi Hospital, Kayunga Hospital, we visited Kiryadongo, Kiboga and many more. They are really in a very bad state.

I think as Government, we need to come up with a big master plan to see that we can work on these hospitals. Even when you come down to our health centres, they are not doing well at all. It is very saddening to find that you visit a hospital like Abim where there is no water at all. So, it means that they cannot even restore life. There is no hope. The management becomes so poor and at the end of the day you find that instead of people going to hospitals they run to private health clinics around. You find pharmacies surrounding those big hospitals because doctors have no customer care. Whoever goes there is not handled well and eventually is told to try elsewhere maybe in a surrounding health centre or a pharmacy which actually belongs to those doctors.

So, I think that we, the NRM Government, have done our best. We have tried what we can, money is passed here but I think we need to do a major surgery to see that we restore medicine in these hospitals and we send health teams and workers - (Member timed out_) 

5. 52
MR REMEGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is high time that as a country we start looking at what is happening in Karamoja with different eyes. For a long time, we viewed Karamoja with eyes of insecurity and lawlessness and for many years, Government has been putting a lot of effort in trying to bring peace and stability in that part of the country. Disarmament has been a success and as of this year, over 30,000 guns were picked from the hands of civilians and they are now in the rightful hands of the UPDF. When you think about 30,000 guns this is equivalent to nearly all the armed men and women of the UPDF.

The health situation is really bad. Many people are depending on natural herbs - in the whole of southern Karamoja in the districts of Nakapiripirit, Amudat, there is no hospital. In my constituency, most of you have read in the press recently that in the Health Centre IV women giving birth are sharing a maternity wing with men. That is how bad it is. You read in The Daily Monitor and in The New Vision that women giving birth, children and men are sharing the same ward. That is how bad it is, Madam Speaker.

In one of my recent visits over Christmas – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I wish we could really concentrate on Abim. Now we are moving to other districts, we are going to forget Abim; let us concentrate on the problem that brought us here.

5.55
MS GRACE BYARUGABA (NRM, Woman representative Isingiro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report and I will follow your guidance by sticking to the report. There are two issues that came to mind as the report was being read. One is about the decentralisation policy; I do not think this district has benefited from the decentralisation arrangement. It appears there is no rule of law in that district. If a CAO is doing what we have been told, it is like there is no Government. So, we need to improve on that policy if these other districts that are far off from the centre can benefit from this policy.

As we talk about Abim, we need to look at the healthcare services in this country and the Minister of Health needs to be sincere to us as Parliament to see whether we can change something, either some programme from some place to make sure that we emphasise on healthcare delivery services. We are now talking about water not being in Abim and people may think that it is because it is far off but remember we were told that Mulago which is in Kampala here does not have water. So, is this question of Abim being far away or is it because there is something wrong with the healthcare service delivery in this country. 

The supervision - waiting for a parliamentary committee to go and look at these matters when we have a whole ministry; it appears to me that this health centre in Abim has not been supervised by the ministry. I want to call upon the ministers that they better pull up their socks and supervise some of these health centres which are far off from the centre otherwise I cannot imagine our mothers delivering from such a health centre. 

On that note, I want –(Member timed out_)

5.57
MR BOAZ KAFUDA (NRM, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me also thank the committee for the punching report about the theme. We have seen reports but really this report is touching and it is high time, hon. minister, that as Government you came up and apologise to the people of Abim. Surely a district hospital without running water, without electricity, with the sewerage system broken down, with no oxygen in the theatre room! We are talking about a district hospital but we do not know the status of lower health centres in Abim.

I saw a recommendation that some health centres should be put in the areas where these people are. It is mandatory that every sub county must have a health centre III and each district must have a health centre IV. That is the constituency level which must have a health centre IV and a district must have a district hospital. A region must have a regional referral hospital. It is mandatory. So, if you look at the state of Abim Hospital, this is also what is happening to other health centres –(Member timed out_)

5.59
PROF KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to sympathise with the people of Abim and certainly Karamoja region. In today’s sitting, I remember hon. Baryomunsi raising a question on Mulago and the issue of oxygen and other issues related to the health care system. 

Madam Speaker, you have been here for a long time in that chair before as Deputy Speaker and now Speaker. Members in this Parliament have always wanted to have in-depth debates on sectors rather than having committee reports of sessional committees on policy and we have little time to debate and yet there are so many things. Can I propose, Madam Speaker, that the Committee on Health brings a comprehensive report on health care delivery in the country and we have time to debate it?

The issue of Abim has come up. The issue of Kibaale is another and we are even lucky that recently in Kibaale, we got assistance from the Infectious Diseases Institute which has come in to fill the gap and there is some delivery but otherwise, there is a lot to be desired.

Madam Speaker, you know the population of Kibaale increases by 5.2 percent. It has the highest population growth and therefore the service delivery is overstretched. Where there was a Health Centre II which was created for certain people, the population there is so great that even the health workers cannot handle it.

So, Madam Speaker, I think we need a bigger report. It is surprising that in my constituency, almost every health centre has got power running overhead but there is no power connected to the health centre. Can you imagine a doctor operating in a theatre using a generator but there is power and it is not connected to the health centre? That is erroneous. So, I think we need to discuss health care delivery and see how it can be improved in the entire country. Thank you.

6.02
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this report and to also call upon Government that it is high time they picked interest in human resources because when you look at the three doctors that are working in Abim, they are just being supported by NGOs. NGOs get funding sporadically. So, what will happen when it phases out? What will happen to Abim Hospital when these doctors are no longer supported by NGOs?

This afternoon, the honourable minister said that patients come to Mulago when they are already weak. So this gives us the picture of what is down there. If we do not have human resources and yet our people look at these regional or district hospitals as the hospitals that are accessible, how do you expect them to come to Mulago Hospital when they are still somehow okay?

Like hon. Grace Byarugaba has said, I do not know whether the ministry is still proceeding with the issue of recentralisation. When hon. Christine was still the minister, she used to tell us that they are thinking of recentralising the doctors and I believe this is why we have this problem. These challenges are not only happening in Abim but everywhere. The other time we said that we have failed to attract doctors in our district hospitals simply because - I mean the districts cannot manage to supervise; so, when you say that the CAO should go and supervise the DHOs and you are cautioning the RDCs, I do not think that they can really manage. Central government, you need to wake up and put together your hands and heads and everything else to ensure that you offer health service delivery to our people. I thank you.

6.04
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I feel disgusted because when you look at the way this country is being run, you really shudder. Last year, a report was tabled here about Karamoja sub region and the Members of Parliament from Karamoja told this Parliament that everything was going on well in Karamoja. We wondered and said, are you sure that everything is going on very well? Now I am surprised today to hear Members of Parliament from Karamoja again complaining that Abim is actually in a sorry state –(Interruption)

MR AYEPA: Madam Speaker, I have never said in this Parliament that everything is fine for Karamoja. Is hon. Nzoghu in order to say that all the Members of Parliament from Karamoja said everything in Karamoja is okay? Is he in order to lie to this Parliament? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, he is out of order.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, it is on record on the Hansard of this Parliament.

The second scenario is that I had an opportunity to work with Goal International. We were based in Pader and were going to Abim for most of the field visits. We were driving in the bushes and that was in 2008 but what really disturbs my mind is how we prioritise our issues as a country, as districts and as leaders; local leaders and national leaders. Madam Speaker, just within this month, the NRM has held several caucus meetings in Entebbe and the signatures of hon. Members from Karamoja appear on the petition that actually requires Museveni to stand in 2016 unopposed. This means that they are contented with the work of President Museveni and you wonder why people should come here and really deceive us –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, hon. Nzoghu, the report is of our committee and it did not come from the MPs from Karamoja. It is from our Committee on Health.

6.08
MR STEPHEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this report. The situation that we are talking about does not only happen in that district. I am happy that we have seen what is happening on the ground. Many health facilities in this country are like that. I am only happy that at least in the report, they say that this facility is still strong and only needs renovation and equipping it and sending there health workers and drugs and this will be okay.

But in most of the new Health Centre IIs and IIIs that we have constructed now, some of them may not even live for the following 15 years without collapsing because the buildings are in very bad shape. So, I am happy that at least we have seen that those governments could do something very good in as far as the construction of the buildings was concerned. But now 20 years down the road, we are failing to only renovate and maintain the health facilities that we have. 

I am so disturbed because I know the Chairperson LC5 of that district is from the NRM party. But why is he failing to manage the health facility? I know the Members of Parliament of that district are all from the NRM and should be very close to the minister. Hon. Rugunda is here and I would expect the Members of Parliament who are from the ruling party to move so fast to hon. Rugunda than I from the Opposition and we see drugs in that place. What is happening? Are you not in charge? You leave your people to be suffering and it hurts us –

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Ochola, are you suggesting that the areas that are not under the ruling party should be ignored? Is that what you are suggesting?

MR OCHOLA: Madam Speaker, I am saying this because it pains me. I oppose because I see very bad things happening in my own area. Now when I see worse things happening in areas where there are even representatives coming from the ruling party, I get more pain because these are Ugandans. I speak like this because I am badly hurt because the situation is not good. Just imagine where you have a health facility without running water, electricity, health workers and you have a medical doctor who is working in two districts! What is the Ministry of Health and that of Public Service doing to detect – I hope this lady is not earning salary from Alebtong and also from Abim! It is so hurting.

6.11
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Earlier on, Dr Rugunda did present a report here and so if that can happen in Mulago, just imagine what can happen in Kasilo and what is happening in Abim. I was not surprised when this report was read about what is happening in Abim.

There is a big problem in all the districts but I am dissatisfied with the Ministry of Health. Dr Rugunda Ndugu, you have a lot to do. You have two senior colleagues under you. Where is the problem? Why are they failing to supervise? Let us leave the weaknesses of hon. James Kakooza but when hon. Kakooza was in that ministry, he would reach every constituency. (Applause) When I told him and hon. Mukula that there was a problem in Apapai Health Centre IV, when they reached Soroti, the DHO was dilly dallying and wanted to dodge hon. Kakooza but hon. Kakooza picked a car and drove up to Apapai and everyone followed him. All the health workers run away but the following month, you should have seen how things had changed in Apapai Health Centre IV. What is happening to the minister today in that ministry? Are you just sitting in air conditioned rooms? I guess the members from Abim had brought this matter to the ministry but no action was taken. I can give an example. 

THE DHO of Serere took over the ambulance of Apapai Health Centre IV in Kasilo. I wrote to the PS, Mr Lukwago, and he said they could not handle because that was a matter of the district. How can a PS say so? I think what we need is to recentralise –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute to conclude.

MR OKUPA: Up to today, that health centre has no ambulance because it has been taken and messed up. Last month, two women died because they could not be evacuated to Soroti. When I look at this report here, I see this lady – this is an embarrassment to the doctor. How could you mess up to that level? What is the ministry doing? We have the Minister for Karamoja Affairs. Has this information not come to her? Where is the problem? 

The other biggest problem is that in most districts, the workers are just acting. One time we went to Katakwi and there are people who have acted for 10 years and the CAOs cannot take action. So, I think that the Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Public Service and Ministry of Health must act and act now.

6.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR NORTHERN UGANDA (Ms Rebecca Amuge Otengo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. First, I would like members to agree with me that as Ugandans, we accepted the decentralised system of government. This Local Government Act that we are using now makes life very difficult in some areas and I will give you an example. In most of these areas in Northern Uganda, there is a lot of impunity. It is the leaders who are sleeping in the houses of the doctors and you cannot do much. You try to – 

THE SPEAKER: Information from Dr Bitekyerezo.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you so much, hon. Minister, for giving way. Actually in Alebtong District, the LCV Chairperson is sleeping in the house of the doctor.

MS OTENGO: Madam Speaker, you can now hear for yourself. And it is not only in Alebtong. And when you talk to them, some of them are too big for the CAO – in some districts the CAOs are the ones sleeping in the houses of the doctors and yet the women are dying. To me, it gets – 

THE SPEAKER: Order. I know that this is very exciting but let us listen. 

MS OTENGO: It gets to the district councils where we are ex-officios as members of this Parliament and therefore we have some stake. Allow me to –(Interjections)– please give me opportunity to just make clarification on doctor -

THE SPEAKER: Point of order.

MR KAMARA: Madam Speaker, I understand this is a Minister in charge of Northern Uganda. In Uganda there is nobody who is above the law. It surprises me when I hear the Minister in charge of Northern Uganda telling us that the LCV Chairperson can go and sleep in the house of the doctor and we have the authorities to control where the minister - I think she is the one that reports this and this person can be arrested there and then. 

Madam Speaker, I also become surprised when a CAO who is a government employee is being paid salary and the minister is just observing and lamenting here. Is she in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: The Minister is seeking for the support of this House to evict those people. (Laughter)

MS OTENGO: Thank you, my brother, hon. Kamara. I just want to make a clarification on Dr Apio; I am told Dr Apio was recruited in Alebtong District and she only reported in June 2013. And when she reported, she told them she was going to hand over in Abim. When she went back she returned in October and told our leaders that she was busy with the contract committee. And as we speak now, the PHC Fund has not been used and we do not see her in Alebtong; I just want the people of Abim and members of this House to know that the council actually sat last week and decided that she must be relieved since she is no longer part of Alebtong.

Madam Speaker, I know that some people will say, “Why aren’t you doing some work?” But it also gets down to the District Service Commission; do they do due diligence before they recruit some of these staff? I am telling you that let us not –(Interjection)– but Alebtong is led by UPC; so there is no NRM cadre there. In fact you are more cadre than that one. 

Madam Speaker, I just want us to work out how to correct what is taking place; let us not just be blaming but look at the district service commissions. Are they doing due diligence before carrying out recruitment? If they do not, then we must look at them. We are not just speaking for the gallery; we are speaking because we want to correct the situation. Thank you.

6.19
MS STELLA NAMOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the report and for highlighting the problems in Abim Hospital. Madam Speaker, I am also aware that Abim Hospital was allocated some funds; the contract was awarded from the ministry to Excel Company but this company did not do its work and I am surprised that it has been left to go scot-free and the people have been left in their suffering. I want to ask the minister what is going to happen to this company which has taken more than Shs 160 million that was meant to carry out renovations to the hospital.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to request the Ministry of Public Service to at least pay our teachers and nurses on time. These are people in remote areas and cannot easily access food; they have to get food from Mbale, Moroto and Kotido. And if there is a delay of their salary payment, it becomes difficult for them to work; we need to motivate them. Government should also lift the ban on creation of health centre IIs for the case of Karamoja. 

Madam Speaker, it has been highlighted from the report that in Karamoja, communities are now resettling back to areas which were not settled because of the peace which is prevailing now. And those areas lack health centre IIs. I think Government has to do something for Karamoja for the people to benefit from health services. Thank you.

6.21
MS JULIANA AUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the excellent report they have given on the status of Abim Hospital. It is true that the hospital’s status is pathetic. I would like to say that there has been a lot of neglect from the Ministry of Health towards Abim Hospital. Why do I say so? They have already talked about the beds which are there; these beds are 40 years old! And even if they could not renovate the hospital, at least they would have been in position to put the furniture or the beds in order. The ambulances are being given – we have heard from the report – but Abim Hospital does not have an ambulance until recently when the local government decided to acquire one. We have seen districts being given ambulances; how is it that Abim was not considered even if it is dilapidated? 

As we speak, when we go to other hospitals, nurses wear uniform but this cannot even be given to staff in hard-to-reach areas like Abim Hospital. Don’t you think this has been a great neglect from the main ministry, Madam Speaker? It is not about NRM; we are here not for the party but for the people of Uganda – whether you belong to NRM, UPC or DP; we want service delivery to reach every person in this country.

I would like to appeal to the Minister of Public Service and the Minister of Health to prevail over the issue of the DHO. That issue has become political; it nearly caused us to demonstrate – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Please use half a minute to conclude.

MS AUMA: The Police were about to use tear gas for the first time in the history of Abim because of the issue of the DHO. We have talked with the Public Service Commission and they instructed the District Service Commission to re-advertise the DHO position but the three people who have the contention should not apply. I am appealing to the Public Service Commission to prevail over the District Service Commission so that this position can be advertised immediately so that we can put the issue of health service delivery in Abim District to rest.

6.25
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Committee on Health for presenting what I consider to be a balanced and good report, describing the bad conditions in Abim Hospital. I also salute the people who spoke before me; many of them made very good points. I do want to stress the point that the responsibility of an elected government is to serve all the people of Uganda and not serve partisan or sectional interests. (Applause) So without any doubt, the Movement Government, which has the mandate of the people of Uganda, will serve all the people of Uganda. 

I agree there have been problems in Karamoja but let me say that if there is any part of Uganda that should be proud, Karamoja is one of those that must be proud. Why should Karamoja be proud? We all know that recently Karamoja was literally not accessible; insecurity was at its peak. I am amused that some people are disagreeing with me but that is a fact; let us call a spade a spade. The fact that Karamoja now is easily accessible and peaceful is a major achievement by the NRM Government. (Applause)

Secondly, Madam Speaker, we have always talked of Karamoja as some distant remote land of Uganda. But as I speak today, there is power in Karamoja; a tarmac road is being made to connect Karamoja with the rest of the country. These are great achievements –(Interruption) 

DR BAYIGGA: Madam Speaker, I respect my elder brother but I am compelled to move a point of order because he wants to impute that Abim, which is the subject of this debate, is Karamoja. Karamoja is a huge region and we are simply talking about Abim Hospital where I believe the minister should concentrate. Is he in order to continue talking about achievements in Karamoja, leaving out Abim which is the subject of this debate?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have had from various Members that Abim still has IDPs meaning that it has been insecure. So what he is saying is that a greater part of that area including Abim has been insecure. Please conclude. 

DR RUGUNDA: I salute you, Madam Speaker, for your very wise ruling on this matter. Now to come to Abim, Abim is a microcosm of what is happening in the health sector because it is true that the health sector has significant problems. The essential problems, in my own view are:
One, it is difficult to recruit and retain health workers because of the emoluments which are not competitive in the region and as a result, health workers quite often go to where there is better remuneration. 

Secondly –(Interjections)– well the Movement calls for facts and those are facts; the Movement is in charge, how can I leave it? It has brought peace and freedom in this country; I am absolutely proud of it. Madam Speaker, it is true the Movement Government has decided to prioritise because we know we cannot do everything at ago because the resources are limited. Therefore, the health sector is definitely going to benefit from the improved economic environment that is coming out of that clear prioritisation. The report mentioned many things about Abim and it is very interesting because what they said about Abim is correct. People find it difficult to go to Karamoja because of the old image of insecurity in Karamoja. We need to help them to know that the situation in Karamoja, including Abim, has been pacified and they can now come. 

Secondly, because of the emoluments, it is organisations like USAID which supplement the salaries and therefore have made it attractive. And that is why the doctors in Abim and a few other areas in Karamoja are getting additional support in order to be able to live in that relatively challenged environment. 

The way forward in our view is simple and clear; Government has put in place mechanisms for prioritisation in terms of repairs. We have already put Abim in the 17 hospitals that are being supported by the World Bank for renovation. Actually, Madam Speaker, the World Bank Board was due to discuss the $90 million to renovate hospitals in Uganda including Abim Hospital and that board meeting was stopped for reasons that are very common to all of you. We do believe that this is a temporary phenomenon and that Abim reconstructing and rehabilitation will go as planned –(Interruption) 

MS JOY ONGOM: We appreciate so much having Abim on the list of hospitals to be rehabilitated. But, hon. Minister, it has been on record and also in the report that issues of monitoring are so poor. Does it also necessitate that Abim seems not to have been monitored? As the Minister of Health, when did you last go to Abim Hospital? Even the funds always allocated for retooling – you hear, you get in the report a patient squatting to receive medical attention; that is embarrassing! Can I have clarification whether that also is waiting for the World Bank fund?

DR RUGUNDA: On the point of monitoring, I will make a quick answer. It is true that a number of officials have been to Abim but more importantly, I must commend the Members of Parliament from Karamoja for their vigilance and regular interaction with Government and the Ministry of Health in particular. We have shared with them the problems and the difficulties. They have been on the ground and some of these issues I am talking about, like the rehabilitation programmes, have been discussed with a number of them.

You may be interested to know that the Vice-Chairperson of the Committee on Health is actually –(Interjections)– I am sure she is still the one. She is my vice chairperson and we have been regularly discussing these common issues on health in Karamoja. My sister Juliana Modest has been in regular contact with us raising the problems. But you see, one can rush to Abim and go away but the critical point is to solve problems and that is what we are focusing on as a Government; and we are going to solve them. 

So, Madam Speaker, if I can be allowed to conclude my short statement; many other issues were raised like Uganda – I will not go into individual statements. I will just conclude as follows. That Government is committed to rehabilitate the health infrastructure in this country and nothing will stop it. 

Secondly, Government is aware that there are certain administrative bottlenecks that need to be addressed in the centre and also in the periphery. There is no doubt Government is addressing those issues. 

Thirdly, we are fully aware that there is a big problem of doctors and nurses and midwives in our health units, and Government has decided that as soon as Ugandans complete their internship, instead of spending months or years roaming the streets of Kampala and beyond, Government will take them on so that they can go to our hospitals and health centres and serve the interests of our people. 

Therefore, I want to commend my colleagues on the Committee on Health for the good work done and we will endeavour to do our best to support these efforts so that Abim and other health units in our country can be functional and can be sources of healing people and not sources of infections as in some cases the case is. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the House adopts the report.

(Question put and agreed on.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there was a proposal that the Committee on Health continues to look into the wider areas of the health ministry in terms of health service delivery and so on. So, I now invite the shadow health minister to lay that document so that our committee can use it as basic document.

6.38
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Last year, the then Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi and I, together with other members of the Opposition and staff of Parliament visited a number of hospitals in western and eastern Uganda, including Northern Uganda. 

This report which was compiled between June and July 2013 by the Leader of the Opposition is titled, “Report of the Leader of the Opposition Hospital Inspection Report” which I beg to lay on Table. It has a lot of vital information that can be used by the health committee and the Ministry of Health officials. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The document has now been laid and it belongs to the House. It can now be accessed and used. Let us get back to the item on energy. Thank you, temporary chairperson.

RESPONSE ON THE REPORT OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON ENERGY ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE ELECTRICITY SUB SECTOR IN UGANDA

6.38
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Following the discussions we had yesterday on this report, we have produced some hard copies of the response for Members. We submitted the copies to the Clerk to Parliament and I will appreciate if they are distributed now. I am also ready to proceed recommendation by recommendation, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, proceed.

MRS MULONI: The first recommendation is on page 32 of the report. We agree with this recommendation. We also concur with the recommendation 2 of the committee.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that recommendations 1 and 2 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: On recommendation 3 on page 32, we concur with it too.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that recommendation 3 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: On recommendation 4 on page 32, we concur with it.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that recommendation 4 be adopted.
(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: We concur with recommendation 5 on page 32 of the report.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that recommendation 5 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: We concur with recommendations 6 and 7 on page 32 of the report.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that recommendations 6 and 7 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: We have recommendation 1 on page 44 of the report; we concur with it.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that that recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: Recommendation 2 on page 44 of the report; we concur with it.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that recommendation 2 on page 44 be adopted.
(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: We also concur with recommendation 3 on page 44.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that recommendation 3 on page 44 of the report be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, we do not agree with recommendation 1 on page 52 of the report for the reason that there is a possible misunderstanding on the capping of the losses from 33 to 38 percent. Madam Speaker, the loss factor that is employed by the regulator to set the tariff is done on an annual basis whereas the capping of the losses at 38 percent was a policy issue that was brought on board by Government as a way of effectively managing the agreement given the fact that it was during the period, when there was drought and the level of the water went down and therefore the power supply reduced and the losses were spiking and fluctuating at very high levels. It was important for Government to intervene and ensure that the concessionaires still maintains efficiency despite the difficulties at the time. 

So, the cap, which was set at 38 percent, was not the loss factor that was put in the tariff. It is for that reason that the technical people who discussed this matter and recommended to the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to communicate that position handled it in a regular manner because that was a policy issue and the factors that were done and held by the regulator were not tampered with. So, it is for those reasons that we do not agree with the recommendation of the committee.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, chairperson of the committee, do you have anything to add?

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This recommendation arose as a result of the evidence that was laid before the committee by witnesses, the regulator and copies of the letters from two other ministers. So, we were surprised that a matter of policy was included in the contract. In our understanding, whatever would lead to termination of a contract would not be just a matter of policy; it would be a matter of regulation.
So, we still maintain our position in this regard. We have tried to explain that we did not misunderstand but actually understood that those who sat down – the six of them, three referring to page 48 of our report – did so in contravention of sections 15, 16 and 17 of the Electricity Act, Cap 145 of 1999. And in this regard, whatever guided us were the submissions as can be seen from Appendix 3, 4, 5 and 11 attached to this report. That is the evidence we relied on in addition to other evidence that is all laid on Table that the Chief Executive Officer of ERA then complained to our committee that they had been bypassed when these six people “prominent persons” took it upon themselves to be the regulators in a way and changed the threshold of the loss factor from 33 to 38 percent. The aspect of whether this was or had financial implication, we were also told generally from other submissions that every one percentage loss would translate into $3 million. That was the basis upon which we came to that, Madam Speaker.

MR SIMON MULONGO: Madam Speaker, I would like also to add weight to what the chairperson has explained that the committee received evidence that the manner in which the decision was taken was also suspicious because a couple of days earlier just about a week, the senior minister authoritatively communicated on the subject and so it was interesting to the committee that barely a week after he had left, the acting minister who was actually his junior made a decision to overrule what the senior minister had communicated against.

Secondly, we were surprised that the letterhead on which the minister did write was not of the minister but that of the permanent secretary. It was as if this matter was written for him and what they needed was his hand, and all those compounded our suspicions and therefore the matter remained suspect to the committee.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the recommendation be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, the next recommendation which is – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I seek guidance. You have put a question and we have voted; are we talking about the amended one of the minister or the one of the committee?

THE SPEAKER: No, the minister has no amendment. We have voted on the recommendations of the report.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, if that is the case I also wanted to make an amendment.

THE SPEAKER: On what? Minister, proceed. You didn’t indicate that you wanted to speak. The minister is here, she is in charge. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I rise to seek the indulgence of Madam Speaker and colleagues because I did not realise that we were just about to vote on the issue because I had actually wanted to contribute on this one. So, I do not know how I could seek – (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: You respond in a treasury memorandum.

MRS MULONI: The next recommendation is following the one that we have just discussed where hon. Minister Kamanda Bataringaya, who was holding the portfolio of the Minister for Energy and Mineral Development at that material, was the one that communicated that policy issue regarding the capping of the losses and therefore since the reasoning is that the 38 percent loss factor which is being treated as a factor that was put in the tariff was never put in the tariff and therefore if you consider the license that the regulator had issued out, you will not find the factor of 38 percent and that is why our emphasis is that 38 percent was really a policy issue to effectively manage the agreement and not the license and that is why it is a policy matter, and that is why the minister who was holding the portfolio communicated that policy to the privatisation unit. So, for that purpose we do not agree with the recommendation of the committee.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, we put out this recommendation again and we have been discussing and we found out that if the one that is ahead of this one has passed, actually hon. Bataringaya who is here was duped and we condemned him for being negligent and I thought that would be sufficient punishment for him because he probably did not even know what he was signing at that time. In any way, we were thinking that we condemn him but we lessen the punishment.

The committee looked at the letterhead upon which he wrote the letter and when he appeared before us, he did not appear to be fraudulent; he was actually remorseful. We wrote this to catch every person but with hindsight we believe that what he did was actually in good faith. He was duped to sign a letter on the letterhead of the permanent secretary, which was not for the minister and it would be wrong for us to condemn him in this way. 

More so, we do not have as a committee evidence of collusion and we believe it was erroneously put in there that he colluded. Collusion is a matter of criminality and we did not have that evidence before us. On the basis of that, we thought we would revisit the recommendation and condemn him. If he can apologise to this country that he was negligent, that could be enough.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have seen the letter here. The senior minister went out of the country like today and after two days, they brought a letter to a person who was not involved in the acts and he immediately signed. I cannot say he was duped - he is my brother. He was not! He signed the letter. He knows he was not a Minister for Energy. He should have consulted at least the Minister of State for Energy. If they are saying that the civil servants have been punished, the minister signed a letter barely two days when the senior minister had travelled. If he was a serious minister he would have consulted the minister.

MR WERIKHE: I would like to inform my brother, hon. Nandala- Mafabi, that the time hon. Kamanda was acting, he was acting as Minister of Energy and Mineral Development. So, we cannot say that he acted not as a minister responsible for the ministry. But even then the senior minister has never said that the action hon. Kamanda took was actually wrong. It is unfortunate that hon. Migereko is not here. At least we have interfaced with him. He said that there was nothing wrong with what hon. Kamanda did because what he took was a policy issue as the honourable minister has explained and it was not actually the issue to determine the tariff capping as such. I wish he was here but he is on record somewhere in different fora that hon. Kamanda was in order as the acting minister to have signed that letter.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, he was giving me information. On 17 November 2006, the senior minister wrote a letter to the Minister of Finance and he was not in agreement. There were two ministers: a Minister of State in charge of Energy and another Minister of State in charge of Minerals. Hon. Bataringaya was in charge of minerals but there was a substantial Minister of State in charge of Energy -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I have been a minister before and it is up to the substantive minister to delegate to any of the ministers of state.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am not objecting to that. What I am trying to say is that the Minister of State who holds the portfolio of Energy was there. The original minister himself had a disagreement but there was also a Minister of State for Energy. What I am raising is that hon. Bataringaya was now a full minister on that date; 28th November, 11 days after the other one wrote. If he was now a substantive minister, prudence would have expected that he would have called his colleague, the Minister of State for Energy and said, “Sir, can you help me on this matter?” Whether he got advice or not, he just signed. 

Madam Speaker, Bataringaya is my good friend and he is my brother but this is a clear indication of collusion. You cannot kill civil servants and leave the minister. This minister Bataringaya is totally involved and should answer instead of coming here and saying, “I apologise”.

MR SSEBUNYA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we should give hon. Oboth time to amend his recommendation and then we decide on the recommendation rather than us going into the debate as to whether it was after two or three days. Can we allow hon. Oboth, the chairperson, to amend his recommendation and then we see how to proceed? I thank you.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether it is procedurally right because I was a member of the committee that presented the report to this House. The report became part and parcel of the Committee of the Whole House. For us members, because the report here is what we agreed on as members, it is now upon the House. If you feel you want to amend it, do so but it cannot be the chairperson because the chairperson has to consult the members again because this is what we agreed. So, it is the House here. If you have amendments, please move them and we vote on them but for us as a committee, we agree with what was brought here. It cannot be the chairperson.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to make a proposal that this proposal of the committee stands because there is clear evidence that hon. Bataringaya must have been part and parcel of the process if he cannot confirm otherwise to us. I do not see any reason why the committee can now come here and say, “We want to amend” because they were with him and they were convinced that he was involved. In my view, hon. Bataringaya should be held personally liable.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, when a committee presents a report and it is debated, sometimes you can get convinced by the tone of the debate. It is for us to decide.

MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yes, I can see the recommendation but from the way the chairman of the committee is talking, it is like he is saying that yes he was liable but he was duped by the technocrats and this is the minister. If you are duped, what do you do? At times it can be an error so why don’t we follow what the chairman is telling us that he apologises and we leave him because he said he was duped according to what they got in the committee by the technocrats. So, should we punish him when he was actually duped?

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have had the benefit to listen to the chairperson of the ad hoc committee and hon. Werikhe. The chairman’s presentation had made me believe that actually the hon. Minister had been duped into this action but the contribution by hon. Werikhe actually shows that he knew what he was doing because he starts by saying that he was substantially acting. In my opinion, there are two positions; one by the chairperson who departs from the earlier position, which he was pursuing and then hon. Werikhe saying, ”No, the honourable minister was acting and he knew what he was doing.” What comes into the picture is that the hon. Minister was reversing a decision taken earlier on by a substantive senior minister. We have seen this when we presented the report of the Public Accounts Committee. I appreciate this might not be within our rules that we allow one of the Members to clarify on an issue, which has been raised because whereas the hon. Minister is also indirectly involved, he has a chance to come up and speak for himself. 

I would seek the indulgence of the House. The committee interfaced with him and they looked at the demeanour of the minister but before we take a decision, maybe we should listen to him on that specific aspect. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not know whether these are not double standards. There are people who have no opportunity to address this House; there are people who have no opportunity to speak.

MR KIWANDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to re-echo the suggestion brought by hon. Werikhe and that is what actually happened. The substantive minister was away and hon. Bataringaya was acting on behalf of the senior minister. The senior minister did not come out and say that what hon. Bataringaya did was wrong. What we are blaming him for is not actually the signing but the decision that was taken. The decision was taken by the senior minister and not hon. Bataringaya. Bataringaya who was in the acting position. Actually, he would have made a call to the senior minister wherever he was and asked, “Can I go ahead and sign this?” Now if we implicate hon. Bataringaya, we are actually implicating a wrong person because he did not do it on his own. He was delegated and when you are delegated to do such things - if he had not done it, that was going to be insubordination. This was a minister acting on behalf of a senior minister. So, hon. Bataringaya has no case to answer.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I appreciate how hard it is to implicate a colleague sitting with us in the House but it has become a common practice that politicians do wrong things and at the end of the day we implicate the technocrats.

I am at pain to say this but I do not know how urgent it was that hon. Bataringaya could go and make such an important decision and at a time when the substantive minister is away. If we are to take such decisions and unless we are only pretending that we are fighting corruption, either we exonerate both of them and say there was nothing wrong with what the Permanent Secretary did or we also hold hon. Bataringaya painfully. But for the sake of having fair justice, balance it so that he also takes responsibility that he should not have acted in haste and could have probably consulted with his colleague who was away or waited to take such an important decision which could lead this country to a big loss. I thank you.

PROF. KASIRIVU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The principles of delegation are that when you delegate, you retain ultimate responsibility. If there is a mistake done by anybody you delegated, you actually own up. So, I would have wished that - and when we were debating this report, I remember bringing it out and I wanted hon. Migereko to come up and clarify. I do not know whether he clarified before the committee to find out what he did or whether he disowned what hon. Kamanda Bataringaya did and whether what the technical people did was wrong. I imagine that a minister can also put to task the technical people to explain before a matter is concluded. So, we are criticising people and thinking that what was done – and that is why I am also looking at the committee because later on, there is a very serious observation that the committee made and it is but they never made any recommendation on the issue on ERA and it is here and I am going to read it.

So, Madam Speaker, I am very dissatisfied that the substantive minister cannot come up and say that what my colleague did was wrong and therefore the –(Member timed out-)

7.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to say something about processes in offices. When our bosses go out, they give a series of activities, “Do this and that”. By the time hon. Migereko went out, there were discussions about these tariffs here because of what had happened; that the tariffs were supposed to rise. It was negotiations and even when the minister wrote to them, he was saying that what they were saying may not be correct and then he left hon. Bataringaya to continue with the negotiations while they were in touch. When it came to a standstill where the others were saying that if they went down, they would be at a complete loss because they were between 38 and 41, it was then agreed of course with the authority and mandate to the acting minister that if it has become difficult, you can cap it at this. You always communicate and this is what we do. 

That for this particular one, the capping where they should not go above was 38 but they were to oscillate between 33 and others. If you see the diagram here, the losses did not even reach 38 but you see 34, 35 – the flexibility of the uncertainty which were then seen. In fact, the colleague was right and was in constant touch with the boss and that is what we do when we are given to act. I thank you very much.

MRS OGWAL: I am seeking further clarification –

THE SPEAKER: From whom?

MRS OGWAL: From the chairperson of the committee because that is coming from him. The impression that is being given is that the minister who was acting bears responsibility for signing the letter. But another impression has been given that the substantive minister also agreed with the final position which to me, if we are to be fair, both ministers are now directly responsible because you cannot say that the one who was acting is culpable and yet the substantive minister also agreed with him. So, it means that the position is now the same and so, both of them will now be equally responsible for the actions taken. This is how I look at it but I am not a lawyer. But I think, Madam Speaker, you can help us in this situation.

But even if hon. Dr Kamanda Bataringaya was duped, I think that even creates greater fear in me. You can imagine a person of the status of a minister being duped to sign a document that he did not understand is very serious. It has serious consequences to this country and actually, that minister should have been sacked a long time ago – (Laughter) – because it means he could have been duped into doing many other things that we have not yet discovered. Therefore, ministers of that type must identify themselves and must leave public offices and not continue to dupe this country into these types of losses. So, Madam Speaker, from my position, the two ministers must be held responsible. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister for Energy and then the Prime Minister. Let us hear from the Minister for Energy.

7.13
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): I wish to give further information so that maybe this matter can be clear in the honourable members’ minds as we discuss this matter. When you look at the energy losses that are set by the regulator and which is a regulatory matter - starting the year 2005 to date, you do not encounter a loss factor of 38 percent. In the year 2005, the loss factor was 33 percent; in 2006 it was 32.2 percent; in 2007 it was 31.3 percent; 2008 it was 34.1 percent; 2009 the loss factor was 31.7 percent – (Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Order. Madam Speaker, are we back to debate? I thought that all these matters were all debated and all those facts were given to the House. I believe that the committee had all those facts given to them. What we are now doing is to endorse the proposal given or reject. Where we are now, the minister is actually being diversionary and is taking us back because we are not seeking clarification because all we are trying to say is that either we hold the minister responsible or we hold both ministers responsible. But there is a problem and now the minister is trying to – I beg to move therefore, Madam Speaker, to put this matter to rest.  [HON. MEMBERS: “You are on Order.”] 

Is it, therefore, in order for the minister to continue confusing the House with facts we have? We do not need your facts now but need to take a decision on this matter. Is it in order for her to continue taking us back and actually provoking us to debate a report that we have already debated and closed? Is the minister in order? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, on the Floor of this House, the chair of the committee said he was considering reviewing but he did not come to making a review of his amendment and that is on the Floor and that is how this debate began. What is the level of punishment we should give and that is how the minister is responding to try and give us the facts as she understands them. 

MR SIMON MULONGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The committee chairperson, if I understood him and having listened to the hon. Minister – if you look at Page 48 of the report, there is an indication of the hon. Minister colluding with the technocrats and the facts as elaborated in the report do not necessarily indicate the element of collusion. And that is why the committee chairperson thinks that the component of collusion should be left out. But the committee is not suggesting that the minister is left scot-free; only that the degree of offence as identified be lessened with that part of collusion which was not substantiated. And as such, consequently, the penalty to the minister be lessened. And I agree with the chairperson; I would like to implore my colleagues to support the idea that the issue of collusion be left out. Thank you.

7.18
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, I think the point that the minister was trying to make – which has relevance to the debate now – is that you seek to punish the minister for something that did not happen. This is because one is talking of a loss; there is an assumption that because they signed a document raising the capping level to 38 percent, a loss was incurred. But actually there is no evidence at all that any loss was incurred.

Secondly, if there was any loss, it was not because of the 38 percent; it was because there was a difference between the actual loss and the loss factors that were put in the tariff and the one who actually made that loss was not Government but Umeme. So why would you seek to punish a minister or even a bureaucrat for the loss of a commercial entity which they have made? (Interjection) I will yield the Floor to you and him later but allow me to conclude my point so that you understand what I am saying. 

Looking at table one, there are three losses: the first one is the actual loss which is an annual average; the second one is the original set target – who sets the target? The regulator. And of course we are talking about irregularity; if the regulator sets the target, that cannot be irregular because the regulator is doing their job. So, the target for 2005, as an example, was 33 percent; the actual loss was 34.5 percent. So there is a difference of 1.5 percent. What was factored in the tariff was 33 percent and not 34.5 percent. That is what that table means. Therefore, the one who made that extra loss of 1.5 percent was not me, the consumer paying a higher tariff, but the operator. That is a fact. But I will take information from hon. Nandala-Mafabi and then continue with my presentation.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for giving way. Madam Speaker, on the last page of the report, there is a letter written by the Electricity Regulatory Authority. That is how losses were computed; there is what we call “technical loss” which was estimated at 14-17 percent; then “commercial losses” estimated at 16-19 percent. This was from the Electricity Regulatory Authority. I am bringing this out so that Members can understand that the losses we are talking about – 

THE SPEAKER: Which Annex is that?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is not numbered but it is at the back of the report – the last page No.64. It is written on the Electricity Regulatory Authority headed paper.

THE SPEAKER: Is it the one of 16 June 2006.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is on the committee’s report; I know we are few people who have it but I can use mine. It is actually Annex 5. They computed and took averages; technical losses at 15.5 percent and commercial losses at 17.5 percent and they came to 33 percent. They then said that the parties had agreed that total distribution cost losses were at 35 percent. So, when they were calculating the tariffs, they applied – because they had to take into consideration the losses – they applied 35 percent to the tariffs. So the senior minister said – if you read the letter dated 17 November 2006 – “We can benchmark at 33 percent.” That means that if ERA were to set tariffs, it should use 33 percent. Now, these people made two blunders; there were tariffs in losses – technical and commercial – and also pegged tariffs in dollars. So whenever the exchange rate would go high, the consumers would pay higher rates. 

So, hon. Prime Minister, if you are looking at these two people, including hon. Bataringaya who you want to save, look at how he allowed the loss to move from 33 percent to 38 percent. So, Madam Speaker, the computation by ERA is on the last page and the letter is dated 16 June 2006. Now the minister is writing his letter in November 2006, varying from 33 percent to 38 percent. Now, Mr Prime Minister – 

THE SPEAKER: You read exactly what he wrote because we want to understand the language.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, Madam Speaker, let me start like this: On 16 June 2006, there was restructuring of the Uganda Electricity Distribution Concession. This letter was addressed to Mr Muhakanizi. Do you want me to read the entire letter? Okay, it says: “We refer to your letter referenced EDP49/258/2 of 12 June, 2006 on the above subject matter. You will be glad to know that ERA is a full member of the Project Transactional Committee set by the Utility Reform Unit and has very senior representation at most of its meetings. 
The distribution losses remain a major enigma in the sector. ERA has recently sought some independent professional advice on these losses. Through the support of the Norwegian Embassy, the authority, with the approval of Umeme Ltd, commissioned No-Consult A.S., an Oslo based energy consultancy firm in April 2006 to address some of the issues raised in your letter. Their work with Umeme Ltd is on-going. 

However, they recently submitted a draft report on a study on establishing the level and cause of distribution losses which although undiscussed by parties seem to suggest that the total distribution losses at present is estimated to be 34 to 35 percent. The technical losses are at present estimated to be 14 to 17 percent. The commercial losses are at present estimated to be 16 to 19 percent. 

Since the total is close to numbers presently reported by Umeme Ltd, the split might also be close. One might on average take technical lose at 15.5 percent and commercial loses at 17.5 percent. If you add that up, you get 33 percent. 

Our advice in the PTC on how to restructure issues around the losses has been – this is the worst loss scenario; all parties to agree at a present 35 percent total distribution losses. Umeme Ltd has full control over the technical components of the losses. In case of any worsening of distribution losses, above 35 percent, Umeme should only be compensated up to the maximum of palatal commercial loss component, i.e. 53 percent of the escalation in distribution losses above the 35 percent. 

For example, if the total distribution losses were to shift from 35 percent to 37 percent, Umeme should be allowed 35 plus two times 53 percent i.e. 36.0 percent as the total distribution losses. The 0.94 percent would be a technical loss meant by Umeme and would act as an incentive for Umeme Ltd to invest in loss reduction equipment infrastructure”. 

Now, let me go to the letters of 17th November; it is annex no.4. This is from the Minister of Energy. But before I go ahead, the losses which are factored in utility bills are known. But there are those losses which when not factored in utility bills, Government is supposed to compensate to Umeme and when compensating, you have to get the money from the taxpayers’ money. So nobody should lie to you; regardless of the nature of loss, the people of Uganda have to foot it. Let me make a summary of this. In paragraph no.3, the minister says; “The current state at 33 percent and 28 percent is a more acceptable level.”

The minister is saying that current figures for loss reduction of 33 percent and collect rate of 10 percent should be considered as acceptable benchmark. So the minister is referring to the figures of ERA. That was on 17 November 2006. 

Madam Speaker, on 28th, barely 11 days later, Mr Migereko travelled and Mr Bataringaya became the acting minister – this man knew everything  – 

THE SPEAKER: But now you are giving your own evaluation. You read the letter. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, let me read the letter. “To hon. Dr Ezra Suruma, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 28 November 2006. 
Dear Colleague: Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Ltd (UEDCL)/Umeme concession restructuring. Further to a letter referenced ESD/85/23/02 of 17 November, 2006 -” so he was referring to the letter by hon. Migereko – “in which we gave our final approval to the restructuring of Umeme concession subject to parties agreeing to more acceptable threshold of losses/collections and resolving the framework for the implementation of rural electrification schemes; I hereby wish to grant our no-objection to the execution of the amendment. 

Our no objection is granted having been satisfied that the losses and collection threshold are set out in the proposed amendments and not regulatory targets of performance but rather a mechanism of cutting the government’s compensation on increasing losses and reducing collection. 

Secondly, we are also satisfied on the progress made on resolving the impediments of the implementation of rural electrification schemes for which according to our understanding, a workable framework will be put in place by 15 December 2006.” 

So, Madam Speaker, the minister agreed and on amendments that are referred to the letter of the minister. So if he had wanted to go by the minister’s amendments, they should have capped at 33 percent.

MR MWIRU: Thank you honourable member for giving way. The information I want to give to the Prime Minister is that actually, Umeme does not make losses. When they make loses, they get the money from this escrow account. This explains why in many ministries, there are domestic arrears on utility more so on electricity because they would find a way of leaving that unpaid. We have dealt with that extensively in PAC. Ministries, like defence have not been paying yet in the budget; we make provisos for those components. As we talk today, our escrow account does not even have money. 

But you have to address this Parliament on that issue; whether the minister acted lawfully and two whether he acted in good faith. We want to take a decision in that direction. 

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, on page 8 of the minister’s responses, we have that table. The question we should ask ourselves is, by proposing the cutting of 38 as a terminating point did this country make a loss? How did it make the loss?  You see, it is one thing to suggest that if we get to this point, we will not negotiate, the bill will break and another thing to look at the actual losses as indicated in the table. So, in the table here, it indicates that in 2005 the actual losses are 34.5 while the original set was 33. At no time have we actually had losses of 38 percent being factored in the tariff. This is something we should understand. What loss did we make as result of proposing the capping at 38?

THE SPEAKER: What does capping mean? Can someone explain that? Yes, Prime Minister? Okay, let us first hear from hon. Ann Maria Nankabirwa.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, hon. Prime Minister, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I don’t differ from the position of the chairperson of the committee that we can amend but that should not alter the facts from the report. What is confusing members is the term “capping.” The issue is like this: there was a special provisional period brought about by low generation. This period ran from 2006 to 2009. 
The point that is being raised is whether we made losses or not. Yes, we made losses. But they had to cap. It is true it was protecting the country from the escalating losses beyond 38 percent. That is right. But there was a lower threshold, which was meant to be the target whereby when you read page 47 of our main report, you will realise that in 2006, the set distribution loss targets were 32 and the distribution used on the tariffs was 32 but the actual distribution loses were 34. They had capped it at 38 but the minimum figure was 33. 

The question was when the senior minister left the country, in his letter as an attachment, he had initiated as a final position that the capping be done at 33. But junior Minister Kamanda Bataringaya signed that the capping be increased to 38. So, one would ask that did the losses ever got to 38 percent? I would certainly say no, they did not go to 38 percent but as long as it was not below 33 percent –(Interjections)– Please, I am clarifying. Listen to me; it will let you know more.

There was a set target of 33 percent. In 2006, the actual distribution losses were 34.5 and it is true they did not get to 38 percent. But again they were not at 33 percent. The question is: who made the variance or the loss? In 2007, much as the set target was 31.3 percent because different targets were set for different years, the actual distribution losses were 35 percent. That is a difference of 4. The question is – much as it did not go to 38, which was the point beyond which if the distributor went, they would be terminated. But a target was set below which if the distributor made losses below the set target of 33, they would be compensated and the distributor would benefit.
Now what about if the distributor did not make a loss at 33 percent but went beyond 33, for example, to 34, 35 – those two points were referred to as losses. These losses were supposed to be factored into the tariff. 

In the special provision period agreement, there was a halt in increasing tariffs because the distributor had argued it out that when you increase the tariffs, there would be escalation of power theft. And that perhaps would make it difficult for him to meet his collection targets. So, who would meet that loss? It would mean that the Government of Uganda would come in directly because Government didn’t want the tariffs to increase. You will recall that our tariffs went to almost Shs 875. But the actual tariff collected from the energy users was less. It was because the Government of Uganda was subsiding.

I want to call your attention to page 57 of the report. How does the distributor get this power? We have a generator who is a private entity. He sells it to UETCL, which is a Government entity as a bulky. It is UETCL, with the monopoly because it is Government owned, is the one that sells this power to the distributor. At that evacuation point, where the transmitter sells power to the distributor, power is metered and will read, for example, that we have sold to you 1,000 megawatts and would be invoiced. If you open Page 57 in that table – when you go to 2007 per se, the gross invoice value was Shs 344.1 billion. But the net invoice value was 226. The variance is because in the special provision period agreement, they had provided for a formula on how to calculate energy losses. This was by finding the differences between energy bought minus energy sold. That is why our own company, UETCL, keeps on making losses when the distributor makes profits because it is in the agreement. That is called a rebate. It is in form of calculations and not cash. The gross invoice - once the net invoice is less, that variance is a rebate and not a form of subsidy.

However, after looking at this and the submission of Minister Bataringaya – one thing I want to clarify is that there was a loss. Every percentage loss equalled to US$3 million. As long as it wasn’t 33; as long as it was above 33 and not above 38, the loss was paid for. When we read through the report, we realise that the honourable minister wasn’t part of the negotiation first but when the senior minister moved out of the country – true he had left a letter of his opinion but there was now a team that was leading the negotiations and it is called the team of prominent persons and it is on our attachment as appendix 3.

So, we thought as a committee that because this was the guiding team, the minister who was now acting in this portfolio, because the senior minister had moved out of the country, perhaps that is where the error came from. That is why we thought of amending that perhaps he would be warned for negligence and cautioned. That is the case I want to present.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: No, all these people were still giving me information and you want to put the question? I am now fully informed except in one aspect and I am very grateful for the information because I think the information supports the case I was making. The problem I have is actually hon. Paul Mwiru’s presentation, which was that it was Government that met that cost of the loss, which he says was paid from the escrow account. I wanted to be sure about that, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: He is saying Umeme did not lose because money was got from the escrow account. I wanted to know if we could get information from the minister on that one.

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, the escrow account was put in place as part of the agreement to provide security for the concession, and the conditions under which Umeme would revert to the escrow account are three:
    1. If Government departments failed to pay their electricity bills over a period of 60 days then Umeme reverts to the escrow account until Government pays back that money into the escrow.

    2. When Umeme applies for a tariff to the regulator, there is a certain specific period within which the regulator is to respond whether positively or negatively. If the regulator does not respond and Umeme collects all the revenues for the sector, it means the sector becomes paralysed. The regulator has to respond quickly within a period to address the issue of the tariff in whichever direction the case may be.

    3. The third is adjustment of the bulk supply tariff at which Transmission sells electricity to Umeme. A cap was put in the agreement that this bulk supply tariff should not be increased beyond a certain percentage. If it does then the recourse would be to the escrow.

So there are conditions that manage and govern the transactions on the escrow account. The issue that hon. Mwiru was raising that Umeme is compensated from the escrow account resulting from the losses is incorrect, that is not accurate. 

Further, let me clarify on the issue which hon. Ann Maria brought; the issue of losses as the hon. Prime Minister referred to this table that all of you colleagues have looked at. At any one time there was no loss factor of 38 percent put into the tariff because that is the mandate of the regulator, and it is the loss factor that is put into the tariff that determines the tariff and that is the money that Umeme collects for the entire sector to sustain it. 

What hon. Ann Maria brought referring to page 57 of the reports, the rebates that UETCL was paying to Umeme. This is where Government was buying down the tariff so that the consumer does not meet the full tariff. These were rebates where Government would inject in the subsidies through its own company, Uganda Electricity Transmission Company and therefore the Uganda Electricity Transmission company would be able to respond to buying down that tariff by giving rebates to Umeme, and this is the table and the figures and since we actually removed the issue of subsidy from the tariff. UEDCL no longer pays or gives any rebates to Umeme for the tariff. I thought it is important to clarify that matter.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, just a clarification. I do not want some colleagues to say we were mistaken; 38 percent was meant that when you reach this stage, your contract will be terminated. That means that below that, you accepted to operate. It is like knowing you are very strong but you set lower targets. In this case the lower target was to make the loss bar too high. That is what we are trying to say because Umeme would say that even if they put the loss at 34 percent or 33 percent, their contract would not be terminated. And when he does that he will apply to the regulator and say “I want this rate to this and this” when in reality the loss is about 20 percent. 

What we are trying to raise is that, the 38 percent was to try to make Umeme overstay yet if we had put it at a lower rate of 33 percent, we would have captured them, reduced the losses further and made our tariffs lower. So, whoever should get up to speak should try to defend. For your information, the current minister of energy was the Managing Director of UEDCL. What would she say? She would come to defend because she knows what she did was not right but now has an opportunity to defend it.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: You know, the only point which was not supporting my line of argument was what hon. Mwiru had presented which was rebutting what I had said that actually the loss was met by the operator (Umeme). He said no, the loss was met by Government because by agreement they were paid from the escrow account. The minister says that is not the case and she has given you the three grounds on which that money in the escrow account could be paid to Umeme, and does not include that loss.

I want us to understand this very well because my brother, Nathan Nandala-Mafabi, made the two points very well; that this 38 percent was a threshold beyond which Government could not accept the loss by the operator. The loss is in two categories:
    i)  Technical loss which is inevitable because of the transmission of power through cables and the type of cables, which we have here which they found in place - we had to lose 17 percent.
    ii) The commercial loss and commercial loss is when power is stolen. People tap power.

Now for the technical loss, nothing would be done until we improved our system. It is so important that we go into the details, Madam Speaker. If we do not have time, I would rather we found time to go into all these details. I would rather have the details, we do the calculation and we all reach the conclusion which is logical. 

MR WERIKHE: Arising at 38 percent, there is a history to it. At the time our Government went into this concession, the loss factor was at 41 percent and I expected this to come from – I do not know whether I am right, hon. Minister.

MRS MULONI: It is here in the report.

MR WERIKHE: Yes, it was at 41 percent and that is why the proposal of 38 was below what was obtaining at the time we entered into the concession. I thought this information could also help us; why 38 was arrived at.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, that is a lie. During D’Ujanga’s time the thing had gone down.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. At the time of concession - by the way, hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi was the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy and some of us were members. There was a World Bank grant which this Parliament had approved and which Umeme inherited to lower the technical losses below 10 percent and that did not happen. Instead, the technical losses continued. This was after they got the World Bank money for new cables, transformers and so forth. The records are there and available.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: If I can say this; the first time I heard about our losses was when I was with the President in a meeting in Zimbabwe. It was an international meeting and it was announced there that Uganda had the highest - no, the power loss was 41 percent and it was the highest in the world. I heard that in Zimbabwe. The point I was developing is that there is technical loss, the things which came out of the letters that my brother Nathan read plus commercial loss. Technical loss was at 17 percent maximum. That meant that the rest was commercial loss, which included tapping power or people not paying their bills.

Now it happens that at the time when Umeme came in, we suffered drought and our water levels went down. I know this because I was the one authorising the decision to raise - because energy would be demanding for more water from the Ministry of Water who would resist it because of the commitments we have with Egypt. So, it is I who authorises this as - at that time I was Chairman in Cabinet of a committee that was dealing with energy. I was the Chairman of the Cabinet Committee on Energy.

So, at that time we had a problem of drought. The water levels came down and therefore generation of power from our power station came down and that is why we were forced to bring in these emergency power suppliers - the thermal generators. They were selling at a very high rate. So, this raised the tariff of course because they were thermal and they were an emergency; they were very expensive.

At that time when it came in, the actual loss was more than 33 percent and Umeme is a commercial entity, they are not charity. It would be unreasonable to demand that they come in and operate when the costs were so high at less than 33 or even 33 percent when the actual losses were higher. That was obvious.

Therefore, what was agreed was that let us have a threshold in case of escalation of these problems where you cannot go beyond because if you reach that as hon. Nandala said, this terminates the contract. That was one.

Two, the actual loss which was to be factored into the tariff was set by the regulator - not that 38, not that threshold. The threshold was for the purposes of determining whether Umeme can operate here or they go. So the question then arises, because we are talking about irregularity in all this, who had the authority to determine all this? For the loss factor, it was the regulator and the report itself indeed confirms that it is the regulator that determined these percentages: 33, 32, 31 and so on. It was the regulator - I think it was a “he” who was doing his duty under the law.

The threshold was done by the government; the political leadership, the minister and the PS - I do not know who; all those who negotiated with Umeme and said the threshold will be this. That however did not affect the loss factor that was determined by the regulator consistently from that time; 2005 if you look at that table up to 2011 that is the end of this table. We do not see 38 - I am looking at page 8 of the table in the response by the minister. I do not know if you have another one. 

So as I said, row one actual losses. This is actually what it was. Then the next row is the set target. The third row in that table the actual loss factor that was reflected in the tariff. When you look at it, the highest was in 2008 where it was 34.8 percent. 2005 is 33 percent, 2006 is 32.7 percent, 2007 is 31.28 percent, 2008 is 34.1 percent, 2009 is 31.69 percent, 2010 is 28.2 percent and 2011 is 27 percent. 

Those are the figures. Those are actually the losses that were incurred. That is the actual loss but the loss which was factored in the tariff is not that actual loss. It is the loss, which had been established by the regulator, which is the third row. That is the point that I am making.

MR EKANYA: You rightly said Umeme is not a charity and that they make profit; if the net loss was 33 percent but the actual loss was 34.5, then did Umeme make profit for its shareholders or itself? How did it manage operations and who covered that because they are not a charity.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: We can go and check. They made a loss. But whether that loss wiped out their profit or part of their profit is a question of fact we can establish by looking at figures. It is possible – you know, I think that it is important that we go into the details of this because this is very critical and that is why I am happy to give those who have a – (Interruption)

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, hon. Prime Minister. I am going to read the real table given by the minister. The truth is that we never went up the threshold but where the set target is the lower table, for example, if it was 33 and we make 34.5 that variance was a loss. Who paid for that loss? It was Government. Why? Because like today, after the special provisions period in 2010, they now fully factor it in the tariffs but because then, this agreement, the Special Provisions Period had indicated that they had to put a ban on price increase for some time because the distributor thought that the moment you increase a tariff, it would escalate our savings. So, this cost was a loss and was passed onto Government. This is why we are talking of subsidies and rebates.

About technical losses, it is true we have commercial and technical. But the problem with a technical loss is this: when Umeme came on board and it is true as hon. Ekanya said, there was US$11 million that was passed onto them because it was a loan from the World Bank to invest in the network. The purpose for contracting a private distributor was to strengthen the network to make losses lower and the tariff affordable. Now how do they strengthen the network? By investing in the transformers and extension of lines. Where a transformer bursts, it is true that it could be a commercial loss because of people tampering with the transformer. But it is true that they are even supplying fake transformers that burst, they are supplying unworthy poles which are falling and whenever you find a falling electric line, that is power lost. So, that is an argument in the last attachment of the report that was being ironed out; that even those technical losses – must they, even when there is an inefficiency in the expertise of the distributor, be carried on to the consumer?

MR SSEBUNYA: I used to work with the National Water and Sewerage Corporation where we used to have unaccounted for water. That is a systems loss and I do not know how we can apportion that systems loss to an individual. The statement that was not rebutted in this report was for the minister and it said, “There is a loss factor that is employed by the regulator to set the tariff on an annual basis. The minister said that the other loss factor that is employed by Government to arrive at a benchmark for termination of a contract for a private power distribution company like Umeme -” So, if we do not dispute this statement here and we know that there is a level Government makes a decision and they made their benchmark at 38 but the systems losses are benchmarked on ERA who assigns an average. To determine a price using the table given here, and we never reach the 38 percent they are talking about - so why are we overzealous on fining somebody on systems losses which involves people not paying power? Where Parliament can fail to pay power is a commercial loss. So, why do we fine somebody culpable for those systems losses?

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Members, I want to know –

MR SEBUNYA: That means, Madam Speaker, that we may even have to go back on the earlier amendment we made given the explanation of the Prime Minister.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to know the nexus between the minister’s letter and ERA’s decision on the tariff. That is what I want to understand.

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, the statement of the minister saying that there is a loss factor that is employed by the regulator and that is ERA - and that one is the table that they gave us from which they determine the price. But also, there is another loss factor that is employed by Government for its operator and it is set by Cabinet and hon. Migereko. And given the table, we did not reach that benchmark of 38 and so that was loss not incurred. So, why do we take it as part of the benchmark for which we should find somebody culpable? That is the question.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to make a proposal that we defer this decision and all of us go and study all this that everybody is bringing so that tomorrow, we handle it when we are fresh and everybody is on the same page. So, hon. Members, the House is adjourned to tomorrow. I think that I will even postpone the Question Time tomorrow so that we can focus on this and finish it. So, this will be the main item for the agenda for tomorrow. The House is adjourned to 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 8.14 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 27 March 2014 at 2.00 p.m.) 

