PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - THIRD MEETINGTHURSDAY , 30 MARCH 2023PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA7812 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTThursday, 30 March 2023and we want all the ministers to be here. I have only received one response from the Prime Minister concerning issues of Kenya and Uganda; an excuse that they will handle it next week. Can we have the other ministers in the House? They must respond to whatever was raised. I am happy the Minister for Agriculture has come.2.03MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. In my district of Tororo, we have been having a challenge -THE SPEAKER: Is that in response to my communication? MS OPENDI: Yes. You have indicated that most matters of national importance are going to be responded to. However, the one touching health is not covered. We have a challenge of Blackwater Fever Malaria. Children in my district have been dying, especially those below 10 years. This matter has been reported to the ministry; however, no action has been taken. The ministry acknowledges that this is a problem in the areas of Busoga and Bukedi. Secondly, we also have had an epidemic, which has been nicknamed “Busy” by my people. People are scratching themselves and because all the hands are busy, they have nicknamed it IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 21ST SITTING - THIRD MEETINGParliament met at 1.59 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to welcome you to this afternoon sitting. As you are aware, Muslims are fasting and they commenced their fast on 22 March 2023. Since it is our custom in the Parliament that we always host them for a dinner before Eid, we will be hosting the Muslim fraternity, our brothers and sisters in Parliament, tomorrow for a dinner. Even non-Muslims are welcome to join the Muslim community. Please join our brothers and sisters - since we are preaching the principle of Ubuntu – as they break their fast. Parliament will gladly host all of you to a dinner. Honourable members, yesterday we had various items on matters of national importance. We had the issue of Bududa and the issue of disaster. When you look at the Order Paper, we have accommodated all those issues because they are really urgent and must be handled today. Is the Frontbench on leave? We have matters that must be responded to on the Order Paper 7813THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 30 MARCH 2023“Busy”. It is like scabies, but it is not. I have personally seen affected children infecting women - it affects even old people.Madam Speaker, my request is that the Ministry of Health takes this up so that we can save the lives of these children who are dying. Worse still, only the general hospitals, where blood can be transfused, are able to attend to these children. There is also blood shortage in the general hospital and when they are referred to Mbale, the children die on the way. This is the issue that I have brought to your attention, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Bahati, can we have one of the Ministers of Health here? We should not continue getting generic answers; we need a minister in the House. Go and call them.MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, let me do so. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have been telling you every day about the declaration of your income, assets and liabilities. I know you do not have liabilities. (Laughter)Honourable members, by midday today - and remember today is the deadline - 64 members had not yet declared. Can you kindly go and declare? We need you to declare; it is good for you. Please, go and do so because the system will close tonight.MR OMARA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have risen to make comments on the manner in which we are conducting sports in the country. We were supposed to prepare for the Inter-University Games for East Africa. This Parliament provided Shs 3.8 billion for Ndejje University and also, a reasonable amount of money to rehabilitate Mandela National Stadium. What is happening now is that our teams in Uganda are playing games from other countries as we do not have sufficient stadia to conduct those games in the country -THE SPEAKER: Are you saying insufficient or we do not have stadiums?MR OMARA: We actually do not have. When we were in Dar es Salaam, for example, our teams went to play games, but they would only conduct –THE SPEAKER: Hon. Omara, you are arguing that Uganda Cranes is playing in Egypt and that they should stop just –MR OMARA: Madam Speaker, Uganda Cranes are currently playing games in Egypt. We cannot host any games in this country because our stadia are shambolic.My prayer to the Speaker is, can the Ministries of Finance and Education confirm to this House whether the money that was appropriated by this Parliament was provided to ensure that our stadiums are rehabilitated and fit for games? I submit.THE SPEAKER: Are you rising on the same matter? Hon. Amos, let other Members also speak. MR RUHINDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Minister of Finance is actually aware that the President made pledges to construct two stadia; Akii Bua Stadium and Buhinga Stadium. It is now over 5 years since feasibility studies were done. By that time, Hon. Obua was the Minister of State for Education. We went to the field and established where these stadia  can be constructed - all those processes were done. To our dismay, no concrete plan was followed. By now, we should have had the solution. If Namboole has issues, we would not have problems going to train out of the country. You can imagine the embarrassment we are going through. Even our young players – THE SPEAKER: Can we have the Minister of Education and Sports in the House? As you respond, can we have the minister? Hon. Amos, just hold on. 7814 MINISTERIAL STATEMENT2.10MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The body that governs sports in this country has come from very far. Developing sports in this country to where we are now has taken a lot. It is very embarrassing to see a team of Ugandans hosting a match in a country beyond East Africa; in Egypt. We have very many stadia. When we win these trophies, the President always throws a dinner. The current Minister of Education and Sports is the First Lady. We cannot continue having this shame; pouring water on the efforts of FUFA, which has struggled to see that we reach where we are. Therefore, as the minister comes to respond, can we have a commitment that this embarrassment will never be seen again? He should even apologise to Ugandans for having taken us through this embarrassment. How can we host a match in Egypt, Madam Speaker? THE SPEAKER: Egypt is our local stadium – (Laughter) At the end of the day, we are going to complain that the money is spent, yet we are spending money hiring a stadium and transporting our players to Egypt.  2.11MR NATHAN TWESIGYE (Independent, Kashari South County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You appointed me to the Committee on Education and Sports and when we examined KCCA, one of the issues we found concerns Lugogo playground, which we use, as Parliament. I have a report here that was made by the Confederation of African Football (CAF) on 10 April 2018. When we interacted with KCCA, they had issues with the playground. We asked them why they were not using it and they gave us a report. I have a copy of the report here. There was a team from Cairo that inspected Namboole Stadium, St Mary’s Kitende and Phillip Omondi Stadium. From the inspection report, the three stadiums are not fit for any serious international game. This was in 2018. Therefore, my concern is, between 2018 and today, Government should have done something. As the minister comes, he should know that there is a report and I am happy he got a copy of this report because he is among the people that were copied in. I just wanted to say that the inspection report of CAF headquarters, Cairo stated that Namboole Stadium, St Mary’s Kitende and the Phillip Omondi stadia are not fit for any sport. THE SPEAKER: I think this House passed a supplementary budget for Namboole; it was Shs 97 billion. 2.13MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a very serious issue that we need Government to take interest in. Madam Speaker, you will recall that not very long ago, the President of CAF was hosted by H.E the President. Our President committed that in the next few years, we should also host the CAF games here; maybe even bigger games than that. Madam Speaker, you have supported us in sending young talented players out of this country in a bid to build our capacity when we compete in those games, to scale up and also be seen and recognised out there. However, one question that is being raised where we take these boys – we have taken them to Scotland and Spain and their capacity is being escalated there. The concern that those teams, where we send our boys, keep raising is, these boys cannot continue to go there to enjoy those facilities when we have a lot of talent at home because our facilities are wanting. They would be able to take as many boys as possible, but we need to improve our facilities for us to be able to recognise the talent. I hope this is taken seriously. We would like to thank you again for continuously supporting us. We are going COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR7815THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 30 MARCH 2023there again because we have been invited in preparation for a grant; they are trying to support us in one way or the other. I thank you very much. THE SPEAKER: There was a stadium in Masaka and money was allocated for it – I can see the Member from Masaka standing.2.15 DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. We passed a budget in this Parliament and part of that budget was to rebuild a stadium in Masaka; Masaka Recreation Grounds. We are now going into the fourth quarter. We have struggled and moved in the corridors of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, but they have not released a shilling for that stadium. When I see our football team in Egypt - Madam Speaker, you know that all players draw their energies from supporters. That is why we lost a match. We were embarrassed and beaten by our neighbours because there was no support. You realise that when they came near us here, we managed to win. This idea that we go to Egypt, as if we are not a nation, is very embarrassing. The finance minister should commit.2.17 MR MAPENDUZI OJARA (Independent, Bardege-Layibi Division, Gulu City): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In line with what the honourable colleague said, about three years ago, Government made a commitment to have Pece War Memorial Stadium in Gulu rehabilitated. Government spent resources to have the design for that stadium done - I am told a consultancy firm was hired and they did the design. Unfortunately, to this day, we have not heard what happened with that plan. It would be fair for the honourable minister responsible for games and sports to help the people of Gulu understand whether they have abandoned this plan or it still exists. Thank you very much. THE SPEAKER: There is also Akii Bua Stadium, the one in Fort Portal, another in Jinja, Mbarara - Shadow Minister of Sports, you will speak last. 2.18 MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am very annoyed – THE SPEAKER: Can you show us that you are annoyed?MR MWIJUKYE: Well, I will not go there, but we appropriate money, as Parliament. I do not know what message Government is sending us when we continue appropriating money, but they do not implement. When we get problems, it is Members of Parliament that are attacked for not doing our work. We are in the budget cycle. Why should we continue to give you money when you are not putting it to use? Madam Speaker, we need to send a serious warning to the Executive that we are not going to continue appropriating when they are not putting the money to use. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are issues being raised in a number of areas. We need a comprehensive infrastructure plan for sports in the immediate, medium and long term. We gave out money; Shs 97 billion to Namboole and we will not budget for Namboole again until we know what the Shs 97 billion has done. We need accountability for the Shs 97 billion before we put any money in the budget. We cannot continue budgeting for money without seeing any output. 2.20MR GEOFREY KAYEMBA-SSOLO (NUP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank my colleague for bringing this to the attention of the country. The infrastructural problem in the sports subsector is too wide. It is not only in football, but also in all other games. For example, indoor games like basketball and volleyball have no stadium that can host an 7816 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTinternational tournament. That is why we go to Rwanda and Kenya to host.THE SPEAKER: Thank you.MR KAYEMBA-SSOLO: Madam Speaker, the stadium where we hosted our Uganda v. Tanzania game in Egypt was built with Shs 96 billion. However, we gave Shs 97 billion for rehabilitation of Namboole. We need a forensic audit for that money. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, can we hear from you? We gave you money to rehabilitate Namboole, but to date, nothing can be seen. What is your plan for the infrastructure? 2.21THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, let me begin by congratulating our national team, Uganda Cranes, for the deserved victory on our behalf in Tanzania. I think they need a hand clap for that. (Applause)Number two, Madam Speaker -THE SPEAKER: Uganda Cranes played against Tanzania, but they played in Egypt. That must be on record. We won, but we played in Egypt. What is important is that we played in Egypt.MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, with your permission, allow me say the following: it is a fact that on 2 December 2021, the Minister of Education and Sports signed an MoU with the Ministry of Defence to undertake renovation of the national stadium of Uganda - Namboole (Mandela National Stadium).It is also a fact that the budget for phase one of renovation of the said stadium was meant to be Shs 97 billion. Madam Speaker, Parliament appropriated Shs 81 billion. Out of the Shs 97 billion, Shs 81 billion was received by the Ministry of Education and Sports and that is the money, which is carrying out works for the renovation of Namboole as of now -THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I want the record corrected. What we gave as Parliament was Shs 97 billion. There is a difference between appropriation and release. The issue of the release was Shs 80 something billion, but we gave Shs 97 billion.MR OGWANG: Most obliged for that correction, Madam Speaker. Of the Shs 81 billion that was released, I want to speak to the following: one, I regret, on behalf of Government, that we did not meet the CAF requirements to have our game played at home.Two, as you are all aware, Government sends money to various federations for international competitions. I confirm that Government, through the National Council of Sports, sent money to the Federation of Uganda Football Association to have Uganda play its game in a place, which was determined by the federation and not Government. Government of the Republic of Uganda catered for the total cost of the national team. I regret that we lost the game in Egypt, but I want to call upon this Parliament that as of now, we need to support the national team.I am happy that as far as Namboole National Stadium is concerned, ever since I took over office, I found it prudent to ask for the schedule of works being undertaken by the UPDF Engineering Project. I can confirm that I have a weekly schedule of meeting engagements between the client- Ministry of Education and Sports, and UPDF, the contractor. Madam Speaker, I want to say the following: as you are all aware, the UPDF was able to secure the entire land by fencing and there is a wall fence there. Secondly, the UPDF was able to begin with the renovations - that is demolition of the existing dilapidating structure both in the hotel and the stadium itself. I confirm that the UPDF has finalised almost all contracts for us to have the stadium ready for our next game. Madam Speaker, works of engineering -THE SPEAKER: When is that?[Mr Kayemba-Ssolo] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR7817THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 30 MARCH 2023MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I am coming to that. Honourable colleagues, I am not an engineer by profession, but there are certain durations in terms of timelines of structures to set, which are required for a project of that magnitude.This morning, I held a meeting with the contractor and management of Namboole. I was finding out from them what their procurement plan is, for purposes of making sure that by 1 June, we are able to have phase one of the works completed. There are laws of this country in terms of procurement, which to a big extent, we cannot circumvent for purposes of us having this project concluded in a timely manner. However, according to the technical team’s information to me this morning, we are going to work hard to have our next game - which is a home game, scheduled for 12 June - played at Namboole. We are also working with the Federation of Uganda Football Association to look at the key requirements that CAF needs to have that game played at home. There are some areas where I have personally worked closely with the President of the Uganda Football Association and his technical team in terms of visiting the site and looking at the key priority areas, which must be put right for purposes of us having CAF certify that stadium for our international competition. As a Minister of Education and Sports, it is my considered opinion - (Interruption)THE SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter. MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, Minister Peter Ogwang. I have been listening to the presentation of the minister and it is not focused and steered towards what the Parliament is looking for. We appropriated Shs 97 billion and the Ministry of Finance disbursed Shs 81 billion. What we want the minister to tell us is how he has used the Shs 81 billion. However, he is moving round and round and is not able to capture how the Shs 81 billion has been spent. Secondly, I want to know if the UPDF Engineering Brigade is capable of handling the works which you are anticipating from the contracts that you have given out. Have you assessed the capability of the UPDF Engineering Brigade? Are they in the position to deliver to us what we want? I think that is what we want. Tell us what you have been able to procure out of the Shs 81 billion. What is the balance? What do you hope to do? Where are the obstacles so that we know? However, you are moving round and round. Madam Speaker, I have failed to follow, maybe because I am old. (Laughter) Is the minister procedurally right to continue meandering and not focus?THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal is very right. We want to know what Shs 81 million has done. Secondly, is the engineering team competent enough to handle that job? Working on a stadium is not like working on a classroom block. Thirdly, tell us why we should not hold you people accountable for a nugatory expenditure of paying money to play a game in Egypt yet you should have used that money to play from here. You would have invested that money to finish whatever is here and we have the game here.MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I thank you for those good questions. To begin with, I regret, on behalf of the Ministry of Education and Sports, why we found ourselves in Egypt. THE SPEAKER: Can you apologise to this country? MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Ministry of Education and Sports, I apologise to the country for having made Uganda Cranes go and play in Egypt. 7818 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSecondly, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal has asked a very good question to which I would like to say the following. Madam Speaker, I will be able to furnish the House with a report stating the details of what the Shs 81 billion has been used for. I was giving you information based on the questions that have been raised here. THE SPEAKER: Can we have that report on the Floor on Tuesday? MR OGWANG: Yes. The other issue, which I want to talk about is the competence of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) Engineering Brigade. I want to confirm that the UPDF Engineering Brigade is very competent and they are doing a commendable job. Madam Speaker, with your permission, I can invite the Committee on Education and Sports to visit, on behalf of Parliament, and we take them through the works that have been done so far  for purposes of coming back to report to this House. Secondly, in areas where they do not have the expertise, they source for it. For instance, I can confirm to this august House and the country that for the construction of the pitch itself, we are working with a consultant from the United Kingdom. The consultant is the one directly responsible for making sure that the system that the pitch requires – in terms of irrigating and all that – is done. That is an area in which I would say they do not have the expertise. However, for the other works - Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Works and Transport is a consultant of the project and for that matter, these young engineers are doing a commendable job on behalf of the country. I am actually older than them. Therefore, I would like to confirm to the people of Uganda that as of now, our focus is to have the stadium ready for our next game, which we are scheduled to play in Uganda. It is a must-win for the Uganda Cranes –THE SPEAKER: When will we have the stadium ready?MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, the next game is meant to be on 12 June 2023. I told you earlier, in my submission – THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, listen to the minister.MR OGWANG: In my submission earlier, I told you that much of the work is now on fittings. For instance, how long does it take to fit chairs? With due respect, the fitting of chairs does not take a month and we are looking at about 40,000 chairs. Once they are delivered in the country – THE SPEAKER: Give us the deadline. MR OGWANG: As of now, we want the stadium ready by 1 June 2023. I have given that programme to the contractor and informed them that they must work towards achieving the target of having the works completed by 1 June 2023 so as to allow us to satisfy all the CAF requirements and use the stadium. I thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will assign a team to go and visit that stadium and report back. The team is going to be headed by Hon. Mathias Mpuuga. I am going to ask Hon. Mpuuga to lead a team involving Hon. Omara, Hon. Kibalya and – I am looking for a lady – Kiboga. Honourable members, I will need feedback from the committee on how far the construction of the stadium has gone. MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, with your indulgence, there are questions which were raised about Masaka Stadium, Pece Stadium, Buhinga Stadium, Akii Bua Stadium and other stadiums across the country. First, for Buhinga and Akii Bua stadia –THE SPEAKER: Can we have a report presented to this House on all of them?MR OGWANG: No problem, Madam Speaker. I will bring that report here. I thank you.[Mr Ogwang] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR7819THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 30 MARCH 2023THE SPEAKER: Masaka Stadium was budgeted for in this financial year. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here - MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I am happy the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here. For the record, you appropriated money for Masaka Stadium and the release is supposed to be done by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and he is here.For Akii Bua and Buhinga stadia, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development can explain. The Chinese Government had promised to give us a grant. Let the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development tell us what happened with the grant. They are here. As the Minister for Sports, I need the facilities to support us to go forward.Lastly, Madam Speaker, it is important that we put it as a priority that we need to begin appropriating money for development of our stadia or sports facilities across the country. We can no longer wait or say that donors or grants will help us develop sports infrastructure in this country. All of us must make sports a priority to help our young people. I am happy when you task me to explain what we have done with the money released. However, I also ask you the second question: what have we planned for sports infrastructure in this country in next year’s budget? I thank you.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, first tell us what you have used the money that we gave you for. We cannot continue giving you a cash bonanza. We want to know what you have done with the money that was given to Namboole Stadium before we give you more money. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development?Honourable members, you have an item on the seeds that you need. Let us finish this and bring the issue of seeds.2.37THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.I am responding to the question relating to funding of Akii Bua Stadium and Buhinga Stadium. These two projects were being treated together for Chinese funding – THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, listen to the minister.MR LUGOLOOBI: In line with the commitment that was originally made by the Chinese Government. I went to Dakar, Senegal, to represent the ministry in a Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC) meeting. It was under that arrangement that a commitment had been made by the Chinese Government to support a number of programmes, including the construction of Akii Bua Stadium and Buhinga Stadium. The Chinese Government made a lot of commitments then, but the details were not revealed in that meeting. When we came back here, I held a meeting with my team and the ambassador of China to Uganda, and he indicated to me, formally, that the Chinese Government had shifted priorities and that they were no longer going to be able to fund the Akii Bua and Buhinga stadia. They did not give the reasons, but their priorities had shifted. They confirmed that to me physically. We had all our expectations banked on the Chinese Government to fund these two projects. The Ministry of Education had actually provided feasibility studies for the two projects. Unfortunately, the funding is not forthcoming from that source. However -THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, did they write informing you that they were not going to fund the project?MR LUGOLOOBI: They informed us in a meeting, Madam Speaker.7820 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTTHE SPEAKER: The first communication was in writing.MR LUGOLOOBI: Again, it was through a bilateral engagement, not officially in writing, where they stipulated the priorities that they were going to fund. THE SPEAKER: Is Hon. Bakkabulindi here?MR LUGOLOOBI: In a review of priorities, this had been dropped from the projects that they were going to fund and it is a fact because I spoke to them personally. We are now looking at alternative sources of funding, especially the Islamic Development Bank for these two projects, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: We will need a comprehensive report on the funding of all the stadia. We budgeted in this financial year for Masaka and the money has been on the budget, but to date, it has not been released.MR OGWANG: On the issue of Masaka, Madam Speaker, you appropriated Shs 6 billion, but the challenge is no releases. Finance has not released this money because according to my work plan, I had planned to go to Masaka to check on the progress of works. I want to confirm to the Leader of the Opposition that when I cross-checked with the Ministry of Finance, I confirmed that they did not release the money. So, the problem is still finances. THE SPEAKER: Finance, we need a report on the stadia.MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I do not want to lose the last point on the issue of the balance of the 16 - As you put me under pressure to complete the project, I know that I will also require the balance of the money before the financial year ends so that we have this work concluded because we are now dealing with the procurement. I am happy that the Minister of Finance, Mzee Kasaija, is here. I would be very happy and most obliged if that money is released. I thank you, honourable members.THE SPEAKER: We do not have a Mzee in the House; he is Hon. Kasaija. Hon. Kasaija, we need the balance of the money for Namboole Stadium, we need a release for what was budgeted for Masaka and we need a comprehensive plan for funding sports infrastructure. Next item. STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER ON THE FULFILMENT OF THE GOVERNMENT PLEDGE TO SUPPLY SEEDS AND PLANTING MATERIALS TO FARMERSTHE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this issue was raised yesterday by Hon. Silwany, MP Bukooli and so many other Members had also raised it. It is the rainy season and you made Ugandans used to receiving seeds every planting season. Can you tell us what plan you have for planting materials, together with hand hoes?In the public gallery this afternoon, we have law students from Cavendish University. You are most welcome, thank you for coming. They have come to witness our proceedings.2.44THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Age is catching up with me, so I have to put on some extra eyes. My apologies. Madam Speaker, this statement is in response to a directive by your good self to the Minister of Agriculture on 29 March 2023 to present a statement to Parliament on the availability of seeds for Members of Parliament to take to their constituencies for the farmers. As you are all aware, Government changed policy and is currently implementing the Parish Development Model (PDM) -(Interjection)-  I request for your protection, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us get the statement and you will respond later. MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you. Government started implementing the Parish Development 7821THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 30 MARCH 2023Model as a policy intervention aimed at transforming the lives of 39 per cent of the households still in subsistence agriculture to commercial farming. In line with this policy directive, the budget that was previously used by the Minister of Agriculture and its agencies like NAADS to provide seeds was withdrawn and consolidated to support pillar 1 under the PDM. This money was retained by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to be dispersed directly to the PDM SACCOs. Madam Speaker, the strategy under the PDM is to transfer funds directly to parish-based SACCOs from where farmers can borrow and procure inputs such as seeds and agrochemicals for selected inputs, including food security crops such as maize and beans. Accordingly, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) and its agencies no longer provide seeds as a matter of policy and also due to lack of funds. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries will continue to execute our mandate in seed inspection and certification to ensure that farmers across the country access quality seed, in addition to other functions such as disease and pest control, research, extension services and overall policy guidance. We continue to engage the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, following guidance from HE the President, to support the Uganda Prisons Services in the multiplication of more quality seeds, affordable to farmers through PDM. Madam Speaker, I had only addressed the issue of seeds and did not talk about hand hoes, but if I can be allowed, I want to state that we have no budget whatsoever for hand hoes. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. The minister is saying they will continue inspection and certification of seeds, which he does not have. He has also said he does not have the money as it was retained by Finance. What else do you expect from a minister if he does not have the money?2.48MR AMOS KANKUNDA (NRM, Rwampara County, Rwampara): Thank you, Madam Speaker and our Minister for Agriculture. Members, you have heard the minister clearly stating that money was diverted to the Parish Development Model, which caters for only 39 per cent of the Ugandan population. Do we think that we are going to provide food for the population and even export? My observation is that money for food production should be spread to other farmers as well; otherwise, we cannot have food production relegated to the hands of only 39 per cent. Secondly -THE SPEAKER: By the way, not all farmers are in these SACCOs yet all Ugandans need food.MR KANKUNDA:  Well said. Secondly, when you consider the seeds that we get - I would like to urge that they are distributed, like you said, to other people. On top of that, I would like to say that we should stop getting genetically modified seeds since we are unable to keep the balance for the next planting season.MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have heard the agriculture minister say he has no money and the finance minister is here - We are a Parliament that is supposed to appropriate money and our position is that we need seeds. Whether the money is with the Parish Development Model or not, we need the seeds now. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right, through your office, Madam Speaker, that we take a decision to task the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to get money and provide seeds now rather than taking long routes?THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, money was appropriated, but you did not give the money to the agriculture ministry. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is actually clean in this 7822 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTwhole thing. Originally, we were used to the business of keeping our seeds for the next season, but you have led us into a dependency syndrome. You have made us think that every year, Government will provide seeds. Now, you have stopped abruptly. What is the way forward? Farmers need seeds. Members, let us not continue lamenting. Let us hear from the finance minister and get a solution.2.52THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLAN-NING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOP-MENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are fully aware that farm-ers require seeds. When we took the Parish De-velopment Model policy, the assumption was that small farmers would use that money to buy seeds. (Interjections)  Let us listen.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, listen. The minister said it is an assumption; so, first listen to him. MR MATIA KASAIJA:  This is why we have virtually released all the Parish Development Model money, depending on the committees that have been formed. We cannot send money in the air. We want that money to land in the hands of people who are responsible for this money. That is the arrangement.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you actually have a wrong assumption. One of the Members said that 39 per cent of the population of Uganda are meant to benefit from the Parish Development Model, but they have not yet benefited. What about the other percentage? Agriculture being the backbone of our country, where does the other percentage get seeds to plant? Honourable minister, it is a simple thing. Just agree that we must provide the seeds. Let us have the seeds.MR MATIA KASAIJA:  Yes, but we can consider for the coming season. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please sit. What we want is a solution.MR MATIA KASAIJA:  In most parts of the country now, the season is running out. (Interjections) Is there anybody here who is a better farmer than Hon. Kasaija?THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if we are not providing seeds for this season, what will people eat? Are you going to provide them with food?MR MATIA KASAIJA:  Let us be honest to each other. In the past - for example, the last season - Government did not provide seeds to everybody free of charge.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you know how Government provided seeds to everybody? All Members of Parliament were given seeds to take to their districts. This House is a representative of everybody in Uganda. That is how they were provided.MR MATIA KASAIJA: In that case, I think then the policy - Give me a chance to finish my sentence.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, let me give you some time. You will come back. MR MATIA KASAIJA:  I can come back, but I cannot give an immediate solution because I do not want to tell lies in the House.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you get out and consult with your team and see what we can do? The power is in our hands; it is this House that makes decisions.MR MATIA KASAIJA:  Most obliged, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are talking about Shs 4 billion to cover the whole country. Honourable members, let us allow the minister to consult. He will come back with the information. Doctor, I am going to ask you to stand up.[The Speaker]7823THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 30 MARCH 2023Honourable members, it has come to our attention that some schools and learning institutions are levying charges on students that come to Parliament. They tell the students that this money will go to Parliament. I want to clarify that Parliament does not charge any visitor to come here. This is a people-centred Parliament; this is your Parliament. When coming here, all you need is to make sure that you get yourself in here. This place is free entry for anybody who wants to come to Parliament. To those who are charging fees, if we find out that it is true, we will take action against you.2.59THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Much obliged, Madam Speaker. I apologise for returning on the same subject because I thought the Minister of Agriculture would be exhaustive in his submission; not just for the seedlings for annual crops, but even for perennial crops. The Woman MP from Masaka City had a related matter that I think was raised to the ministry concerning UCDA that is under his charge; cutting down and spraying herbicides on farmers’ nursery beds in Masaka City and its surroundings. I checked the law and UCDA has no mandate to do that. When we asked them, they said the ministry gave instructions. Would the honourable minister clarify to this House which instructions he gave for UCDA officers in Masaka to go and maliciously uproot, slash and spray coffee nursery beds? A one Kabalega, your officer there, with the military in broad daylight, with malice aforethought and no warning yet these farmers have UCDA certificates - Would the honourable minister, having knowledge of that, inform this House what occasioned that malice and whether he has taken action on his officers?THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we need a statement on that on Tuesday. Let us solve first things first; give us the seeds. We want the seeds first. Give us a solution on the seeds and then come with a report on what the LOP is saying. We want the seeds. Next item.Let us not divert the issue of the seeds; let us first concentrate on them for now. Honourable minister, are you reporting on the seeds? You do not have capacity. Can I hear from the Minister of Finance, not you, Minister of Agriculture?MR MATIA KASAIJA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am reliably informed that last season, we needed only Shs 4 billion for Members of Parliament and -THE SPEAKER: For seeds not for Members of Parliament.MR MATIA KASAIJA:  No, no, no, for Members of Parliament to get seeds and take to their constituencies.THE SPEAKER: For you to buy seeds and give Members of Parliament.MR MATIA KASAIJA:  Okay, fine. We have agents who will buy these seeds. I want to promise this House; let us go and look for the Shs 4 billion - (Applause) - give it to the agents like NAADS so that you can take seeds to your constituencies. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it is  planting season; we are giving the Ministry of Finance one week to give us the seeds. Let us have the seeds in the constituencies in a week’s time. (Applause)MR MATIA KASAIJA:  Most obliged. The suppliers of seeds will be contacted and the distribution points will also be identified. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We want a commitment from the Minister of Agriculture.MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, I thank the Minister of Agriculture for that commitment -(Laughter) - oh, of Finance for that commitment. I assure you that all we need is permission, in writing, to the accounting officer of NAADS. Even if the money is not there tomorrow, we will have the people ready 7824 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTon the framework; they will have their locations done per constituency, as it used to be. Secondly, I regret the information from the LOP. I am not aware about it, but thank you for this information. I will follow it up. Certainly, we cannot give instructions to destroy nursery beds of farmers; that is criminal. Let me verify that and get to know the facts. I will report to this House and get in touch with you directly. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Next item?MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF PAYMENT OF SALARIES OF SCIENTISTS UNDER UGANDA PRISONS SERVICETHE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the prison officers have not been paid their money and this issue was raised yesterday by Hon. Richard Sebamala. MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON GOVERNMENT’S PLAN OF ACTION ON DISASTER RISK REDUCTION AND MANAGEMENTTHE SPEAKER: Honourable minister in charge of disaster preparedness, we had an issue here that was raised by Hon. John Baptist Nambeshe from Bududa. The issue is, the rains are on and there is a likelihood that people will be washed away again. What plans do you have as the ministry?3.06THE STATE MINISTER IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Ms Esther Anyakun):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Bahati, your Members are making noise. Government Chief Whip, Members are making noise for us. MS ANYAKUN: Madam Speaker, this information paper seeks to address Parliament on Government plans towards Disaster Risk Reduction and Management. Madam Speaker -THE SPEAKER: Is it uploaded? MS ANYAKUN: Madam Speaker, it is uploaded. As you may be aware, the Uganda National Meteorological Authority released the March, April and May seasonal weather forecast for the country that showed increased rainfall in most parts of the country. In summary, we are to have rain as per the following:1.  Near-normal rainfall in Karamoja, Bugisu, Bukedi;2.  Near-normal to below-normal rainfall in several parts of the country: Busoga, Teso, West Nile, Bunyoro, Lango and Acholi;3.  Near-normal to above-normal rainfall in some parts of the country like the Rwenzori, Kigezi, Central and Lake Victoria Basin.Madam Speaker, Teso Subregion is a basin and there is likelihood of flood risks from the water flow from Karamoja and Bugisu. Current reports show rain is being received in many parts of the country, including Karamoja.A week ago, my office released a statement putting the country on alert of increased rains and related hazards expected in most parts of the country. Information on potential disaster impact, along with advisories was provided. Districts were advised to undertake preparedness measures and cascade the information to the communities. Development of early warning systems The Department of Refugees, Disaster Preparedness and Management has continued to produce and disseminate the Uganda National Integrated Early Warning Systems (U-NIEWS) Bulletin with information on various cross-sectoral hazards. The monthly bulletin is disseminated to district local governments as well as ministries, departments and agencies of Government. [Mr Tumwebaze]7825THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 30 MARCH 2023The Office of the Prime Minister, in coordination with the Ministry of Water and Environment, installed two flood early warning systems on the subcatchments of Aswa and Manafwa with validation of data and systems ongoing. Subsequently, the early warning systems are expected to contribute to greater prediction of future flood events in surrounding districts affected by those rivers. Similar work is being done by the Ministry of Water and Environment to install a flood early warning system on the Nyamwamba subcatchment to ensure prediction of flash floods in Rwenzori and this is being supported by the World Bank. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform this House that we had similar equipment installed in Butaleja. It is supposed to make noise the moment the water is rising, but the people of Butaleja demolished it saying it had some ghosts or something. (Laughter) THE SPEAKER: So, the machine was destroyed? (Laughter) MS ANYAKUN: Madam Speaker, it was demolished. They alleged that it carried some ghosts and that some women were suffering miscarriages because of that machine. I do not know. Disaster Risk Management Plan The Disaster Risk Management Plan was approved by Cabinet and presented before Parliament in November 2022. The document was launched in a bid to attain donor support on 21 September 2023 with a letter requesting for support also written. Funds are still being awaited from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to embark on the implementation of the planned activities. Disaster Preparedness and Management Bill The regulatory impact assessment was conducted and the principles are ready to be tabled before Cabinet this April. A tentative roadmap was developed as we await the approval of the principles. Resettlement through physical relocation and cash transfers to vulnerable households Following the completion of the additional 42 houses in Bunambutye Resettlement Area in Bulambuli District, a team is on the ground right now to ensure that 42 households that are highly prone to landslides are relocated and resettled from across five districts in Elgon subregion by the end of this week. This shall bring the total number of houses completed in Bunambutye to 305. An additional 50 houses have been planned for construction during quarter four of Financial Year 2022/2023.Further to the above, we are implementing a cash transfer strategy that was approved by the Cabinet on 12 September 2022 as a suitable option to resettle people at risk of landslides in Elgon sub-region. With the support of Give Direct International, a partner, 4,000 households have been targeted from the high-risk districts of Bududa (2,050), Manafwa (900), Namisindwa (500) and Sironko (550). Identification and registration in Bududa District has been completed for 2,116 households and validation is ongoing. Registration is on-going in Manafwa to be followed by Sironko and Namisindwa districts respectively. Each registered household at high risk of landslides in Elgon sub-region will be supported with around Shs 17 million. Shs 10 million is from the Government of Uganda and the NGO – Give Direct – will give Shs 7 million to each beneficiary. The internally displaced persons (IDPs) in the districts of Kasese, Kayunga and NtorokoLand was identified and bought to resettle internally-displaced persons from the districts of Kasese and Kayunga. A total of 200 acres has been secured in each of the districts. 7826 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTAdditionally, relief food and tarpaulins have been sent to Kasese and Ntoroko for the IDPs in the camps during this month of March. We also sent 20,000 kilogrammes of maize flour and 10,000 kilogrammes of beans to each of these districts, with 164 and 100 pieces of tarpaulins respectively. On food securityBasing on the Integrated Phase Classification (IPC) food security bulletin projections of September 2022 to January 2023 and U-NIEWS Bulletin, Karamoja was predicted to face food insecurity. Subsequently, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development released Shs 20 billion for relief food for Karamoja and other areas across the country. A projected amount of 3,348,200 kilogrammes of maize and 1,674,100 kilogrammes of beans is to be procured. Relief interventions will be provided on a case by case basis from the MAM impact on other regions in the country. Assessments and continuous monitoring of the hazard eventsA food security and nutrition assessment with support from UN agencies and OPM, led by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Ministry of Health, is being conducted in Karamoja to inform the food security and nutrition status for the coming period. Continuous monitoring of hazard events in addition to updates from the district disaster management committees, through the National Emergency Coordination and Operation Centre (NECOC), is ongoing. Products from UNMA such as the 10 days forecast shall inform on the progress of the rain. The Government of Uganda is partnering with the Uganda Red Cross Society to strengthen community-based disaster risk reductions and management. Early warning systems/messages, assessments and community preparedness plans are some of the activities undertaken to build community resilience to hazards and disasters. Reporting through the NECOC toll free line – we all know the number - 0800-177777 – especially for human-induced hazards has been done and is continuously being taken. Madam Speaker, as I conclude, these are some of the key challenges faced by our department. No funding has been advanced to the Disaster Risk Management Plan by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development since it was approved by Cabinet on 11 July 2022. The funding requirement for the short-term period between 2022/2023 to 2024/2025, equivalent to the presidential pledge of US$ 50 million (Shs 185 billion) has not yet been released from a total of Shs 867 billion over the 10 years. Similarly, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is yet to release the Government of Uganda component under the cash transfer for resettlement in the Elgon subregion.The amount of relief food required vis-a-vis the frequency and magnitude of disasters is high. I thank you, Madam Speaker.MR OMARA: Thank you, honourable minister. Madam Speaker, the country is having serious issues as a result of the disasters. In some cases, like it happened in Mbale, entire bridges and community roads are washed away. The same thing is happening in the west. We also had famine in Karamoja and Otuke.Madam Speaker, the ministry seems not to have money yet Section 26(1) of the Public Finance Management Act provides for the provision of a contingency fund, which is 3.5 per cent of the previous financial year’s budget. This money is commanded in the law, but it is not provided for during the budget process. If we are keen, the Minister of Disaster would not be requesting for money when these emergencies occur. [Ms Anyakun]7827THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 30 MARCH 2023Therefore, I need clarification on whether the Ministry of Finance is making budget provisions in line with the Public Finance Management Act, Section 26(1). I submit.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, thank you for that report. We will expect a response on what Hon. Omara is asking on the contingency fund. Hon. Agnes Atim. MS AGNES ATIM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inquire from the minister: given the challenges stated here that for the last 10 years, you have not received any money to manage disasters, how are you going to manage the effects of disasters? For example, Amolatar is one of the disaster-prone districts. For the last two years, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister visited a school called Aninorar Primary School, which was submerged. However, up to now, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the school you visited is conducting lessons under a tree. Now that the rains have come, the children are not going to school. I think we should not look at disaster in the context of providing food and emergency relief items only. We should also consider the destruction of infrastructure like schools and such disasters live with us. I would like to inquire from the minister; what do we do with such instances where infrastructure is already destroyed and there is no budget provision for it at the Ministry of Education? What do we do with such schools that are non-operational due to disaster? I thank you. MR WANDWASI: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Having listened to the report given to us by the Minister for Disaster Preparedness on the disaster management plans, she talked about the resettlement of people in the Elgon Region. However, six months ago, the Minister of Disaster Preparedness led by the Hon. Prime Minister, committed herself when they visited Bugisu Region. They discovered a number of bridges were washed away by the floods, but in her report, she did not capture that yet the ministry committed itself to raise Shs 200 billion as emergency funds to take care of the roads in the Mt Elgon Region. I, therefore, want to know how the ministry will manage the aspect of damaged roads and bridges in the Bugisu Region. I want to hear that from her, thank you. THE SPEAKER: Issues of disaster are multi-sectoral in terms of approach. They may include education, energy, water and others. Therefore, the Prime Minister needs to come up with a multi-sectoral approach towards these kinds of disasters. MR JACOB KARUBANGA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is a concern arising from vermin. Karuma Wildlife Reserve has a number of elephants that have destroyed crops. I believe that the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Relief should be able to come to our aid -THE SPEAKER: Members, let us not smuggle in things; that is wildlife. The matter that was raised is very important; we are asking Government for the plans they have now that the rains have started.We have resettlement camps. What plans do they have in terms of health, food and all that? The Minister of Wildlife will handle your issue later. MR DA VID KARUBANGA:  Thank you. I would like to thank the honourable minister and indeed you, Madam Speaker, for guiding that the issue of disaster is supposed to be handled from a multi-sectoral approach.Recently, we had floods along Lake Albert and indeed, many committees were supposed to be relocated, but the ministry did not do anything. Houses were washed down, including those which were beyond the legal 200 meters.In relation to that, you talked about the roads. How I wish the Minister for Works and Transport was here. On the issue of Kasese, 7828 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTMbale and all those areas, I think the ministry should not be looking for money to cater for major relief items only. The Ministry of Works also suffers a lot. The other day, West Nile was cut off and the Ministry of Works was grappling for funds to have that road restored. Madam Speaker, in my constituency, there is a very big issue of land evictions. This minister should help us. As Members of Parliament, we do not have facilities to handle IDPs, but if you came to my constituency, it has become like an IDP camp. People are being evicted from land now and again, but we have nowhere to put them and this is a big problem. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Nambeshe, can we understand your expectations?MR NAMBESHE: My expectation comes with the communication you made and the great concerns about the heavy downpours in the areas of Mt Elgon, which has cracked.By the way, I should not withhold my appreciation to the Office of the Prime Minister for procuring early warning gadgets and systems. However, why should we provide warning systems and gadgets where God has already provided them; like a crack, for instance?We are talking about numerous cracks in a high-risk mountainous terrain. Why talk of early warning systems honestly? We should thank God that it is no longer ‘Ebigwa tebilaze’ . It has already warned us in advance. What I expected is emergency relocation of the people living in those hills. Even the internally displaced persons who were affected by the landslides in 2010, 2012 and the subsequent years have returned to the landslide scars and settled there out of frustration. There is need for emergency relocation of these people.I must also thank you for the Bulambuli Resettlement Scheme. In your report, you mentioned that the target is 100,000 households, but it is six years down the road and you have covered only 305 households. The houses that are ready are 42, according to the statement. If you do a computation, it will take us about 57 years to complete the target of 100,000 households. I can see that Hon. Baryomunsi is agitated, but this is the truth of mathematics, this is science. You cannot dispute this. Should we wait until Jesus Christ comes back? By the way, the cash transfer strategy is good, but it is only able to cover less than 1,000 households. If it were not for financial constraints, that would be the best option to quickly solve this challenge of relocating people for eventual resettlement. (Interruption) MR WAMAKUYU: Thank you, Hon. Nambeshe, for giving way. The information I would like to give this House is that as much as Government is trying to put up houses in Bunambutye for resettlement of victims, the wanaichi  want to occupy that land because it is empty, but the RDC and security at the district have been trying to protect the land. Last week, one minister of the Republic of Uganda, Hon. Sam Mayanja, went and ordered people to go back and occupy the land. Right now, people are moving to occupy it. The neighbours are occupying the land gazetted for resettlement. I would like to bring to your attention – I think it was a Cabinet decision that people should go back to occupy the land that Government secured. It was done by Hon. Mayanja. He even ordered the RDC and DPCs to be removed because they are the ones trying to disturb people. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Which Hon. Mayanja? MR WAMAKUYU:  Hon. Sam Mayanja, the Minister of State for Lands, Housing and Urban Development. He did that last week. MR NAMBESHE: I must thank you, Hon. Mudimi, for that information, but as you are aware, we had already warned in advance, in the 10th Parliament, about that land which had [Mr Karubanga]7829THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 30 MARCH 2023serious encumbrances. Of course, Government went ahead and zeroed on it for this resettlement. The controversial minister, Hon. Mayanja, is at it again because if that land – THE SPEAKER: Who is the controversial minister? Just say, “a minister.” MR NAMBESHE: I have said it, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: What have you said? MR NAMBESHE: That he is a minister. (Laughter) Indeed, he is a minister in charge of lands. If land is earmarked for the vulnerable people who ought to be relocated and should have been relocated yesterday, why on earth would this minister be harbouring it at the back of his mind to get people from wherever they are, in their safe zones, to come and settle on this land? I think that would border on callousness; the particular person who is the holder of that office is callous and heartless – THE SPEAKER: The person in charge of that office is Hon. Nabakooba. MR NAMBESHE: Okay, I conclude with an appreciation. I normally give credit where it is due. At least the Office of the Prime Minister increased the budgetary allocation, particularly for these hotspots of disasters like Bududa, Tingei and Namisindwa. However, incidentally, this is virtual. It is in the air and we do not see any efforts regarding the same on ground – THE SPEAKER: The minister has said that the releases are not yet there, but they are trying amidst all this. Does Rukungiri also have disaster issues? I do not want you to mix issues of roads and health with what we are talking about. Hon. Nambeshe was very specific. Members, we have the Prime Minister’s Question Time. I am going to allow debate on the Parish Development Model for a very short time. Hon. Mpuuga, you have talked about Prisons salary, but we shall bring it on Tuesday. 3.33THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Much obliged, Madam Speaker – THE SPEAKER: Anyway, they are not ready; the report is not ready. MR MPUUGA: Hon. Nambeshe has made an able presentation of the specifics. I will be general for the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to respond. What happened to the command of Article 249 of the Constitution that obliges you to constitute a disaster preparedness and management commission to deal with both natural and manmade disasters? If that commission was in place, it could have guided your responses. The Constitution is 28 years old and it commands, “there shall be…” Is the Prime Minister aware of Article 249? What happened? If it was in place - Some of the leaders in this country are disasters. They could have been helped by that particular commission to deal with their troubles; to deal with manmade and natural disasters. Some of the manmade disasters are human beings. Where is that commission, Rt Hon. Prime Minister? 3.35 THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Madam Speaker, the issue of Hon. Mudimi is pertinent. We already got reports that the minister was in Bunambutye in Bulambuli District sometime back. He made those statements and the Government land is being threatened. We have since held two meetings with the minister and agreed to go back next Friday to have this problem solved. I promise that we shall solve this problem. THE SPEAKER: What about the commission under Article 249? 7830 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTMS NABBANJA:  Honourable members, I will consult the President over the matter. 3.38THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Esther Anyakun):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start with my sister who spoke about Amolatar. When we realised there was submerging of most of the facilities in her constituency, the Office of the Prime Minister managed to construct a new health centre III in Nagoya. That has been concluded and we are coming for commissioning. On the issue of cash transfer, I know my colleagues from Mbale and Bulambuli – we have resources that are able to handle one issue at a time. We cannot do everything at a go, so, we handled the health centre first. As for the school, we need to relocate it. Actually, any institution that is high risk and has students and pupils at the moment, has to be relocated. Otherwise, we are not going to be able to rescue them –(Interruption)MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and my sister, for giving way. The procedural matter I am raising is on the delayed implementation of the disaster plan, which is making this House constantly raise the same matters. Madam Speaker, I am of the opinion that this House directs the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to release adequate money so these plans are implemented, to ensure that the reoccurrence of the same matters is handled. Therefore, Madam Speaker, are we right to proceed when Government is here without making any commitment to the releases of the money that we need for implementation of the approved disaster plan? Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, the issue is funding. When you look at section 26, on issues of the Contingency Fund that is supposed to be used for disasters; do you have that fund in place? Is it doing what it is supposed to do? How far have you gone with the disaster plan because we will be talking left, right and centre and blaming the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, when there is no money?3.39THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, in the context of the matter being discussed, the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Act, 2015, provides for 0.5 per cent of the budget to be set aside for the Contingency Fund to address natural disasters, as you have indicated.Now, over the last two financial years, Shs 62 billion has been provided each year and appropriated by this House for that purpose.This year -THE SPEAKER: Is the Shs 62 billion, 0.5 per cent?MR LUGOLOOBI: It might not be equivalent to 0.5 per cent, but it is some level of effort towards attaining the 0.5 per cent. This year, out of the Shs 62 billion, Shs 40 billion has been released so far and the year has not ended and accountability is awaited before subsequent releases are done.THE SPEAKER: So, what stops you from giving what the law requires of you?MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, it is because we are constrained; we cannot have all the money that we need at the moment to provide for all the needs of society. Therefore, it is because of that problem that we are not able to fully provide for the 0.5 per cent. However, this coming financial year, we are going to do much better than we have been doing before. THE SPEAKER: So, honourable minister, you got the money, but you are not using it as required. Do you have the Shs 62 billion?7831THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 30 MARCH 2023MS ANYAKUN: Madam Speaker, the Shs 40 billion that the minister is talking about was from the -THE SPEAKER: The Shs 62 billion?MS ANYAKUN: Madam Speaker, I must say the Shs 135 billion, which was a supplementary for Karamoja, is what we know we got. Previously in 2021, we got around Shs 15 billion. Therefore, I do not think the Office of the Prime Minister is aware of the Shs 62 billion, as far as I am concerned. THE SPEAKER: Can we have a reconciled figure between the Office of the Prime Minister and the Ministry of Finance on how much money you have given for disaster preparedness and what it has been used for, and what plans you have? Because it is between the Prime Minister and the Ministry of Finance.3.42MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are here to look at disasters caused by increased rainfall. We are battling with the Contingency Fund, but we are looking at the response about the money that has always been provided after disasters have befallen us. They are talking about that value, but they are not talking about the Contingency Fund that the ministry would have, prior. All these instruments are supposed to be the incorporated - THE SPEAKER: The Contingency Fund issue is coming as per the Public Finance Management Act, that was raised by Hon. Omara - that whereas we do not have money for disaster, what about the Contingency Fund that is provided by law? MS KAAYA: Yes, Madam Speaker. That is why I am reechoing this; that without a disaster management law, it is going to be very difficult - even other Members are coming up with a plan; it is going to be very difficult to have this Contingency Fund prior to disasters, such that the minister plans according to what is in her basket. Therefore, it is better we fast-track the establishment of the disaster management Bill. Since 2017, the process has been failing. We need to come up with this law, and then provide for the operationalisation of many of these contingencies that we are talking about, and then we stop just responding, but have a plan. Otherwise, disasters related to too much rainfall, especially as far as water harvesting is concerned, we have not done anything. We are just looking at the water moving on and spoiling everything. Then the President will later come with proposals for irrigation, but we shall have no water to use for irrigation. Therefore, those disasters that are created by too much rainfall need to be fast-tracked. Madam Speaker, the simplification of the weather forecasts still wants - What does near-normal mean to our people? Who exactly at the district is going to distribute these weather forecasts? That one is still wanting; people do not know how much rainfall means near-normal or above-normal? The distribution is still wanting. Everybody at the district is saying, “I do not know who should distribute the information,” and the weather forecasts remain there. Therefore, we would like the minister to come up and at least put in place a disaster response related to too much rainfall. The rest of the disasters, we shall respond to later. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 3.45MR SOWEDI KITANYWA (NRM, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I begin by thanking Government for identifying land, and procuring the same for the people who are internally displaced. However, for the case of Kasese; last year in March, the Prime Minister in this House told us that land had been procured for the people in the internally displaced camp in Muhokya. However, up to today, people are still in the camp, living in terrible conditions. I want to 7832 MINISTERIAL STATEMENThear from the minister; if the land has already been procured, what is the problem? Why are people not moving away from the camp to occupy this land? Thank you, Madam Speaker.MS ANYAKUN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start with what my colleague from Elgon came up with - on issues of why they are leaving some districts. International organisations are now piloting the four Elgon districts. Once we are sure that we have successfully acquired this, we should be able to take to other districts including Mt Rwenzori. On the issue of bridges during floods in Elgon, the Ministry of Works did the assessment and I am sure they are working on this report. Lake Albert submerging most of the health centres as raised by Hon. David - we also have Butyaba Health Centre III. This was newly constructed by the Office of the Prime Minister in Buliisa.About the cracks in Bududa - we are doing the relocation right now with a cash transfer; we have ring-fenced all the settlements that are on those cracks. These are the people we are going to relocate by this Wednesday. Most of them are going to receive their cash in two weeks’ time - by the 15th of April - and they have to leave the place. We are only still waiting for the Ministry of Finance to release the Shs 50 billion to top up and make it Shs 10 million for each beneficiary, since the organisation is giving us Shs 7 million for each of them. But at least, they will first receive the Shs 7 million as we give them a condition to leave. So, that is going to be taken care of.Then in Bududa alone, we are giving 2,116 beneficiaries, compared to the rest of the districts in Elgon. On the question raised by Hon. Mudimi, I think the Prime Minister has clarified the issue of Bunambutye  land. On the question raised by Hon. Mpuuga, the Prime Minister has also responded – it will depend on the rationalisation. On the question by the honourable member from Kiboga, we know very well that we have district disaster management committees in each of these districts and the chief administrative officer is the chairman of the committee. So, the way we disseminate information - we know our people pick this information through the radios and TVs, but at the same time, the district disaster management committees at the districts handle the issue of training. They are all trained and they are –(Interruption)MS AMERO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have heard the minister say that by Wednesday, they will be paying some of these people who are in the landslide-prone areas and they expect them to leave by the 15th. I would like to know whether they have identified land where these people are going to buy from because I know that for the issue of land in Uganda, you must take your time to get the right piece of land. So, do you have a place where you are going to take these people? If it is in 15 days, I am quite sure that they will not be able to find anywhere to sleep. Otherwise, they are going to spend this money.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Susan, by the time Government values your land and tells you that you are supposed to move, it means you have a plan on where you are going. MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to find out from the minister what she is doing for flood-prone areas like Dokolo. You are aware that in 2021, about four subcounties were affected seriously by the floods, to the extent that we were cut off from the water supply treatment plant in Kacung, which supplies water up to Kitgum. I would like to know the programme you have to deal with such disasters.Secondly, there was a promise, in writing, from the Prime Minister’s office that they would look into the possibility of giving the affected persons money to shift. One of the affected persons was actually the departed Justice Rubby Opio Aweri, whose home was [Mr Kitanywa]7833THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 30 MARCH 2023completely covered by the floods. He was one of those who should have been compensated. What do you have in place for those people in areas that are prone to floods? I thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Hon. Anyakun, you are going to respond to that during the Prime Minister’s Time. Let us receive the Bills. All of you will speak during the Prime Minister’s Time.BILLSFIRST READINGTHE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will invoke Rule 25(1) of the Rules of Procedure and amend the Order Paper to accommodate the Bills’ first reading. We have the tax Bills. They are part of the requirements for us to be able to pass the budget, according to the Public Finance Management Act. We are in the budgeting process. Yes, honourable minister?3.52THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FI-NANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOM-IC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2023” be read for the first time. THE SPEAKER: Please lay it. The Bill is referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.BILLSFIRST READINGTHE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 20233.53THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FI-NANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOM-IC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill 2023” be read for the first time.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. It is referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. BILLSFIRST READINGTHE V ALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 20233.53THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2023” be read for the first time.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. It is referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.BILLSFIRST READINGTHE TRAFFIC AND ROAD SAFETY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 20233.53THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Traffic and Road Safety (Amendment) Bill, 2023” be read for the first time.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. It is referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.7834 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTBILLSFIRST READINGTHE TAX PROCEDURES CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 20233.54THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2023 be read for the first time.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. It is referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.BILLSFIRST READINGTHE LOTTERIES AND GAMING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 20233.54THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that “The Lotteries and Gaming (Amendment) Bill, 2023” be read for the first time.THE SPEAKER: It is referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.BILLSFIRST READINGTHE CONVENTION ON MUTUAL ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANCE IN TAX MATTERS IMPLEMENTATION BILL, 20233.55THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that “The Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Tax Matters Implementation Bill, 2023” be read for the first time.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. It is referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.BILLSFIRST READINGTHE APPROPRIATION BILL, 20233.55THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Appropriation Bill, 2023” be read for the first time.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. It is referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Can you lay the Certificate of Financial Implications?MR LUGOLOOBI: Allow me, Madam Speaker, to lay on Table –THE SPEAKER: The Appropriation Bill, 2023 is referred to the Budget Committee, not Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Please, lay the certificates.MR LUGOLOOBI: I beg to lay on the Table the relevant Certificate of Financial Implications for each of the Bills that I have laid. I hope I am allowed to lay all of them.THE SPEAKER: Please, lay them Bill by Bill.MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Certificate of Financial Implications for the Bill entitled, “The Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Tax Matters Implementation Bill, 2023”.THE SPEAKER: Please lay. MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Certificate of Financial Implications for the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2023”. COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR7835THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 30 MARCH 2023THE SPEAKER: Please lay. MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Certificate of Financial Implications for the Bill entitled, “The Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2023”. THE SPEAKER: Please lay. MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Certificate of Financial Implications for the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2023”. THE SPEAKER: Please lay. MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Certificate of Financial Implications for the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2023”. THE SPEAKER: Please lay. MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Certificate of Financial Implications for the Bill entitled, “The Lotteries and Gaming (Amendment) Bill, 2023”. THE SPEAKER: Please lay. MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Certificate of Financial Implications for the Bill entitled, “The Traffic and Road Safety (Amendment) Bill, 2023”. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. LAYING OF PAPERSTHE PROPOSED ANNUAL BUDGET FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2023/2024 PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OF THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT ACT AND RULE 148 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURETHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday, I guided that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development would table the proposed annual budget for Financial Year 2023/2024 and all the attendant documents, including the Tax Bills, which they have just laid. The Public Finance Management Act, 2015 imposes a number of requirements on relevant documentation that is supposed to be tabled by the first day of April and these are notably the proposed annual budget for the following financial year, which the Minister is going to lay. That is pursuant to Section 13(3) of the Public Finance Management Act - a detailed report of the preceding financial year on the management of the public debt, guarantees and other financial liabilities of the Government; that is under Section 42(2) of the Public Finance Management Act, the semi-annual and annual reports. Those are the documents that you are supposed to lay on the Table. Reports on the Petroleum Fund, that is section 61(1)(b), the annual plan for the petroleum revenue investment, the reserves, that is section 71(3) and then of course the tax and revenue Bills. So, can you go ahead and lay?Honourable minister, read the documents one by one. You know by law that you are supposed to lay them. Read what you have, one by one, and we also have our checklist.4.00THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLAN-NING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOP-MENT  (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you, Mad-am Speaker. In line with Article 155, clause 1 of the Constitution, and Section 13, clause 3 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, as amended, I have prepared the draft estimates of revenue and expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024 under the theme, “Full monetisation of the Ugandan economy through commercial agriculture, industrialisation, expanding and broadening services, digital transformation and market access”.Madam Speaker, the total budget for the next financial year amounts to Shs 50.92 trillion up from Shs 48.13 Trillion in Financial Year COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR7836 MINISTERIAL STATEMENT2022/2023. In this regard, therefore, I want to lay a statement attesting to the liability and the completeness of the budget, section 13, part 11.THE SPEAKER: First lay the budget - let us have the budget.MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I wish to lay the draft estimates of revenue and expenditure, recurrent and development for Financial Year 2023/2024, central government votes. I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We refer that to the Budget Committee. Can we have the management of public debt guarantees, a report on that and the financial liabilities?MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I wish to also lay the draft estimates for revenues and expenditures, recurrent and development for local government votes. I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER: Is that the same budget? Okay, it goes to the Committee on Budget. MR MATIA KASAIJA: The other one of the central government.Madam Speaker, I wish to lay before Parliament the estimates of revenue and expenditure, recurrent and development, for the state-owned enterprises and the public corporations. I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER: Please lay.MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a statement attesting to the liability and the completeness of the budget estimates of revenue and expenditure for the Financial Year 2023/2024. THE SPEAKER: Please lay.MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance for the annual draft budget estimates of revenue and expenditure for the Financial Year 2023/2024. I beg to lay.Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Certificate of Climate Change Compliance of the budget estimates of revenue and expenditure for the Financial Year 2023/2024. I beg to lay. MR MATIA KASAIJA:  I beg to lay the Certificate of Compliance of the annual budget for Financial Year 2022/2023. I beg to lay. Madame Speaker, I wish to lay the Certificate of Financial Implications for the budget estimates of revenue and expenditure for the Financial Year 2023/2024. I beg to lay. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. MR MATIA KASAIJA:  Madam Speaker, I wish to lay a list of accounting officers for Financial Year 2023/2024 as per the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, part 11, Section 2 and subsection G and section 13, part 11, subsection D. I wish to lay.THE SPEAKER: That one is referred to the Public Accounts Committee.MR MATIA KASAIJA:  Madam Speaker, I wish to lay the Uganda multi-year commitment statement for Financial Year 2023/2024 and the performance of projects for the Financial Year 2021/2022. I beg to lay.Madam Speaker, again, I beg to lay the budget estimates for statutory vote number 101, the Judiciary for the Financial Year 2023/2024. In the same vein, I want to lay the budget estimates for vote 102 - Electoral Commission, for the Financial Year 2023/2024.Madam Speaker, I also beg lay on the Table the Budget Estimates for V ote No.104 - Parliamentary Commission, for the Fiscal Year 2023/2024. I would like to lay the Semi-annual Budget Performance Report for Financial Year 2022/2023.I beg to lay the Medium Term Debt Management Strategy for the period 2023/2024 to 2026/2027.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [Mr Kasaija]7837THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 30 MARCH 2023Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report on public debt, grants, guarantees and other financial liabilities for Financial Year 2022/2023. I beg to lay on the Table the Treasury Memorandum for the preceding financial year for the Annual Budget for Financial Year 2023/2024. I would like to lay the tax expenditure report for the period July 2022 to March 2023 for Financial Fear 2022/2023.I beg to lay the compliance of ministerial policy statements with the gender and equity requirements for the Financial Year 2023/2024. I beg to also lay the microeconomic assumptions for financial years 2022/2023 to 2023/2024. Madam Speaker, I have done my job and I wish that Parliament can process this budget quickly so we begin the new financial year as quickly as possible.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Have you laid the report on the Petroleum Fund as per section 61(1) b); the semi-annual and annual report on the Petroleum Fund? We also need the petroleum revenue investment reserve, which is captured in section 71(3).4.11THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, the report on petroleum is one of the documents we have included.THE SPEAKER: As you continue checking, the shadow minister has something to say.4.12MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, I thank you, for this opportunity. I also thank the minister for the timely fulfillment of his mandate.I have one express request, which is not expressly put in the budget framework paper, that is, the laying to Parliament the approved budget framework paper. The reason that document is very critical is that in the process of approving the budget framework paper, Parliament makes recommendations where the Government finally writes the final budget estimates. In the process, it is the assessment of the level of consistency with the recommendations of the budget framework paper. Quite often, and I have been here for quite some time, the approved budget framework paper does not accompany the budget. It makes our work very difficult to assess the level of consistency, yet that is where the whole budget assessment is anchored. May I request the minister to lay on the Table an approved certified budget framework paper that was approved by Parliament to enable us to process – Otherwise, that section provides that assessment of the budget must be in conformity with the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility, and the National Budget Framework Paper.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the Member is asking about the approval of the budget framework and the logic in it. We need to know where we are, what was approved and what are we looking at. It is not provided for in the Public Finance Management Act, but it is prudent enough that we have it.4.14THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before the minister responds, and indeed like you have stated, it is not a matter of law, but a question of prudence. When we passed the budget framework paper here, it had both the majority and minority report adopted by the House. The command of the House was that go and harmonise. In the circumstances, without a harmonised document, the Committee on Budget is going to find it very hard to deal with reconciliation 7838 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTof what the House resolved and what is now available. I think the question the Member is asking is whether you have a harmonised document upon which these figures have been submitted. THE SPEAKER: Going forward, and since it is not something that is provided for, and you had a checklist – it is just a matter of prudence - we should always have a harmonised budget framework paper as one of the documents that you lay on the Table. Next?STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER ON THE GOVERNMENT’S LEVEL OF PREPAREDNESS AND MITIGATION STRATEGIES FOR THE POSSIBLE ADVERSE EFFECTS OF THE ONGOING POLITICAL SITUATION IN KENYATHE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have got very alarming reports on the Parish Development Model. I do not know how much time you will need, but I am requesting the ministers responsible for the PDM to look at the release reports so that they come ready to respond to what Members are raising.Yesterday, Lango subregion presented a very good report that will help the whole House. As you prepare, ask your ministers responsible for the PDM to look at the reports because the whole of next week, we will handle the PDM.Rt Hon. Prime Minister, after that, you can go ahead with Prime Minister’s Time and answer everybody’s question.4.16THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Madam Speaker, in response to your request for Government to make a statement on how we are prepared to handle the impact of demonstrations in Kenya -THE SPEAKER: Honourable ministers, do not leave your Prime Minister alone in the House.MS NABBANJA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am pleased to provide a preliminary assessment of the situation as follows:Government has been keenly following events as they unfold in the Republic of Kenya, following the announcement of demonstrations in major cities and towns in Kenya. We have continued to maintain our warm, brotherly and strong cordial relationship with the Government and the people of Kenya throughout this period.We remain confident that the Government of His Excellency, President William Ruto will contain and return the country into normalcy, as we have seen in the past weeks.The effects of these demonstrations, according to our preliminary assessment, are that our trade and supply chains with the Republic of Kenya have continued without major disruptions. Data on our cross-border business with the Republic of Kenya for dry cargo, wet cargo - that is fuel - and units, show a steady flow from both Malaba and Busia entry points, except for minor disruptions that took place on the 13th, 20th and 27th of March this year. Those are the days when the demonstrations were held. Let me go to Busia entry point. Busia’s overall daily average number of goods vehicles in February 2023, before the demonstrations started, was 473 vehicles. For the month of March 2023, by the 29th, the daily average was 474 vehicles. It is likely to be higher when we add the numbers for the 30th and 31st of March 2023. Madam Speaker, from Busia border entry point, while the goods vehicles reduced on 13 March 2023 to 283 from 425 on 13 February 2023, they went up to 508 the following day on 14 March 2023 and consistently increased in subsequent days. On 20 March 2023, traffic fell again to 217 vehicles, down from 390 compared to the same day in February 2003. Again, traffic immediately picked up to over 366 vehicles the subsequent days. COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [Mr Mpuuga]7839THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 30 MARCH 2023On 27 March 2023, traffic reduced to 230 vehicles, down from 350 vehicles, compared to the same day in February 2023. The number immediately rose to 441 vehicles on 28 March 2023, climbing to 560 vehicles in March 2023 - (Hon. Pacuto rose_)THE SPEAKER: Yes, Hon. Avur?MS PACUTO: Madam Speaker, our Rules of Procedure do not allow us to bring in here newspapers when other people are deliberating. However, the honourable member there - Hon. Biraaro - is busy trying to catch up with current affairs. Madam Speaker, is he really in order? THE SPEAKER: Of course, he is not in order; that is disrespect to the House. (Applause) When a Prime Minister - do you know the Prime Minister of the Government of Uganda? (Laughter)  Prime Minister, go ahead.MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, the same trend happened at Malaba entry point. Members can read for themselves. Let me go to security. The joint security agencies of Uganda continue to closely monitor our borderline with Kenya from Busia, Tororo up to Karamoja areas to purposely protect our communities along the border and counter any spillover effects that could arise from the violent demonstrations. As a result, comprehensive deployments along the border have been put in place. The Government of Uganda would like to reassure the public that all residents along the border are safe and secure. Let me go to energy.Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Energy is in close contact with our counterparts in Kenya to ensure uninterrupted flow of petroleum products.Access to trade Madam Speaker and colleagues, the Government of the Republic of Uganda is working closely, like I have already told you, with our Kenyan counterparts to ensure that roads, railway and the sea routes remain open and secure to facilitate uninterrupted movement of goods. Below is my observation.Madam Speaker, from the above data, it is very clear that for the days of the 13th, 20th and 27th of March, when the traffic fell due to demonstrations, the traffic flow of goods and general trade immediately picked up the following days in both Busia and Malaba entry points. The disruptions by demonstrations notwithstanding, our trade and traffic flow remain stable and there is absolutely no need to panic. Our economy still remains on course to collect its revenue from imports and the general trade, as programmed. We are also on course to attain the growth of our economy this financial year, as I am sure, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development already informed you. In conclusion, honourable members, I want to assure you and the country that we remain confident that the strong ties between the Republic of Uganda and the Republic of Kenya will continue to blossom. Our two governments are on track to remove the few remaining non-tariff barriers, following bilateral discussions at all levels. These interruptions notwithstanding, our business with the Republic of Kenya and indeed, the East African Region as a whole, is on a sound upward trajectory.Madam Speaker and Members, I beg to move.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. We will debate everything at a go. Give us a report on the preceding week. We are going to debate everything. 7840 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSTATEMENT BY THE RT HON. PRIME MINISTER ON GOVERNMENT BUSINESS FOR THE SUCCEEDING WEEK4.27THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Madam Speaker, I move under Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure that requires me, as the Leader of Government Business, to make a statement in this House regarding Government business for the succeeding week. One, Madam Speaker, we plan to present the Veterinary Practitioners Bill and, two, the Minister for Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs will come here and make a statement on how we are mitigating the floods in Kampala. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. PRIME MINISTER’S TIMETHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, after the Prime Minister has presented, you will ask the questions you have.4.28THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, I got a question from Hon. Andrew Ojok Oulanyah, Member of Parliament for Omoro County. He would like to seek guidance from Government and an update on the status of the compensation of Omoro war debt claimants. He said the people of Omoro were yet to receive their compensation from the Government. His prayer was that I update the House on the compensation of the war debt claimants of Omoro.Madam Speaker, my response is that on 26 March 2022, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda launched payments for war debt claimants and beneficiaries for cattle lost in the subregions of Acholi, Lango and Teso at Soroti University grounds, Soroti City. Following the launch, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs started processing payments of livestock compensation for beneficiaries and claimants in the sub-regions of Acholi, Lango and Teso. A total of 92,634 data cards, in triplicate copies, were distributed to the 29 districts in the subregions of Acholi, Lango and Teso. The data cards were distributed as follows: 45.4 per cent (42,024) to the districts of the Lango sub-region, 36.3 per cent (33,664) to the districts of Teso sub-region and 18.3 per cent (16,946) to the districts of Acholi sub-region. Madam Speaker, by 30 June 2022, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs had received 33,017 (35.64 per cent) livestock claimants and beneficiaries records, out of the 92,634 data cards submitted. Omoro District had submitted hardcopy data cards accompanied by soft copy information. However, when the data cards were subjected to verification, the ministry realised that the data cards had been wrongly filled, that is to say, each claimant/beneficiary had filled triplicate copies, each with a different serial number (0001, 0002 and 0003) instead of a set of triplicate data cards bearing the same serial number (0001, 0001 and 0001). The ministry procured 2,000 new data cards from Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation, which were sent to Omoro District for the claimants/beneficiaries to fill in, again. A total of 1,258 data cards were resubmitted by Omoro District in July 2022 and have since been verified. Madam Speaker, this current Financial Year 2022/2023, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs has allocated Shs 30 billion to pay verified and validated war debt claimants/beneficiaries in the subregions of Acholi, Lango and Teso. Hon. Phyllis Chemutai, the Woman MP Kapchorwa District, raised a matter concerning lack of water in Kapchorwa District and the need for Government to fulfill a presidential PRIME MINISTER’S TIME7841THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 30 MARCH 2023pledge by implementing the gravity flow scheme to ensure one pump stand per household in Kapchorwa District.Her prayer was that I update the House on the status of safe water provision in Kapchorwa, as well as the status of implementation of a presidential pledge by implementing the gravity flow scheme to ensure one pump stand per household in Kapchorwa District.Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Water and Environment has undertaken and continues to plan various activities across the country with the objective of increasing access to safe water in rural and urban areas, while ensuring availability of at least one source of water per village and promoting improved sanitation with the aim of providing a water source in every village. To date, the national rural safe water coverage and the one water source per village is estimated to be at 67 per cent, while for Kapchorwa District, the safe water coverage in rural areas stands at 75 per cent. Madam Speaker, the district local governments receive District Water and Sanitation Conditional Grant disbursed directly from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for implementation of water and sanitation programmes in all districts across the country. Over the last three years – that is, financial years 2019/2020 to 2021/2022 – the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development disbursed a dedicated conditional grant amounting to Shs 938 million for the implementation of water supply and sanitation activities for Kapchorwa District alone.Kapchorwa District, over the years, using the conditional grant, has constructed new piped water systems and made extensions on the existing piped water supply systems in rural areas as follows:Kabeywa-Gamogo Gravity Flow Scheme, covering Kabeywa, Gamogo and Chepterech.Chema-Tegeres Gravity Flow Scheme, covering Chema Subcounty and Upper Tegeres.Cheptalal Water Supply System, covering Tumboboi Parish and Kaptanya Subcounty.Sanzara Water Scheme covering Sanzara Parish, in Kawowo Subcounty.Kapenguria Water Scheme covering Kapenguria area.Amukol Gravity Flow Scheme covering Amukol. Kapchorwa Town Water Supply System was constructed by the ministry through the Water and Sanitation Facility. East Kapchorwa Municipality is currently being served by this town water supply and the Kapenguria system, which is supplying the central and eastern divisions.Madam Speaker, in response to the presidential pledge, this Gravity Flow Scheme was constructed by the ministry to address the shortage of safe water in the district. The scheme supplies safe water covering the four subcounties of Kapsinda (24 villages), Kaserem (18 villages) Amukol (35 villages) Kawowo (41 villages) and the surrounding communities with a current population of 13,814 and 2,792 households in Kapchorwa District, with 674 connections. A total of 118 villages are served in the four subcounties.Madam Speaker, the ministry is currently constructing Kapchorwa Water Supply System, Phase II, under the Strategic Towns Water Supply and Sanitation Project. The system will cover the Koki area and the western divisions. The ministry also plans to expand and extend the water supply on the Upper Sipi piped water system to serve Munarya and Sipi subcounties. Madam Speaker, Government, through the ministry has put in place all the workable strategies to ensure that there is at least a safe water source in every village, not only in Kapchorwa, but across the whole country. Hon. Aber Lillian, the District Woman Representative for Kitgum District, said that the fishermen on the lakes are under threat of eviction by Government, coupled with forceful registration of fishers and boats, yet most of 7842 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTthem are informal and live around the lakes from which they make a living.Her prayer is that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister explains to the House the fate of our fishermen on the lakes.Madam Speaker, my response is that Government appreciates the fact that Ugandans living around lakes earn out of fishing. However, fish and other aquatic products are natural resources that if not well regulated may be depleted. It is due to the above fact that Government introduced a way of formalising fishing activities on lakes through registration to avoid illegalities that may threaten the fishing industry. Registration of fishermen and boats is done every two years, while licensing is done annually. In this year 2023, renewal and issuance of licenses commenced in January and ends on 31 March 2023. The fishermen who will be caught fishing without a valid licence after 31 March will be denied access to the lakes and will face the law. Fishermen who registered their boats last year, but failed to acquire licences will have to pay the arrears.For fishermen to be legalised, the boat owners must have the recommended size of the boat, fishing gear, tax identification number and National Identity cards. The boat owners, who are not fishermen, need to first secure fishing licenses for their fishermen in order to be registered. According to statistics from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, 14,600 boats are on Lake Victoria, but only 9,306 are licensed to operate. On Lake Kyoga, registered boats are 6,550, and 5,515 are licensed while other lakes also have almost similar variations between registered boats and those licensed.Currently, registration, licensing and issuance of permanent boat identification number plates have simplified the work of developing a database of all boat owners in the country. This has also reduced the abuse of fishing and the fight between fishermen and law enforcement teams on lakes.Honourable colleagues, I implore you to acquaint yourselves with the provisions of the recently enacted Fisheries and Aquaculture Act, 2022. As leaders, it is our duty to continually sensitise and mobilise the population on the provisions of the law applicable.Hon. Nyamutoro Phiona, the National Female Youth Representative narrated that Adjumani District is faced with a high number of refugees from the Democratic Republic of Congo and South Sudan. However, due to congestion and overcrowding, the COVID-19 pandemic became a threat to the people in the refugee camp and the communities in Adjumani District. It is also faced with other contagious diseases such as Hepatitis B.Her prayer is that I explain to the House the government’s intervention to save both the people of Adjumani and the refugees from this looming health threat.Madam Speaker, my response is that Government appreciates the value of the good health of people not only in Adjumani District and for the refugees, but also the good health of all Ugandans.Adjumani District recently secured funding of Shs 132 million from Government partners called UN-Women, targeting 100,000 people - both refugees and host communities. As a result, a vaccination programme against COVID-19 and Hepatitis B targeting both the refugees and host communities in the area was launched.The vaccination rate among the refugee population during the 2022 mass vaccination was very low. Out of 273,380 populations that were targeted for COVID-19 vaccination, only 158,592 were vaccinated, representing 58 per cent while only 24 per cent of refugees were vaccinated.With support from the Government and donor community, we target to hit the 95 per cent mark for vaccination coverage in the whole district.[Ms Nabbanja] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME7843THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 30 MARCH 2023The district has designated 40 COVID-19 vaccination points and 37 Hepatitis B screening centres in all health centres in the district for six days.centres in the district for six days. The health management and response teams are handling COVID-19 as well as Hepatitis B and extending effective services to host communities and refugees. Madam Speaker, we enjoin our political leaders and other community leaders to take lead in the vaccination and screening exercise of COVID-19 and Hepatitis B so that the population embraces the exercise to save the host communities and refugees in Adjumani District. Hon. Norah Bigirwa Nyendwoha, Woman Representative for Buliisa, said that many parts of the country are facing drought, which is affecting the production of food and cash crops. The farmers are entering the first season of the year and usually, it is very short with little rain. Government, over time, has been promising to support Ugandan farmers - both small and large scale - with irrigation schemes for the farmers to access water for production. However, this seems not to have taken off and many farmers are worried. Her prayers are that: I should assure this House and our farmers the extent of Government’s assurance to access water for production.When is the Government fulfilling the promise on the solar power irrigation systems?My response is that the Government has continued its efforts to invest and improve access to water for production. The Government, through the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, is supervising the construction of six irrigation schemes in different parts of the country including Mubuku II, Doho II, Ngenge and Rwengaju, to mention, but a few. Construction of the irrigation schemes including Acomai in Sironko and Atari in Kween have started. The Government has supported farmers and farmer groups by installing solar-powered irrigation schemes in various sites in the districts of Ntungamo, Hoima, Mubende, Kamuli, Koboko, Kumi, Kabale, Mukono, Kiboga, Buvuma, Ssembabule, Kayunga, Yumbe, Kaberamaido, Kaliro, Buikwe, Masindi, Butambala, Bukomansimbi, Kapachorwa, Iganga, Kaabong, Rukungiri, Amolatar, Adjumani, Mbale, Pader, Rukiga, Nakaseke and Katakwi, among others. This is to promote adoption of improved and efficient water for agricultural technologies for the crops and livestock. The Government has constructed over 1,555 valley tanks with a total holding capacity of 10,840,000 cubic metres in order to address the challenge of water for animals, especially in the cattle corridor and drought prone districts. Honourable members, even Buliisa will eventually benefit. Hon. Geoffrey Macho, Member of Parliament for Busia Municipality asked that Busia Boarder Seed Secondary School is located in Mukungu B Village, Central Parish, Eastern Division in Busia Municipality. The school was started in 2019 and had an enrolment of 497 students by the close of year 2022. The school was started as a response to Government’s policy of having public secondary schools at subcounty level. It also came as a result of a Presidential pledge. Though Busia Municipality donated land of approximately 25 acres, the Government has not come up clearly to ensure that people benefit from the Uganda Secondary Education Expansion Programme (USEP). His prayers are that: 1. The Ministry of Education and Sports comes out clearly on the USEP in relation to this school before term one of 20 – Madam Speaker, these questions came earlier, but since we have not had a chance – it says at the start of the term. 2. The ministry should implement the Presidential pledge. 7844 MINISTERIAL STATEMENT3. The ministry should recommend the school to apply for a UNEB centre number since there is no other O’level school in the municipality. My response is that the Government of Uganda, through the Ministry of Education and Sports, secured funding from International Development Association - World Bank, amounting to $150 million to finance the Uganda Secondary Education Expansion Project. Of this, $90 million is a loan while $60 million is a grant from the refugee window. The project’s main objective is to enhance access to secondary education through construction and equipping of 116 new secondary schools; 84 in non-refugee hosting districts and 32 in refugee hosting districts and expansion of 61 existing secondary schools in refugee hosting districts. The project was declared effective 19 May 2022 and is expected to close on 31 December 2025. It is important, honourable members, to note that although the project was signed to the last five years in the World Bank system, the five years are counted from the date of the bank’s Board approval in 2020. This, therefore, implies that almost two years of implementation were lost due to delayed approval of the project by Parliament and the ministry. We have to utilise the project funds within the three years. Madam Speaker, the project consists of the following components: Component 1: Expansion of Lower Secondary Education; Component 2: Support education in refugee hosting communities; Component 3: Improving Teachers’ Support and Strategy Development Nationally; Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation.Component 1 is composed of two subcomponents which include construction of new lower secondary school facilities. The subcomponent will finance construction of 116 new secondary schools in the subcounties and expansion of 61 existing secondary schools. All the new infrastructure will be furnished and equipped. The second subcomponent is ensuring safety and protection of children in the new and expanded existing schools. Regarding the status of construction of Busia Boarder Secondary School, the ministry has already identified the Eastern Division in Busia Municipality as one of the beneficiary subcounties or division. However, there are prior activities that have to be done before construction starts and these are: topography and cadastral survey, geotechnical survey and environmental and social impact assessments. These studies are critical when developing the standard bidding documents. Kyambogo University and the Ministry of Works and Transport are carrying out the topographical and geotechnical surveys, respectively, while the consultants were hired to do the environmental and social impact assessment. Madam Speaker, Busia Municipal Council submitted documents confirming that the school was granted two acres of land in Nangwe-Mugungu B, Central Parish in Eastern Division, not 25 acres as stated by Hon. Macho.Regarding the recommendation of Busia Border Seed Secondary School for a Uganda National Examinations Board –THE SPEAKER: Hon. Enosi, you had an issue of seedlings.MS NABBANJA: The ministry has advised the school to apply directly to UNEB and follow through the process. Hon. James Baba Boliba, Member of Parliament for Koboko County, raised a matter concerning [Ms Nabbanja] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME7845THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 30 MARCH 2023the confiscation of drones at Entebbe International Airport, especially from students studying information and communication technology and the professionals that use them as work instruments. His prayer is that Government clarifies the policy on drone use in Uganda?My response is that cognisant of the threats to national security facilitated by advancement in scientific and technological innovations, unmanned aerial vehicles (UA Vs) or drones have become weapons of war with lethal capabilities, including surveillance, target identification, acquisition and named engagements with precision strikes.Madam Speaker and colleagues, as a security measure, all entry points have been scrutinising the importation of drones and the other equipment that can potentially endanger national security. It is upon this background that the joint security at Entebbe International Airport got involved in the securing and declaring of all drones imported in the country.The procedure involves withholding imported drones on entry to allow due diligence by competent security authorities before security clearance is granted. After due clearance, the drones are forwarded to URA for customs and licensing as required. Many drones have since been cleared in line with this procedure. However, as of now, there are 243 uncleared drones for various reasons, which include 177 drones under security custody pending clearance at Entebbe Airport for reasons including: Verification; Lack of contact and proper addresses of the importers as well as consigners; andReluctance of importers to follow the security procedure. Sixty-six drones, which were unclaimed, abandoned for more than two years, were recently forwarded to URA Nakawa for further management, in accordance with the customs law. Madam Speaker, the Government urges the concerned importers to follow up and undertake the process of security and customs clearance of their items still in Government custody.Furthermore, private importers are encouraged to always engage with the responsible Government agencies for recommendation and quick clearance.Hon. Nakimuli Helen from Kalangala District raised a matter of concern that the illegal detention and killing of people - (Hon. Twesigye rose_)THE SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter.MR NATHAN TWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Prime Minister for answering questions. However, the Members who asked the questions are not in the House, yet the Prime Minister is giving the answers. THE SPEAKER: Is it the Prime Minister’s problem that they are not in the House? MR NATHAN TWESIGYE:  Chair my –THE SPEAKER: Are they not paid to be in the House when it is sitting time?MR NATHAN TWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, my concern-THE SPEAKER: Do not waste our time, Hon. Nathan; just sit down. Hon. Nakimuli is here; now if you are so negligent that you do not come and represent your people - you ask questions and then you disappear from the House, as if you are paid to loiter in the streets of Kampala. Prime Minister, go ahead. MS NABBANJA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our sister raised a matter of concern that there are illegal detentions and killings of people in Kalangala District. For instance, the death of Masaba Stephen of Buyange Landing Site on 29 January 2023, claimed to have been fishing using illegal fishing gear.Her prayer is: can Government explain the circumstances of his death?7846 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTMy response - this is the last point; I beg your indulgence colleagues. On 20 January 2023, the fisheries protection staff at Buyange Landing Site, Bubeke Subcounty Kalangala District arrested Zanga Stephen aka Masaba for illegal fishing using prohibited fishing gear and dealing in immature fish.He was detained at Bubeke Police Post pending further investigations and prosecution. Case reference number is CRB/078/2023. On 25 January 2023, he appeared before court, under case number 074/2023, pleaded not guilty, and he was remanded to Kalangala Prisons until the next hearing of February 2023. Madam Speaker, on the 28th of January, while on routine prison outdoor labour, Masaba attempted to escape prompting the prison warder to shoot in the air in order to prevent his escape. While running, Masaba fell into a ditch with rocks, sustaining a deep injury -THE SPEAKER: Hon. Charles, is it on the same thing? Why don’t you wait for the Prime Minister to finish then you raise your issue?MS NABBANJA:  He was evacuated to Kalangala Health Centre IV where he was later pronounced dead because of over-bleeding. Madam Speaker. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, Hon. Charles?MR MATOVU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Prime Minister for her response. This House passed the Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill to the effect that the army or the Fisheries Protection Unit be banned from manning the lakes. However, up to now, they are still surfacing, causing most of these deaths and unwarranted arrests. Is it procedurally right that the Prime Minister keeps mentioning the Fisheries Protection Units that are causing mayhem on almost all these landing sites, especially Bussi Island and Kalangala Island. There are numerous deaths and unwarranted arrests almost every week. Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence.THE SPEAKER: Is there anything on fisheries so that she answers them at a go? Yes, Hon. Teira?5.07MR JOHN TEIRA (NRM, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the issue of the military men and torture of our fishermen still persists despite the several engagements that we have had with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries as well as the Uganda People’s Defence Forces.A long River Nile – in the area that I represent – we, on a daily basis, continue getting cases of local fishermen being treated inhumanly under the pretext of illegal fishing. The enforcement officers are the jury, the executioner and the witnesses. This matter is affecting our integrity in the areas where fishing takes place. Can we, kindly, have an accurate and actual response to this matter that shall bring back sanity and dignity to these people? I thank you. 5.08MS HELEN NAKIMULI (NUP, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is almost the same, but different. When a law is passed and assented to by the President, we understand that regulations are supposed to be made by the line minister. We are wondering why this is taking very long because it was gazetted. There are no regulations, the minister is quiet and all this suffering is being inflicted on our people. Can we have the regulations in place so that the law is effective? Thank you.MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, the practice has been that they ask and I answer. PRIME MINISTER’S TIME [Ms Nabbanja]7847THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 30 MARCH 2023THE SPEAKER: No problem. MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, let me start with my sister’s question. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is coming up with regulations to operationalise the law that we passed in this House. I believe they will come here and table these regulations for us to acquaint ourselves with and, if there is anything, add value to these regulations.To my brothers who are complaining about the law enforcement officers on the lakes, let me take this opportunity to inform you that we have had a number of meetings concerning this issue because, naturally, it is also affecting our support on the lake shores. So, we are saying the army should have respect for the fishermen and the fishermen should also live within the law. Thank you.5.10MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am responding to the issue of Kenya.The Prime Minister said the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development is in close contact with Kenyan officials and there will be uninterrupted flow of petroleum products. She also said that there will be no interruption on trade because they are in touch. Our concern was: what if there is interruption? Last time there were demonstrations at the border, which affected the flow of fuel and fuel prices went up to Shs 10,000 per litre. When we went, as the committee for trade, we found that in Jinja, the reserves were not only empty, but dry. (Laughter) Now, our concern is: what if there is an interruption? Do we have an alternative or reserve? What is in the reserves of this country? Thank you.MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, I believe it is not good for this House to legislate in anticipation. I have given you the chronology of what is happening. I beg to submit.5.12MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa):  Madam Speaker, on the same possible adverse effects of the current political situation in Kenya, history has taught us… In 2007 – the skirmishes that were there – this geographical gateway for Ugandan supplies was cut off. Mombasa Port was paralysed completely and packed to capacity with containers. We expected you, in the mitigation strategies and solutions you were giving, to give an alternative of at least going through Dar es Salaam Port, but you did not mention anything like that. So, what solutions do you have in case we are completely cut off from the usual Kenyan route? MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, in 2007, I was the Resident District Commissioner of Busia and I know what happened during the Mungiki issue. This Government has got capacity, my dear brothers and sisters. The route of Tanzania notwithstanding, I assure this country that no interruptions will take place. 5.14MR ALLAN MAYANJA (NUP, Nakaseke Central County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can you give us the status of the African armyworm control in our country? I am raising this because the dangerous African armyworm has invaded Nakaseke District – parts of Kirinda, Butalangu, Wakyato and Kinyogoga. Banana and maize plantations have been destroyed.I need your response and immediate rescue plan for my farmers in Nakaseke. We wrote to the ministry, through the chief administrative officer, but have never been given any response. MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, this Government has built capacity over the years – you know how we handled the locusts. That 7848 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTcapacity still exists in this country. We shall go and handle that, too. 5.15MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is to do with the people who are dying in Kotido District, specifically in Panyangara and Rengen subcounties, as a result of total lack of food. Yesterday, we were in Kotido with 12 Members of Parliament. We got disappointed and some Members began crying when they saw elderly women dying on empty stomachs. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what urgent interventions are in place to rescue these lives?MS ANYAKUN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think my brother came late when I was making a submission here. We said that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has given us Shs 20 billion for food in Karamoja and so, the procurement is already done. The food will be taken this week to the region.THE SPEAKER: The food is going to be taken this week and as the Member of Parliament has said, people are dying. Please ensure that you start with that area.MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, we now have to focus on Kotido, Panyangara Subcounty and Ngenge. Let me direct the minister: Hon. Anyakun, I am directing you now to start with Kotido.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I want food in Kotido because our people are dying.5.18MS IDAH NANTABA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to refer to the statement by the minister, which she has just presented on the Floor. In that statement, she informed Parliament that 200 acres of land have been procured to resettle the people in Kayunga who are affected by the recent floods. I want to extend my sincere appreciation to the Prime Minister, because when you directed her to visit, she indeed conducted several visits, and she delivered relief items. She is now working on the road that had been washed off by the floods and she has bought us land. My only issue is that she bought only 200 acres, yet we have over 5,000 people who are affected. This land is so small and it cannot accommodate each and every one. My simple request is that the Prime Minister considers procuring more land because we will have more land. She assigned the Attorney-General and the Minister of Lands to take up that matter. Indeed, they tried to do that and they sent surveyors, who surveyed other portions of land, but all those have not been paid. We pray that money is located to have these other portions of land paid for such that we can resettle the affected persons because we do not even know who to settle, and who to leave out. That is already an issue. We thank her so much and request that she responds as soon as possible. MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, at least I have got somebody appreciating Government. I remember when we, in the Office of the Prime Minister, decided to use the Shs 5 billion to procure land and to restore the health facilities. Some people were complaining that providing relief items all the time is not the answer. I am happy to see that the honourable member at least appreciated it. We are going to look for money out of the little they have given us to see that we procure those other two pieces of land and also do the same in Kasese. The Kasese land had some problems. The families that sold the land went to the IGG, saying that the individual had not shared the money with the family members. However, the IGG has cleared it now. So, I want to answer the member from Kasese who asked about this; the IGG has cleared that issue and Government bought this land using the resources that you, people, allocated. The people are now going to settle on that land. Thank you.PRIME MINISTER’S TIME [Ms Nabbanja]7849THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 30 MARCH 2023THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when asking a question, do not first create a problem statement. Let us go straight to the question and the Prime Minister will answer. Just in half a minute.5.21MS JANE BAINOMUGISHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two concerns: In Ibanda, we have got minerals and as you may be aware, the district officials - the people from Ibanda, are the ones supposed to benefit from these minerals. Madam Speaker, you will be surprised to know that some of our local leaders in the district, especially in the areas of Irimya and other areas where we have minerals, had their mining licenses cancelled, and some of them are being denied mining licenses. My prayer is that let the first beneficiaries of the minerals be the residents of the district. The second concern is about our roads. In Ibanda, we have got terrible roads and most of them are UNRA roads. We have Kagongo Road. It has been the talk of the day in the district.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, ask one question because everyone wants to speak.MS BAINOMUGISHA: I would like to request the Prime Minister to help us with these roads - Bisheshe and Kyangwahanda. It is an issue in the district. I thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you.MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, on the issue of minerals, colleagues, I want you to appreciate and support Government that we should add value to our minerals. This will give us jobs and industries. The President directed that we add value to our minerals. If you have a mining license, and you do not have the capacity to add value to our minerals - that is why some of those licenses are being cancelled. We have the minister of state in charge of that docket. Please come and add.5.24THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENER-GY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Sidronius Okaasai): Mad-am Speaker, the question which she poses, she has actually had an interaction with the minis-try and revoking the licenses was actually by law, which this Parliament passed and we are going back to streamline the licensing accord-ing to the new law. Those who are affected are actually free to come back to the ministry and we shall give them clearances according to the law. If they conform to the new law, they will be given licenses and if they do not, then the licenses will remain revoked. I submit.5.25MR JOHN MUSILA (Independent, Bubulo East County, Namisindwa): I am happy, Madam Speaker, that you have not forgotten me. I have two concerns for the Prime Minister. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: Just say only one; the most crucial one.MR MUSILA: I may get confused on that guidance; but anyway, most obliged, Madam Speaker. Number one is the issue of Kenya - for those of us who are close to the border. I want to also support the Prime Minister that the traffic flow is perfect.Lwakhakha is a return border point, where we have about 1,200 trucks and we have maintained the number. That shows that those bringing in goods are returning smoothly. Even those who export - those of us at the border, are doing well. Concern number two - Madam Speaker, please just give me one minute - is about the issue of compensation and assistance in Bugisu. Hon. Nambeshe, myself and others know that Give Direct promised us Shs 7 million, which is okay, but Government added Shs 10 million. I wish to announce to the country and the Parliament today, that it should not be an insulator when it comes here - I am not a prophet of doom, but to say that you are going to give 7850 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTShs 17 million and then move people away - I do not know the rationale of that because in Bulambuli, one house goes for about Shs 60 million. Land goes about for about Shs 40 or 50 million, which makes it Shs 100 million. What would be the rationale of giving a Mugisu, who is being moved away, Shs 17 million? And where do you get land in Bugisu, even a quarter an acre, at Shs 17 million? THE SPEAKER: Thank you.MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, we have held over seven meetings in Kampala and locally, and the honourable member has always been present. People are dying. Government does not have enough resources to relocate them, and some people are no longer there, anyway. Yes, some are camped in schools and some are living with relatives. However, my office, together with the MPs, including Hon. Musila, came up with a strategy and said for Bunambutye, like you heard our brother say, it will take 54 years; it is going to take so long yet people continue to die. So, the Office of the Prime Minister, together with the leaders and local leaders, agreed to let people relocate to other areas rather than losing lives, day in, day out. I am wondering why my brother now - because some people left long ago without anything - and he is one of those members who suggested that we go urbanisation. So, I am reminding you, brother, let us not fail this because your people will die anytime – (Interjections)  – yes, it is not good for us to continue losing lives like this; just support Government.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a bird in the hand is worth two in the forest.  Let us first have the small bird, as we anticipate for so many in the air. Hon. Asiimwe.5.29MR ENOSI ASIIMWE (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, well aware that Government changed its policy to supply free seedlings and moved funds to the Parish Development Model (PDM), and well much aware that the PDM has not been implemented, this Parliament, during the last financial year, allocated Shs 30 billion to Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) to continue supplying free seedlings to farmers as we wait for implementation of the PDM. This money has, however, not been given out or has not been released to the Uganda Coffee Development Authority yet this is the second season. Last season, the Minister of Finance allowed the coffee nursery operators to supply UCDA on credit. That was around Shs 42 billion, and farmers were given seedlings in November. However, this season, UCDA has been quiet, and Government is quiet yet Parliament appropriated Shs 30 billion towards that, well knowing that the PDM will not have been implemented by this season. Madam Prime Minister, we are here to ask that you push the Ministry of Finance - even if they do not have resources, which we might understand - to allow coffee nursery operators to supply farmers with seedlings on credit as we mobilise the resources, considering that already the money was appropriated. We can wait for the money to be available to pay the operators, but at least, farmers should have seedlings this coming season if we are to achieve our roadmap - we had targeted to produce 20 million bags. At the time of these interventions, we were at 3.5 million bags, and we have now reached 8 million bags. However, if we do not sustain our interventions, we might fail to achieve our roadmap of 2017 for coffee growth. Thank you.MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, I am reliably informed that you already came up PRIME MINISTER’S TIME [Mr Musila]7851THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 30 MARCH 2023with a directive to the Executive, that the Ministry of Agriculture comes back here with a statement. I request that we allow the Minister of Agriculture to come back so that I do not “beat about the bush.” THE SPEAKER: There was an issue raised by the Leader of the Opposition and the MP for Masaka and Hon. Frank Tumwebaze is supposed to report back to the House on Tuesday. So, forward your question on those matters. MR ENOSI ASIIMWE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The question had to do with cutting trees or closing nursery operators’ gardens in Masaka.THE SPEAKER: Let us incorporate yours into what Hon. Frank Tumwebaze is supposed to bring.5.32MS AISA AGABA (NRM, Bugangaizi East County, Kakumiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Greetings from the people of Bugangaizi East. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I have been hearing about compensations in Karamoja, Bugisu and everywhere. However, we have people who were moved from Mpokya since 1992, and they are all over Uganda - Kasese, Kamwenge, Bugangaizi East in Kakumiro District, Kagadi, and Isingiro.Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when do you plan to compensate – okay, while some were compensated, others have not been compensated. When are you compensating the people that were moved from Mpokya? Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Those are the Prime Minister’s voters.MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, my voters have been compensated in a phased manner and Government continues to compensate these people.5.34MS CATHELINE NDAMIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question is about the Batwa community. My fellow colleagues from Rubanda and Kabale have been raising this issue.The Batwa were chased out of the forest where they used to enjoy all goodies. They were forced to live with the people they were not used to and no land was allocated to them for farming. They have suffered the hunger, season in, season out. I wrote to request for food from the disaster preparedness department, which I think is under your docket, but the minister told me that the Batwa issue is not a disaster. However, I want to let you know that they have become a disaster to the people they are living with. They just steal from other farmers and so, I would like to know where these people should be relocated. I thank you.THE SPEAKER: I am not sure whether they steal, but they help themselves with whatever they get because that will be a very strong word for them; that they are thieves?MS NDAMIRA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, because those others are complaining a lot. And even the Batwa are complaining; they want Government to also consider them. And if not helped, they are vowing to go back to the forest.MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, His Excellency, the President wrote and directed me to handle the issue of the Batwa and the Benet. The Office of the Prime Minister, together with the Ministry of Tourism, have had about seven meetings since this issue started. We are looking for a way of settling them permanently.I want to assure my sister that we shall handle this matter conclusively, though we have delayed. Secondly, I have reliable information that these Batwa have been working for people 7852 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTand they are usually paid, and it is that pay they use to survive. They are not thieves.THE SPEAKER: I told you they are not thieves. (Laughter) Yes, Member for Moroto. (Laughter) Okay, let us have both of you, but starting with the lady. 5.37MS STELLA ATYANG (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in 2019, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development allocated money, Shs 4.7 billion, to construct a remand home in Moroto District. That remand home was supposed to be completed by 2021, but to date, it has stalled and looks abandoned. What has happened? When will this remand home be completed? Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, Minister of Gender.5.38THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that under the Justice, Law and Order Sector, we got financing to construct that remand home three years ago. The contractor was given the task. Unfortunately, at one point, the district indicated that they needed a diversion because of the wetland that was near the site. However, we have resolved most of the outstanding issues with the contractor and we have given him a timeline within which to conclude. We will soon resume and finish the construction. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: You need to give the MP a timeline; what timeline you have agreed on so that there is certainty.MS AMONGI: We have given the contractor six months to complete the construction.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Stella Atyang, make a follow-up within the six months when it should be completed. 5.39MR SAMUEL OKWIR (NRM, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have a question for the Prime Minister. In 2017, Government grant-aided Akora Seed Secondary School - it is at the centre of my constituency. However, to date, the parents struggled and erected two structures to accommodate Senior One and Senior Two students. They are now up to Senior Four, but still, the students are studying in a very funny place. Now that the rains have come, they do not have proper classrooms in which to conduct lessons. I want to know, from the Prime Minister, the plans Government has to ensure that Akora Subcounty, which houses Akora Seed Secondary School, also benefits from the funding that Government is pushing towards the improvement of secondary education in this country. Finally, Madam Speaker, heavy rains destroyed crops - I have two subcounties that are in the floodplains - that is Abia and Aloyi. Last week, two parishes of Alebtong and Amuria were destroyed completely. And I whispered to the minister in charge of disaster preparedness. She told me all activities have stalled; they are only looking at delivering food supplies for now. What is it that Government can do to also support these farmers whose crops have all been destroyed? I thank you.MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, on Akora Seed Secondary School, I suggest that you allow me engage the ministry, since they are not represented here.THE SPEAKER: Education is present.5.41THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You are all aware that the policy of PRIME MINISTER’S TIME [Ms Nabbanja]7853THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 30 MARCH 2023Government is to have a seed secondary school per subcounty. Now that Akora Subcounty is among those, which do not have, the Ministry of Education and Sports has a plan to implement the policy when funds are available. I thank you.THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (MS Esther Anyakun): Madam Speaker, kindly allow me respond to the issue of the disaster that happened in his constituency. At the moment, we have hailstorms and fortunately, the Ministry of Agriculture said they are going to give us seeds. Members, I request that when you have a hailstorm, for now, all we need is replacement - unless it is a disaster that has affected a household or an institution where we need to do replacement. Otherwise, for now, regarding that kind of disaster that destroys crops, we only need replacement by replanting.THE SPEAKER: So, are you saying we should not plant now because there are hailstorms?MS ANYAKUN: For those that have been destroyed during hailstorms, we can replant. THE SPEAKER: Is it in the whole country? My place, for example, isn’t experiencing hailstorms, and so, we want the seeds to plant. (Laughter)MS ANYAKUN: Madam Speaker, the hailstorms are mostly in the western part of the country, right from Rakai, Ibanda -THE SPEAKER: Give us the seeds; we shall know what to do with them.5.45MR MOSES ALEPER (NRM, Chekwii County (Kadam), Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of serious security concern. Something unprecedented in Karamoja is happening in the corridors of Nakapiripirit and Amudat districts. There is a group of armed criminals that has been stealing property and killing people since January this year -THE SPEAKER: Hon. Josephat, leave my Prime Minister to listen.MR MOSES ALEPER: Since January this year, we have so far lost 11 people in Nakapiripirit District and over 2,000 heads of cattle stolen in 13 incidents. On the 6th day of January, we lost four people and subsequently, until about a week ago, we have lost people - 11 lives have been lost. Every other day, this group of armed people is wreaking havoc and they are doing it with ease at their own time. Actually, they have overwhelmed the security in the place. The situation is so alarming that for the last nine days - today is the ninth night - I and other Members of Parliament from both Nakapiripirit and Amudat districts have not rested. We receive phone calls from people crying. People are living in fear and panic. Right now, I am sure we would be receiving phone calls; it is only that we are in the House now. The situation is so dire; it is so bad. It has never happened over a period of 10 years. Therefore, I request that the Minister of Defence, the Minister of Internal Affairs and the top UPDF leadership should be marshalled, so that we go for an on-spot visit to the place because people are living in fear and the situation is terrible; this has never happened before. Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Moses Aleper.MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, regarding the armed warriors in Karamoja, I believe we have had about 20 meetings, including the one that the President organised in the Karamoja Subregion. The attacks usually subside, but then come back. The President, recently, directed that we use the helicopters and also add more troops in 7854 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTthe subregion. I am going to follow up so that the troops are increased in Karamoja. I beg to submit.MR MOSES ALEPER: I would like to inform the Prime Minister that what is happening is not the normal cattle rustling; it is something very unique. In fact, they have now gone to the extent of stealing household property. Our people cannot rest. I wish you could just get a team to go with me to the place right now; this is not the normal raiding –THE SPEAKER: Hon. Moses Aleper, now that the Prime Minister is aware of the issue, follow up with her. Please, when the Prime Minister is leaving, move out and give her full information. Action will be taken. If it means going on the ground, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, please, have a team go on the ground and have that sorted out. MR ALEPER: Thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, although the minister cannot ask, Hon. Anyakun has been to my office twice and there are certain things we have already put in place. I assure the honourable member that we are going to follow through until our people get total peace.5.47MR PAUL NINKUSIIMA (NRM, Ibanda County South, Ibanda):  Madam Speaker, thank you, for allowing me to ask the Prime Minister – people are talking as if -THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please proceed.MR NINKUSIIMA:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister, National Medical Stores (NMS) supplies drugs to our health centres and hospitals in cycles. Cycles one and two are usually supplied in July and September, respectively. However, both cycles were combined and supplied in December. As I speak, Cycle three that is supposed to be supplied in December and Cycle 4, which is supposed to be supplied in February, have not been supplied. Right now, health centres in Ibanda – and this is not in Ibanda only, but all health centres in Uganda, including those in Kakumiro, Bukedea and other districts - (Laughter) - do not have even the cheapest drugs like Panadol – my nickname – in those health centres. The National Medical Stores says they are going to continue combining cycles, time after time. It is like missing lunch and you are given dinner and lunch at the same time. This results into wastage, theft and, to some extent, drug expiry. Therefore, the NMS is essentially asking whoever got sick in those previous months to be sick again at the time when they would be supplying medicines. My prayer is that the NMS should start supplying drugs as per the cycles rather than combining them. This is because, first of all, when you bring drugs for, say four cycles, you will not have stores in which to keep those drugs. So, somehow people end up stealing drugs, yet our people are suffering. Therefore, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, kindly, give us a stand as a country and what the Ministry of Health is supposed to do to make sure our poor people are able to access free health care.MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, I would like to remind the House that you gave me directives in January, when we had a crisis of drugs across the country. The Ministry of Health, the Government Chief Whip and the National Medical Stores, had several meetings with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the issue was one: NMS said going on the IFMS had always delayed them.Therefore, we directed the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to provide money more quickly to the NMS and I believe they have done so. That is why they have started distributing drugs. Thank you.PRIME MINISTER’S TIME [Ms Nabbanja]7855THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 30 MARCH 2023THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Angura.5.51MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Prime Minister for the statement concerning our relationship with Kenya. I would like to say and assure the Members here that at the borders, especially on my side – Malaba Border and the long corridor that we share with Kenya, activities are going on normally. I think that is good enough. However, the Government of Uganda should liaise with the Government of Kenya on giving confidence to our people who are moving on roads. What happened in 2007 should not happen again. Where necessary, convoys should be organised for those who want to move or there could be collection centres where they can park for the two days – Monday and Thursday – when the riots are going on and then be escorted so as to move without any challenge. Also, Madam Prime Minister - THE SPEAKER: What is your question? MR ANGURA: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the request I am putting to you is that we have a challenge with surveillance in terms of security. Most of the subcounties along the borderline do not have security posts. They also do not have motorcycles to support in the surveillance and management of the cross-border movements. Recently, our neighbours have taken advantage of the problems across the border and escalated the theft of animals that are crossing to Kenya, yet our people cannot cross to recover those animals because of the challenges in surveillance. So, my request is that we should enhance the security support to the Gombolola Internal Security Officers (GISOs) who do not have motorcycles. Let us also enhance the support to the police posts that are along the border in order to support the movement of our people without any challenge. I thank you. THE SPEAKER: Yes, Prime Minister.MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, like I told you in my report, the Government of Uganda is prepared for any eventuality. We are doing both covert – the surveillance is ongoing. I assure my brother that we do not use only these – sometimes, you cannot see them moving, but we are surveilling that border. That is why we have a peaceful coexistence with our neighbours.5.55MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, health is number one, but in Gulu Regional Referral Hospital - I heard that we received a CT scan a long time ago. Why are we delaying to operationalise it? We still bring our people up to Mulago yet it is very expensive. What is the problem with the CT scan that was budgeted for in Financial Year 2021/2022? I also have an issue with the remand home in Gulu. The remand home was originally built to serve Gulu District, but right now, it is serving two subregions - Acholi and Lango subregions. The staffing is not enough. The children are not rehabilitated. Why are we doing a disservice to our children? We piled them there - there were more than 150 in a very small place. Why do we do that? Thank you. MS NABBANJA : Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank Parliament for allocating resources for the Government to buy these CT scans across the country. All our regional hospitals received CT scans. The biomedical engineers will be facilitated to make sure that these CT scans are installed and are functional. (Interjections)  - Regarding the timeline, the Ministry of Health will give them to Parliament. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is coming to 6.00 p.m.; it is time to break the fast. 5.57MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The central bank is a key institution in this country in stabilising the economy. However, since we lost the central bank governor, we 7856 MINISTERIAL STATEMENThave not had a replacement. The board of the Bank of Uganda expired on the 18th of February. Today is the 30th day of March and we do not have a board of the Bank of Uganda. When is the central bank going to have a full board, it being a key institution in this country? I remember, the Leader of the Opposition raised this matter before 18 February and gave you a warning but to date, there is nothing. MS NABBANJA: I would like to thank my brother. Let me take this opportunity to inform you that I am going to remind the appointing authority about this.5.58MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The rains have come back and in 2018, Barrio Primary School was de-roofed. We asked for iron sheets, but they were not given. When are we getting our iron sheets? Even with Angolo Primary School, the community had to intervene when I wrote letters and failed to get the iron sheets. Therefore, when will Barrio Primary School – MS NABBANJA:  Honourable members, the Office of the Prime Minister has got six ministries that give out iron sheets. The Ministry for Northern Uganda, as we talk, still has 4,500 iron sheets in the stores. The Ministry for Teso Affairs, as we talk, has 2,800 iron sheets in the store. The Ministry for Disaster Preparedness, as we talk, still has 1,400 iron sheets. I want to know the number of iron sheets you need and then, through the Minister of Disaster Preparedness, we shall give them to you. THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Disaster Preparedness, give them the iron sheets. MS ANYAKUN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have requisitions from colleagues here on disaster-related issues in their districts. From what we got from this quarter, we want to - THE SPEAKER: The Prime Minister has issued an order. MS ANYAKUN: We shall include hers after I have finished giving our colleagues here who requested prior. THE SPEAKER: The Prime Minister has ordered you to give her the iron sheets. Hon. Santa Alum, please, tomorrow, follow-up on your iron sheets. 6.01 MS SANTA OKOT (PPP, Aruu North County, Pader): Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me the opportunity. I have heard the minister make a presentation of services under the disaster ministry. However, I would like to inform the minister that I did not hear anything about the distribution of food to our children who are suffering from the Nodding syndrome. These are no longer children, Madam Speaker; they are now youth who are becoming very wild in the community. I would like to report that in December, one of them hit his father to death. There were three in the family affected by this disease, but one boy - something came to his mind; he took a log and hit the father on the head. According to medical personnel, these children like to eat food most of the time and so when the parent fails to provide food, they get into trouble. This also gives me time to alert the Government that maybe at a certain time, we need to begin thinking about having rehabilitation centres. Kitgum, Lamwo, Pader and part of Omoro districts are affected. Where are we going to put these boys and girls who are a little bit mad and do not understand themselves? They will start raping girls and women on the way. We need to start thinking about that because they are not a few people; they are really many.Nonetheless, for now, I want to hear from the state minister whether there is food going to be given to them because normally, they give food to the parents. Thank you. MS ANYAKUN: Thank you, Madam Speaker and my sister, Santa. We have been giving relief items to the Nodding Syndrome children in Omoro, Pader and all the affected districts, PRIME MINISTER’S TIME [Mr Okupa]7857THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 30 MARCH 2023but I want to promise you that we are going to give another round of food to them. 6.03MS BARODA KAYANGA (Independent, Kamuli Municipality, Kamuli): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. We were promised that a modern market would be built in Kamuli Municipality. While currently most municipalities have had modern markets constructed there, Kamuli hasn’t got one. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when should we expect our market in Kamuli Municipality? Thank you.6.03THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are still negotiating with the development partners. We will keep the Member informed on the market for Kamuli. THE SPEAKER: When can the Member get in touch with you?MR MAGYEZI: We expect a final position –(Interjection)–  not tonight -(Laughter)- Madam Speaker, protect me from harassment – THE SPEAKER: Please, let her know when she can come over to your office. MR MAGYEZI: Kindly, on Thursday next week, get in touch with my office. 6.03MR NOMAN OCHERO (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I have two brief questions – THE SPEAKER: Just ask one. MR OCHERO: The rains have started again and people now fear going to the gardens because of insecurity. Where are the tractors, which are meant for Karamoja? Most districts have received tractors. The rains have started and Karamoja, as usual, is still moving slowly. Secondly, we have mobilised enough children to go to school. However, in my district alone, half of the children are using stones for chairs in class. What is the plan by the Ministry of Education and Sports to provide chairs for children in school?THE SPEAKER: But are there classroom blocks? MR OCHERO: At least there are some classroom blocks, but even in the classrooms, children sit on stones because there are no chairs. MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, I received a report from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries that nine tractors were allocated to our people in Karamoja. I request that you allow me, together with the agriculture minister, to come back with a report on where these tractors were allocated. On the issue of stones being used by children in schools as chairs, the Minister of Education and Sports is here.6.05THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Madam Speaker, first of all, it is very unfortunate that in some parts of this country, we still have children in classrooms sitting on stones; I regret that -(Interjections) - honourable members, listen to me for the answer. We have what we call the school capitation grant. This money is usually sent to the districts. It is from that money that districts plan to procure desks for the schools. As the Ministry of Education and Sports, we continue to call upon the finance ministry to increase the budget to facilitate us to get out of that predicament. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, first find out how much was sent to Karamoja for buying desks. That is when we will be able to determine whether the money went or not. If it did not go, then consider that school.7858 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTMR OGWANG: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. I am happy that we have the Minister of Local Government here. As the Minister of Education and Sports, I will endeavor to get the correct figure for Karamoja Subregion. However, I would like to implore the Minister of Local Government to follow it up with the rest of the country.THE SPEAKER: We need a response on that. Give feedback to the Member, and copy me in. 6.08MR JOSEPHAT TUMWESIGYE (NRM, Bugangaizi South County, Kakumiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is about a situation in my constituency, which affects specifically Kasambya Subcounty. There are two parishes, Semuto and Mutembo. We have a small sanctuary of chimpanzees; unfortunately, it is not a gazetted wildlife reserve. These chimpanzees are growing in number and affecting the communities. Because the population of the chimpanzee is growing, the food in the forest is not enough and so, they keep reaching out to the communities. In doing that, they destroy gardens. Two people have so far been mauled by these chimpanzees. Recently, a kid of three years was killed. This renders most of the families to keep their children at home for fear that they will be killed by the chimpanzees.Madam Speaker, Nayebare Innocent of Genza LC I was mauled by a chimpanzee. Another one called Banturaki Sitidia of Kisoro LC I was also mauled by a chimpanzee and the child who was killed was Tumukunde Abrah. This happened on 31 January 2023. The girl was aged three years. My prayer to Government is that these families should be compensated. The lasting solution, however, is that the chimpanzees should be relocated from that place. This because  Kihaimira Central Forest Reserve, that I am talking about, which is only five square kilometres, cannot sustain the ever-growing number of chimpanzees. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Yesterday, the same issue was raised by Hon. Tinkasiimire.MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, Kakumiro and Kasambya are in my constituencies. We have had a number of meetings and I am aware that we lost some lives. In 2017, chimpanzees took away a baby. We rescued that baby after two days. My brother, I need to inform you and direct the minister, who is here, to go and relocate the chimpanzees forthwith to a better place because we need them for tourism. The communities had started killing them, but we restrained them. I request that you relocate the chimpanzees from Kakumiro.THE SPEAKER: Take your chimpanzees to a gazetted area and they should stop killing our children.6.12MR ELISA RUTAHIGWA (NRM, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to ask a question to the Prime Minister. In Uganda, one in every seven children is an orphan. In addition, about 3.5 million children are orphans to HIV/AIDS. In our communities, the care for these orphans is not clear. I want to give an example of education. When they go to school - yes, we have Universal Primary Education (UPE) and Universal Secondary Education (USE), but there many other needs like scholastic materials, uniforms and the rest that these orphans need.The orphans are not cared for; it is “To Whom It May Concern.” When it comes to university or other tertiary institutions - I know there is an affirmative action for women, they are given 1.5 points at university entry. However, the orphans are not thought about.Madam Speaker, how can the Government support these vulnerable children through education? If it means having some memorandum of understanding with even PRIME MINISTER’S TIME7859THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 30 MARCH 2023private schools - for sure, orphans in Uganda need attention. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: If you are talking about orphans, then it should be all orphans not only those who became orphans due to HIV/AIDS. There are even orphans who emerged due to accidents. I am actually a total orphan. How are you going to help us, the orphans? (Laughter)MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, I am wondering whether the Member is also talking about senior orphans like you and I. (Laughter). Anyhow, this is a matter we need to think through because a number of our children have failed to go to school. Though Government has put in place a number of interventions like UPE and USE, still, there are orphans who do not have scholastic materials to enable them go to school. We need to think through this with the Minister of Education and Sports.6.15MS CAROLINE KAMUSIIME (NRM, Woman representative, Rukiga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. My issue is about the presidential pledges. This issue is long overdue. The President promised to tarmac the Muhanga-Kisiizi -Kebisoni-Rukungiri Road and I have been mentioning this issue since the 10th Parliament. We were expecting it to be worked on this financial year. Now that the Prime Minister is here, can you give us whatever you are planning? Should we expect that road to be tarmacked or it will never be because it has been long overdue?Secondly, we thank Government, we were able to –THE SPEAKER: Please, one question.MS KAMUSIIME: Just one more.MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, the road she is mentioning is one of those priority roads under NDP III and Government is going to prioritise that road.6.17MR HASSAN KIRUMIRA (NUP, Katikamu County South, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In Luweero District, we have River Lumansi  and it has burst its banks, breaking and destroying three major roads – the road from Kalule to Waluleeta and then the one from Wobulenzi to Waluleeta, through Bakijulula.The question is that this road has been there for so many years and these rains keep coming, year in, year out. I want to know the plan for the people of Luweero and Bakijurula . Last week, a six-year-old child was taken away by the running water while crossing the river from school. So, I want to know from the Prime Minister, what the plan for these roads is? MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, the President has directed that roads in Luweero District be prioritised. We have a road that is going to be worked on - Luweero-Butalango up to Ngoma and of course, with a “V” through the bridge that you are talking about to this town council whose name I have forgotten - (Interjection) - it is not Nakaseke. We are also going to have this road from Matugga to Kapeeka, connecting directly to Semuto. Thank you very much. 6.18MS SUSAN ABEJA (Independent, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you directed last time, when I submitted my letter to you, that the Ministry of Water and Environment should provide us with water for irrigation, indeed they went and did the survey. My request to the Prime Minister is for her to do what you, Madam Speaker did, by making a phone call to the Ministry of Water and Environment to provide us with water for production, which is through Nexus Green Limited. The money is there and it is not going to come from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Thank you.7860 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTMS NABBANJA: Since she is suggesting a phone call, I will definitely do the same -(Laughter)- and I will come back to her.Members, I request that once in a while, come to our offices. Some of these things can be settled in the office. I have always said that my doors are open to you, honourable members. Thank you. 6.19MR HANNINGTON WAKAYIMA (NUP, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: If you have spoken today, you are not going to speak again. MR WAKAYIMA: Madam Speaker, in urban areas, there is increasing groups of radical youth who are becoming a problem. In Nansana, we have a group that has graduated from actually stealing to now killing people. In one of our areas called Kibwa, they killed three people. There is also another group that sits in the early morning taxis and those early morning passengers get problems. They rob them – THE SPEAKER: They kill using what? MR WAKAYIMA: They kill using machetes. THE SPEAKER: That is the same thing that was raised by Hon. Oshabe yesterday. I think you need to interest yourself in it.MR WAKAYIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, some members of those gangs have been arrested. Those are some of the people they were claiming that Government is witch-hunting and arresting -(Interjecting) - yes, it is true and you know some of these names. The Ministry of Internal Affairs will continue to pacify the country and make sure these gangs are arrested. And when we arrest them, please, colleagues, give us support. These people are a menace to you and to the community. They may be your supporters, but allow Government and security agencies to do their work. Lastly, the Ministry of Internal Affairs through the Uganda Police Force has always requested support from us. Let me give you an example –THE SPEAKER: In terms of information.MS NABBANJA:  Yes, Madam Speaker. Recently, they nearly killed one of the parliamentary reporters; that young man who reports for NTV and he is called Ronald Galiwango. They nearly killed him and he comes from Nansana. We arrested some of these gangsters and we will continue to arrest them. And when we arrest them, colleagues, give us support.THE SPEAKER: Today they are killing others; tomorrow they will kill you.6.22MR PAUL OMARA (Independent, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question relates to tax arrears on Gold exports. The 10th Parliament enacted a mining law, which provided for a 5 per cent tax on a kilogramme of refined Gold exports. This law could not be implemented because there was serious disagreement between the Gold refining companies and the Uganda Revenue Authority. However, the 11th Parliament, in 2022, repealed the Mining Act, 2003 and cured the lacuna in the law, by passing a provision in the new Mining Act under Section 287(2)(s), which says that a tax of Shs 200 per kilogramme of Gold exported will be applied.The provision of the law allows for the retrospective application of the tax, effective 1 July 2021. My question to the Prime Minister, therefore, is: can the minister responsible for minerals, as a matter of urgency, brief this House on why her ministry has not facilitated the recovery of the tax arrears since we are running a deficit budget? The amount anticipated is about Shs 350 billion. PRIME MINISTER’S TIME7861THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 30 MARCH 2023Can the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development update this House on the total outstanding Gold export tax arrears accumulated since 1 July 2021 and whether the ministry has included a tax on Gold exports in the Financial Year 2023/2024 budget estimates? I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Okaasai, that is not for answering now. We need to know how much the tax arrears are and what your plans for recovering the tax arrears are. We are going into appropriation and we need all this money. So, report back on Tuesday on how much the tax arrears are. Link up with the honourable member; it is a very serious matter. For us, we want money.6.26THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Sidronius Okaasai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of tax is not the responsibility of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development.However – THE SPEAKER: Work together with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and ensure we have the information as a House. MR OKAASAI: That is okay, but I want to make one thing clear: when the law was amended, we actually signed a statutory instrument for the recovery of that money from Gold exporters and that  statutory  instrument is now effective. This means Uganda Revenue Authority can go ahead to recover that money from the Gold exporters.THE SPEAKER: Honourable Okaasai, can you take the instruction of the House, follow up and ensure the money is recovered. Let us not work in isolation. What does it cost you to get in touch with URA and find out whether it has been recovered or not?MR OKAASAI: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: We are helping you to recover these monies. Honourable members, the Prime Minister is tired.6.26MR SIMON PETER OPOLOT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a question to the Ministry of Education and Sports. In January 2021, the President officially opened two secondary schools, which had been built in memory of the war victims who were killed during the UPA (Uganda People’s Army) war in Teso. The secondary schools are Kabwele and Ojie. However, to date, the buildings are still empty. The students went there forcefully and we had to look for untrained teachers to teach them because Government has not yet taken over the schools. I wonder why the Ministry of Education and Sports is delaying to code these two secondary schools that were built in memory of the people who were killed by UPA soldiers. Honourable minister of education, when are you coding these schools and when is the Government taking over the management of these schools by posting there headmasters, teachers and ensuring all the furniture and logistics required are in place? Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you.MR OGWANG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank Hon. Opolot. Well, I have heard the question. I had personally not known that those schools - but to the best of my knowledge, those schools were constructed by the Ministry for Teso Affairs. Now that there is an issue of grant-aiding them, let me take it up with the ministry and report back to the honourable colleague directly. Madam Speaker, I thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 7862 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTMR SIMON PETER OPOLOT: To correct you, they were constructed by State House. MR OGWANG: Thank you for the correction.6.28MS LINDA AUMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker.One of my questions is on the issue of education in Etek and Amach subcounties in Erute South, and this is in regard to the Government programme of having a seed secondary school in every subcounty. These two subcounties are struggling with the construction of their schools. I would like to know the plans the Ministry of Education and Sports has for the two subcounties.The second question is to the Minister of Local Government. Amach is one of the oldest subcounties in Lira District. When they created a town council, Amach Sub-county disappeared, but in the Government’s administrative plan, its code and money is sent to the district. I notice that it is only lacking political support to make it operational. When do you plan to have elections in Amach Subcounty?MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, let me give information to the honourable members that the Government is looking for Shs 1.98 trillion to ensure that in every parish, there is a school and that in every subcounty, there is a Government-aided school. Once we have this money, all your subcounties will be covered. However, the Minister of Education and Sports is here to add some more information. THE SPEAKER: Thank you.MR OGWANG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true, as the Prime Minister has clearly stated, that there is a budget that we require, as Ministry of Education and Sports, which will cover all parishes, as far as the policy on having a primary school per parish and a secondary school per subcounty, is concerned. For this specific subject matter of my sister, Hon. Linda Auma, I will cross-check whether those subcounties are already in the plan for the Ministry of Education and Sports’ budget for the coming financial year or the subsequent financial year, 2024/2025 – THE SPEAKER: And give her a response.MR OGWANG: Yes, I will give her a response.MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There was a question on Amach Subcounty. In 2020, we got a ruling from court that we cannot, in the time between the elections, request for a general election in a subcounty. So, we have to wait until the next elections to handle the issue of Amach. We will discuss it in 2025 and see how to bring it forward during the 2026 general elections. I thank you. 6.32MS CLARE MUGUMYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity to inform the Prime Minister about the disaster that befell Isingiro District. We received heavy rains and hailstorms, and more than 40 villages were affected. People’s houses lost roofs, churches were run down, two bridges were run down and we lost two lives. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you have been appreciated before for always assisting such communities well in time, but it is now coming to a month since we had this disaster. Actually, people in those communities are now internally displaced – staying with relatives, friends and neighbours. We request that you come to our rescue. Please, supply us with food rations because people have nothing to eat. Supply us with seeds for fast-maturing crops so that we are able to recover fast. Further, supply us with building materials, including iron sheets -(Laughter)- so that we get the damaged institutions back and operational. We also request that you help us to repair the bridges so that the road network can be restored. PRIME MINISTER’S TIME7863THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 30 MARCH 2023Lastly, Madam Speaker, we have been promised a road from Isingiro to Rakai for over 20 years. Isingiro is a refugee-hosting community; we have two big refugee camps. We have waited for that road for more than two decades. I understand there is money available for that road, but we keep wondering why it is not getting implemented in time. I beg your intervention in time.MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, Clare is called Ow’Amizi Marungi. (Laughter) Ow’Amizi Marungi means a lady with very good water. (Laughter)Madam Speaker, that was a light moment. On the road from Rakai to Isingiro, I want to say that we are currently using UNRA engineers to do the feasibility study because that road will be worked on using money from the World Bank; it is a grant. We are going to use Development Response to Displacement Impacts Project (DRDIP) to work on that road, and then the minister can talk about the disaster. Thank you.THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (MS Esther Anyakun):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was in Isingiro District yesterday. We went there together with the European Union delegation. I got a report from the Chief Administrative Officer, which I forwarded to the accounting officer this morning so that some support can be extended to the People of Isingiro. Thank you.6.35MR HILLARY KIYAGA (NUP, Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, around October last year, I reported to your office and to the Ministry of Health something about the Kampiringisa health facility that got unroofed. Your office replied and promised that they were going to send a team on the ground. I am battling to put a temporary shelter despite asking for help from Government and nothing being done on the ground. You can imagine the heavy rains going on right now - what I am going through, on behalf of the Government. To make matters worse, Kampiringisa health facility accommodates vulnerable children from Kampiringisa Rehabilitation Centre. You can imagine those young children being there without a health facility while the Government looks on. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you confidently promised me last year, but up to now, nothing has been done.MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, “Dr Hilderman” is one of my best friends. It is only unfortunate that he did not follow up on this. I request that we team up again; we shall handle Kampiringisa Health Centre; I promise!THE SPEAKER: Dr Hilderman, follow-up.6.38MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for recognising me today. We talk so much about girl-children who were victims of COVID-19 -THE SPEAKER: You mean I have not been recognising you?MS CECILIA OGWAL: I thought today was a bit –THE SPEAKER: Oh! In a special way, as former Miss Uganda.MS CECILIA OGWAL: Yes, today has been a bit rare. We have talked so much about the girl children who have been victims of COVID-19. And we, in Dokolo, have gone ahead and captured data on the girl-child, parish by parish. However, we are stuck with our data because we expected the Government to come up with programmes and plans on how we are going to handle these vulnerable children. I want to know, from the Ministry of Education and maybe the ministry of gender, whether they have been able to track these children. 7864 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTHow many of the thousands of those girls have been reabsorbed in schools and those who are not absorbed, what has happened to them? Where are they?I am raising this because in Dokolo, I discovered that many of them were chased away from home. When they went back pregnant, the parents said they did not have the capacity to look after them and their babies. And then they try to look for their boyfriend, they are nowhere to be found. We are responsible for these children and so, I would like to know what Government is doing to track, mainstream these children and give them a future. That is my concern. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. MS AMONGI: Madam Speaker, there is a campaign coordinated by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development with an aim to respond to the issues of girls who got pregnant - and some have already given birth - and those affected by other forms of violence, including sexual issues. We have the data, and we are in partnership with many non-governmental organisations. They have accepted to skill those who cannot go back to school. The person heading the campaign is the First Lady, and she is supported by other senior officials.The Vice-President made a statement on this Floor about that campaign and in Cabinet. A lot of them have returned to school. Most of them actually sat their examinations. Maybe we can give a comprehensive statement on that matter later.THE SPEAKER: Yes, give us a comprehensive report on that.MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I would like to know, as a Member of Parliament - it does not matter where you come from. Where do we get this programme? What is the rationale for choosing who is to be skilled and who is not to be skilled?THE SPEAKER: That will be in the report she is going to give because I saw her skilling some people in my district. So, she needs to give us that report. 6.42THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Madam Speaker, it is a long day, so, I will only remind the Rt Hon. Prime Minister the questions she has not answered, so that she can go and prepare properly to answer them. The rest I will not bother her. Let her make a recollection and answer to the Members, may be personally or in some other informal platform.On the question of drones, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I now confirm, you have never done any trade. Nobody can dispatch any item without a consignee or an address of final dispatch. What you probably have done to send them to Uganda Revenue Authority is an option. But to say that they move without a consignee - in fact, you can follow up with a dispatch form and question their motive for dispatching such an item, classified as dangerous without a consignee. First cross-check! And whoever told you that they have no consignees is sending you to dry in the sun; do not accept that. Nobody can dispatch that. Secondly, the matter raised about schools in Karamoja without furniture should be supplied with a more cogent answer. Before I joined the murky waters of politics, I used to consult with one of the funders of basic education, Alternative Basic Education for Karamoja (ABEK) in that area.And the issues of furniture are matters of affirmative action, not School Facilities Grant (SFG), which we know comes late, is paltry and in some cases, it does not come. If I were the Prime Minister, I would raise a paper to Cabinet to take this as a matter of affirmative action and not wait for the usual budget dispatch. You know how sluggish releases are; we cannot relegate our children to waiting for PRIME MINISTER’S TIME [Ms Ogwal]7865THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 30 MARCH 2023these intermittent releases from Finance. It should be a matter of affirmative action.Please, Prime Minister and my friend, the Minister of Education – those people cannot wait for SFG. It cannot be the case. It is a matter of urgency and affirmative action for their basic education. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the issue raised by Hon. Wakayima about insecurity has nothing to do with the politically motivated arrests that are being made countrywide. It is a matter of urban crime and I want to implore you, as a leader, not to mix the two. We are all aware that arrests have been made with a political motive. One such example is Hon. Allan Mayanja who reported arrests in his constituency, over a month ago, of ordinary citizens, including his driver, by the Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence (CMI) personnel. They were released after 42 days, charged with terrorism and released by the police. Terrorism? What is the other meaning of politically motivated charges? You also know it! The Government Chief Whip wrote to you on the 9th of March about a statement you made within the precincts of Parliament about a one John Bosco Kibalama, who was arrested in 2019. With the permission of the Rt Hon. Speaker, I even played your video here in Parliament, saying you know where Kibalama is yet his family has been looking for him since December 2019. So, is he a thug? I want to go and visit him, on behalf of his family. I am going to escort you after here. In fact, I can have dinner at your home and we go and see Kibalama together; it being your own confession that you know where he is, after two and a half years.THE SPEAKER: It is not official that I have allowed you to escort the minister. (Laughter)MR MPUUGA: For the sake of humanity, I will escort her to go and visit John Bosco Kibalama. The family -THE SPEAKER: They do not visit people at night. MR MPUUGA: Well, I would have escorted, not to visit and the purpose is well stipulated.Madam Speaker, on a more serious note - (Laughter) - the Prime Minister of the Republic -THE SPEAKER: One, we need to know where he is and understand who he is.MR MPUUGA: The Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda is a very serious person in this land and when she makes a statement, we take note and even underline that statement. So, I would gladly want to share with her how we can solve that problem because the family is agitated. He has four little children below 15 years with a wife. Two and a half years; it is a very serious matter. Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister will help us - and I am trying to be as brief as possible. The honourable Member from Karamoja raised very serious matters on insecurity. I thought the Prime Minister could have afforded to supply a more reassuring answer. We have discussed Karamoja severally. He was now raising the bar on insecurity, which seems to be a new wave. I thought the Prime Minister was not helpful in her response -(Interjection)-  yes, I am saying so because if they are telling you 11 people are killed in barely a month - Is that merely cattle raiding?  I think we need a statement from the Minister of Security as to what is happening in Karamoja.THE SPEAKER: We actually need an action, which the Prime Minister has promised - when she promised to go on the ground. Actually, the district that is affected borders my district, and so, we need to know what is happening. Are they the normal cattle rustlers? Are they warriors? We need to find out. So, the team going on the  ground should be able to give us feedback.MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Member from Kabale raised the issue on 7866 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTthe fate of the Batwa communities; the Speaker did not deny the fact that they were sent here from a forest to nowhere. So, these people -THE SPEAKER: Was it the Speaker? MR MPUUGA: No, sorry. I beg your pardon. The Prime Minister did not confirm the allegation whether they were sent away from a forest and left to fate. So, we need clarification where these people were sent to, from the forest, because that was their dwelling for generations of time. It is only that the Government chose to change the user, but these are Ugandans and we owe them a duty of care. For the Prime Minister to say that they are working for others for a living, did they send them to slavery? Are they part of the population we care for, as leaders in this country? Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you did not respond to that question. You need to account for the livelihood of the Batwa communities that are desperate. Like you said, when they go back to the forest, probably they will be right. It is life and livelihood. Do their children go to school in that kind of condition? Were they given some iron sheets to build permanent houses when they came out of the forest? Where did you send them; to caves? The Prime Minister did not help on the cause of Hon. Allan Mayanja about the army worms. The army worms are not coming in the future; they are there. I would have expected the Prime Minister to say she is dispatching a team tomorrow because crops are being eaten. If they are in Nakaseke, like he said, then the Prime Minister did not respond to that question. It is a matter of urgency.THE SPEAKER: What we can do is - the first on the drone was a written answer. We can maybe look at what was written in terms of your response.MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister does not supply me with the answers to her questions and she did not show, this time round; I just write. The last time I was responding to her, as a matter of courtesy and good manners, I asked her to supply me with her answers in time so we can save Parliament’s time -THE SPEAKER: She is going to do that next time and you can respond to what is written, not the questions that are raised on the Floor. MR MPUUGA: Now that she did not supply, I have to respond literally to everything she said. However, I am responding to the second last one.THE SPEAKER: Can you conclude? I am going to break the fast.MR MPUUGA: We respect time, Madam Speaker, but because the Prime Minister is very important, we cannot allow her to get away with unanswered questions.The second last is on the issue raised by Hon. Helen Nakimuli regarding the murder of a one Masaba, in the islands of Kalangala. I think this is a very serious matter. The Prime Minister said that while running away, he fell in a ditch and died on his way to hospital –THE SPEAKER: He was running away from the prison warders. MR MPUUGA: Those are the answers we got. Remember the answer on how Mzee Muhojo of Kasese died. It sounds like the same answer given by the Prime Minister. I think what we need to do - and I am aware the honourable member from Kalangala is ready with her motion and I gave this House notice about it - to investigate the abuse of human rights on landing sites. That motion, Madam Speaker, once carried by the House, will give us an understanding of who is actually killing our people on the lakes. We live with these people; they tell us who is fishing illegally and accusing them of doing so in return. Our people have been rendered slaves. Some of these communities have only known fishing as a source of livelihood. I do PRIME MINISTER’S TIME [Mr Mpuuga]7867THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 30 MARCH 2023not think they are so bad that they do not wish to protect the lakes. However, something is amiss. We need to supply a clear answer, as leaders in this country. Finally, Madam Speaker, is the issue of the central bank governor. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you need to tell the President that he is not doing the country a favour to appoint a Governor to the central bank. It is an obligation that is constitutional. It is an abdication and neglect of duty by the President to take this long without appointing a governor. If the intention of having a governor was casual, it could never have been legislated. So, with due respect, please inform the President that his actions border on the relegation of duty. There is a reason the law provides for a governor and a deputy governor. One, two, three, six months! And this position should not be used for political bargain; it is a professional position. It should never be dangled around as carrots to really tap into political harvest. Therefore, the issue of the governor is very key. It is a demand as a matter of law. Please remind the President that it is not a question of magnanimity; it is a matter of law. I thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2 o’clock.(The House rose at 6.55 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 4 April 2023 at 2.00 p.m.)Ursron 2o4oTHE REPUBUC OF UGANDAOFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTERPIOT9.11APOII.O (AGGWA ROAO. P.O. 'OX 341, KAMPALA. UGANOATETEPHONES G.ncr.ltrn! 0417 770500, W.b ww opm !o u!,E-m.rl pt@opm ao ll!ln any correspondence on thrs sublect, please quote No GD/13/23'1,46 March,2023Rt. Hon. Anita Annet AmongThe Speaker of the Parliament of UgandaKAMPALA flhan)*@ glslcz(-'t"@*aoa" P-F€t',1r\ "tlz3Rt. Hon,IPRESENTING THE REPORT ON UGANDA'S STATUS OF THEIMPLEMENTATION OF SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALSBEFORE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAIn September 2021, the Government of Uganda launched the SDG Roadmap202L / 2025 whrch operationalizes Uganda's SDG Institutional CoordinationFramework and provrdes priorrty actions to catalyse the implementatron ofSDGs during the NDP III period. The framework coordinated by the Officeof the Prrme Mrnister recognizes the conkrbution of Mimstries, Departmentsand Agencies and non- state actors including the United Nations, CivilSociety Orgaruzatrons, Private Sector and other development partners. TheSDG Roadmap also ouflines implementation structures, a timeframe for theroadmap implementation and resource mobilization strategy. It alsoprovides revrewrn& monitodng, evaluatiory and reportrngA Publrc Sector that rs responsrve and accountable rn steerrngUganda towards raprd economrc growth and developmentIn accordance to the new SDG Roadmap, Parhament and Members ofParliament have a significant role to play in mobrhzrng and allocatrngresources, providing oversight in the implementation of the SDGs, andplaying different other roles as champions, advocates, mobilisers, andambassadors for the SDGs due to their proximity to people in theirConshtuencresThis year, the Office of the Prime Mimster presented a CabinetMemorandum CT (2022) 130 on the Implementation Status and Progress ofthe Sustainable Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda to a Cabinetmeeting held on 10th October 2022. T"he aim of the Cabinet Paper was to;apprise Cabinet on the progress on the implementation of the SDGs inUganda, share the critical SDGs implementatton challenges that haveemerged during the implementation and coordination of SDGs and seekCabinet approval of the measures to accelerate the attainment of SDG targetswithin the framework of our Nafional Development Plan and Government'sLast Mile Strategy - the Parrsh Development Model. The Cabinet meetingapproved the proposed measures to accelerate the attainment of SDG targetswithin the framework of the NDP III as highlighted in the Action Extractfrom Minute No .359 (CT 2022)Preparations for the Country Progress on SDGs rmplementation commencedin 2020 The issues rarsed therein have been developed following countrywide consultations and an analysis of trends and factors affectrng SDGrmplementation. For instance, the SDG progress repofi 2021, andthe@A Publrc Sector that rs responsrve and accountable rn steerrngUganda towards raprd economrc growth and developmentVoluntary National Review 2020 were developed through analysis ofGovernment policies, programs and interventions This analysis helped inidentifying the gaps and recommendations for SDG implementationThe issues were addrtionally developed following stakeholder consultationsincluding the regional SDG dialogues where Local Govemment leaders wereengaged and provided feedback on what Govemment needs to do to fasttrack SDG implementation. The regronal SDG forums also provided anopportunity for the young people and chrldren to raise key pertinent rssuesconcerning their understanding and particlpahon in the SDGs.The National SDG conference of which you gave a key note address and theHigh-Level Political Forum further amplified the key concerns and issuesaffecting traction of SDGs. For instance, the rssue of coordinatron monitoringand reporting on the Afrrcan Union Agenda 2063 in both of the two events.All these issues were further consulted on internally with the technicalleadership and Top Management at the Office of the Prrme Mimster andexternally with key Government Institutions (National Planning Authority,UBOS, Minisky of Finance and Ministry of ICT) that are core to the SDGCoordination f ramework-The purpose of this communication, therefore, is to request you to presentthe Uganda's Progress rn the Implementation Status of SustainableDevelopment Goals Report to Parliament for information.kA Publrc Sector that rs responsrve and .ccountable rn steerrngUganda towards raprd economrc growth and developmentPlease receive assurances of my highest consideration.Justine Kasule Lumumba - Rt.Hon.MINISTER FOR GENERAL DUTIESAOCAL-POINT MINISTER FORSDGS, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTERCopy:Rt. Hon. Deputy Speaker of ParliamentRt. Hon Prime Minister of UgandaFirst Deputy Prime Minister and Mrnister for East AfrrcaSecond Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of GovernmentBusiness in ParliamentThrd Deputy Prime Minister and Minister without PortfolioGovernment Chief WhrpMinister of Finance, Planning and Economic DevelopmentHead of Pubhc Service/Secretary to CabinetClerk to Parliament of UgandaPermanent Secretary, Office of the Prime MinisterSenior Technical Advrser/ Head SDG SecretariatA Publrc Sector that rs responsrve and accountable rn steerrngUg.nda towards raprd economrc growth and development{tr,r}OF THE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALSAND THE 2O3O AGENDA(Parlianrent Paper by the Miflister for General Duties/Focal -Point Minister for tlte Sustainable Deaelopnrcnt Goals, Olficeof tlrc Prinrc Minister)March 2023A1l7;-OFFICE c,FTHE PAIME MII\ItSTERTHE IMPLEMENTATION STATUS AND PROGRESS1EXECUTIVE SUMMARYThe Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), were adopted by all UnitedNahons Member States rn 2015 as a universal call to actron to end poverty,protect the planet and ensure that all people enloy peace and prosperrtyby 2030 Through the pledge to Leave No One Behind, countrrescommrtted to fast-track progress for those furthest behrnd frrstThe 17 SDGs, rvith a total of 169 targets and 232 rndrcators, recognize thataction m one area wrll affect outcomes rn others, and that developmentmust balance socral, economrc and envuonmental sustarnabrhtyThe SDGs are umque in that they cover issues that affect us all Theyreaffirm our internatronal commrtment to end poverty, permanently,everyrvhere. They involve us all to burld a more sustainable, safer, moreprosperous planet for all humanrtyUganda recogmzed the rmportance of the SDGs' contrrbutron to Uganda'ssocral development and long-term development planning frameworkConsequently, rn 2016 the Government instituted a NahonalCoordmation Framework under the leadershrp of the Offrce of the PrrmeMinister that created an enabling environment for the state and non-stateactors to achleve the rmplementation of the SDGs In Uganda, the SDGshave been implemented under the five-year National Development Plans(NDP n 2015/16 - 2079 /20 and NDP l 2A0/21. - 2024/25) and in thelong-term development agenda of Uganda Vrsion 20402The Oflice of the Prrme Minister and other key stakeholders beheve thatwith only seven (7) years remaining to the end of the 2030 Agenda, therers need for Parliament to be apprrsed on the SDG progress regrstered andshare Cabrnet approved recommendahons to accelerate the achrevementof SDGs.Thts Parhament paper presents Uganda's progress rn the rmplementatronof the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) agenda 2030 It alsohrghhghts achievements, challenges, and recommendations in thermplementahon of the new SDG roadmap, whrch rs ahgned to the RuhngParty Manrfesto, the Thrrd National Development Plan (NDP III) andother Government strategres and development frameworksThe oblectrves of this paper are marnlv to;i Apprrse Parhament on the progress ot the implementatron of the SDGsrn Uganda;ii Share the crrtrcal SDGs rmplementation challenges that have emergedduring the rmplementatron and coordrnatron of SDGs, and,tti Share Cabrnet approved proposed measures to accelerate theattarnment of SDG targets withrn the framework of our NationalDevelopment Plan and Governmenf s Last Mrle Strategy - the Par$hDevelopment ModelThrs Parliament Paper and the rssues raised theren have been developedfollowrng an analysrs of trends and factors affecting SDG rmplementatiorystakeholder consultatrons All these $sues were further consulted onrnternally wrth the techmcal leadership and Top Management at the3Office of the Prime Mlntster and externally with the key GovernmentInstrtutrons (Natronal Planmng Authorrty, UBOS, Mrnrstry of Frnance andMrmstry of ICT) that are core to the SDG Coordrnatron lrameworkThrs report rndrcates that progress has remarned uneven and that thecoronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) pandemrc has slorved dorvn the gams madeon some of the SDGs However, with coordrnated efforts, there rs stillhope that Uganda wrll make positive strides m achrevrng the SDGs by2030Durrng thrs reportrng period, Uganda conttnues to regrster progress inSDG tmplementation through,i Development of the new Roadmap for the Implementatron of theSustarnable Development Goals 2020 /27-2024/25 which provrdescatalytic and strategrc rnterventrons for the acceleratron of SDGsrmplementahonrr Presentatron of Uganda's Second Voluntary Nahonal Revrew(VNR) m 2020 aimed at sharng of experiences, successes,challenges and lessons in order to accelerate the implementatron ofthe 2030 Agenda This process has informed the roll out ofVoluntary Local Reviews at Local Governments whrch enablesrevrew of SDG progress at sub-nahonal levelslll. The Government conducted an annual assessment on progress ofSDGs and developed a Nahonal SDG Progress Report 2021 Thisreport hrghlights progress, bottlenecks and recommendatrons foreach goal rvithrn the context of NDP IIIiv The Government has also initiated a natronrvrde forum that bnngs4together all Stakeholders wrth an rnterest in the SDGlmplementahon process called "Uganda Annual SustarnableDevelopment Goals Conference. The frrst annual conference washetd rn June 2022 preceded by regional forumsUganda parhcrpated m the Hrgh-Level Polrtical Forum onSustainable Development in New York where the Governmentshared experrences from the SDG Conference and key models andVoluntary Natronal RevrewsThough, Uganda has regstered srgruficant progress in attainment ofSDGs, there are concerns about the Lkely negatrve rmpact of COVID-19on the progress reahzed over trme. There also challenges related to llmitedfinancrng for SDGs, data challenges, low levels of awareness of the LocalLeaders to Integrate SDGs wrth Local Development Initiatrves and lowlevels of drgrtrzahonThus, I led the Offrce of the Pnme Minister to present a CabinetMemorandum on status of SDGs implementatron to the Cabrnet meetingheld on 10th October 2022 under minute No 359 (CT 2022)'130 TheCabinet approved the followrng recommendatrons to accelerate theattamments of the SDG Targets wrthrn our nahonal developmentframeworksr. The Office of the Prrme Mmrster Ministry of Health, led by the Rt.Hon. Prime Mrnlster to convene a meetmg wlth the Mrnrster ofHealth and concerned stakeholders to devise means to address thepersistent outbreaks of malarra rn the country.5ii Mrnistry of Forergn Affairs, Mrmstry of Gender Labour and SocralDevelopment, should follow-up wrth Uganda's Ambassador toAzerbaqan, Amb. Muhammad Tezrkuba Krsamrra on the Pledgemade by the Government of Azerbalan to grve a Grant to theGovernment of Uganda to support Programs dtrectl1, benefitrngPersons wrth Drsabihhesrrr Mrmsky of Health, to submrt a Paper to Cabrnet explainrng therncrease of malarra cases rn the Countryrv Mrnistry of Frnance Planmng and Economic Development should,fast track the implementatron of the Integrated National FrnancrngFramework (INFF) as a means of mobrhzrng resources globally andnahonally to support sustainable development MoFPED needs torevrsit Uganda's Domestrc Resource Mobthzahon Strategy andassocrated pollcies that take into consrderatron these emergmgreahhesv The Ministry of Information, Commumcahons Technology andNational Gurdance, to work wrth Offrce of the Prrme Mrmster topopularize the Sustamable Development Goals.vt. Mrrustry of Agrrculture, Ammal Industry and Frsheries, to mcreasernvestment in agrrculture to foster food secunty and stabilzrng foodsupply charns through pohcy rncentrves to encourage value additiorysupport the central role played by e-commerce/ and expand the6drgrtal rnformahon mfrastructure rn the country. This will ensure thatdata remains supreme and an rmportant part of pnvate sectorgrowthvii Uganda Bureau of Stat$trcs, should contrnue to expand the numberof SDG rndrcators that have data pornts rn Uganda The developmentof statrstlcal plans by drfferent entitres should also be encouragedvrrr Ministry ot Public Servrce and Uganda Bureau of Statstlcs, to re-rnstate the posrtion of Statistrcrans m the structures for MDAs andHLGs for effective and efficrent dehvery on the qualrty data requredat both nahonal and local Govemment levels for SDGs and otherGovernment programs Lke Parrsh Development Model1XMrmstry of Local Government, to tran local leaders to rntegrate theSDGs rn the PDM rmplementation and the all-local developmentplans - includrng the new cities.x. Mrmstry of Scrence and Technology, to strengthen the engagementand mobrlzatron of the pubhc and prrvate stakeholders wrth digrtalinnovatrons and support them for scale upxr The Office of the Prrme Minrster (SDG Secretarrat), should conduct acomprehensrve documentatlon to identify the people left behrnd,those at a risk of being left behind, where they are found and in whatareas of servrce delvery they have been left behrnd1xu The SDG Secretarrat should take on an addttronal role of coordrnatmgthe follow-up on the Afnca Unron's Agenda 2063 srnce rt has not beenwell coordrnated srnce rts adoptron Thrs s because the 2030 Agendaand Afncan Union Agenda 2063 are both mutually rernforcingmternahonal and regional development strategies that support thenatronal pnontles of Ugandaxrir- The Offrce of the Pnme Minister should present the SDG progressreport and status of rmplementatlon to Parliament as a means ofmobiltzrng members of Parhament rn locahzahon of SDGsxrv The Government of Uganda coordrnated by the Offrce of the PrrmeMrnrster and Mmrstry of Forergn Affairs, should present Uganda thirdVoluntary Natronal Revlew (VNR) report to the High-Level PoliticalForum in New York rn 2024 and thrs requrres concerted elforts by allthree arms of Government.In conclusion Uganda has progressed rn the implementahon of SDGs,everyone rs needed to reach the ambitious SDG targets. Achreving theSDGs requrres partnershrp of governments, prrvate sector, crvrl societyand citizens to make sure we leave a better planet for future generattons.The creatlvrty, knowhorv, technology and financral resources from all ofsocrety $ necessary to achieve the SDGS m everl. context1.0 INTRODUCTION81.1 OVERVIEW1 11 This report presents the progress made by the Government ofUganda rn the rmplementatlon of the Sustarnable DevelopmentGoals (SDGs) Agenda 2030. The reports cover the achrevementsmade, challenges and the lvay forward m rmplementatron of thenerv SDG roadmap, which is ahgned to the RuLng Party (NRM)Mamfesto, the Third Natronal Development Plan (NDP III) andother Government strategies and development frameworks.1.1.2 Thrs report therefore hrghhghts the efforts made rn thecoordrnatron, momtoring and reporting of SDGs, the SDGsroadmap 2021-2025, the first natronal SDG conference, the High-level political forum on SDGs. In all these key events andrntervenhons, the report pornts to the key observahons and actionsrequued to gurde rmplementatron2.0 BACKGROUND2"1 In 2015, Member States of the Umted Nahons adopted the Agenda2030 for Sustarnable Development at the 69th Session of the UNGeneral Assembly where Uganda held the UN Presidency throughHon Sam Kahamba Kutesa for that year2.2 The lTGoals burld on the successes of the Mtllennium DevelopmentGoals, whrle rncludrng new areas such as clrmate change, economrcnequality, rnnovatron, sustalnable consumptron, peace and iustice,among other priorities The goals are rnterconnected -the key to9success on one will involve tackling issues more commonll,assocrated wrth another2.3 Honorable It4embers of Parhament, Uganda has over the years beena frontrunner in rmplementrng the 2030 Agenda for SustarnableDevelopment and the attendant 17 SDGs. Thrs unrversal plan forall countrres across the globe focuses on endrng povertv, protectingthe planet, and ensurrng prosperrty for all The 2030 Agendaprovides a focus for the rnternahonal commumty's developmentefforts untrl 2030 The 17 goals and 169 targets provide a yardstickby rvhrch progress is measured24 On 10th October 2022, the Office of the Pnme Mrmster, led by myoffice, under Cabinet Memorandum CT (2022) 130 presented aCabrnet Memorandum on horv Govemment is progressing in thermplementahon of the SDGs, wrthrn the context of the 3rd NatronalDevelopment Plan25 Colleagues the Cabinet Action Extract from mrnute No. 359 (CT2022) 130 of the meeting held on 10th October 20222 5.1 Noted the progress and achtevements made on the tmplementationof SDGs,2 5 2 Noted the crrtrcal SDGs implementahon challenges that haveemerged during the rmplementation and coordrnation of SDGs,and;102 5 3 Approved proposed measures to accelerate the attainment of SDGtargets wrthm the framework of our National Development Planand Government's Last Mile Strategy - the Parsh DevelopmentModel2.6 PROBLEM STATEMENT2 6 1 The Offrce of the Pume Mm$ter and other ke1, stakeholders behevethat with only seven (7) years remaimng to the end of the 2030Agenda, there is need tor Parhament to be apprised on the SDGprogress registered and seek pohc1, gutdance and directron on howto accelerate the SDG rmplementation2 6 2 The Offrce of the Prrme Minister further beheves that the SDGs arernterlinked and hence require a multi-sectoral approach totmplement mterventrons that can accelerate SDGs achievement Allthls requires Parhament blessrng and gurdance It rs hoped that theguidance provrded will further strengthen coordinahorypartnershrp burldrng and inclusrve rn these remarmng years of thedecade of actlon113.0 OBJECTIVES OF THE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOMENT STATUSREPORTHonorable Members of Parhament, the ob;ectives of thls statusreport on rmplementation of sustalnable development goals rs to,31 To apprise Parhament on the progress made rn the implementahonoI the SDGs rn Uganda,32 Share the critrcal SDGs rmplementation challenges that haveemerged during the lmplementatton and coordmatron of SDGs,and,3.3 Share the Cabrnet approved recommendatrons to accelerate theattainment of SDG targets wrthm the framework of our NationalDevelopment Plan and Governmenfls Last Mrle Strategy - theParrsh Development Model4.0IMPLEMENTATION STATUS AND PROGRESS OF THESUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS (SDGs) AND THE2O3O AGENDA4.1SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS COORDINATIONFRAMEWORK41,1,Uganda's development journey has been gurded by the SDGNational Coordrnatlon Framework It was a deliberate and rvell-planned effort to harmomze the contribuhon of Mrnrstrres,Departments and Agencres It also recognizes the contrlbutron of12TIIIIIIthe non-state actors includrng the Umted Natlons, Crvrl SocietyOrganizatlons, Prlvate sector, and other development partnersSrnce adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustamable Developmentrn 2015, Uganda has been steadfast m rts efforts to reahze theasprrahons of her people (Attached as Annex 1 is the NationalSDG Coordination Framework)412The coordinatron framework rs anchored on the TechnrcalWorkrng Groups (TWGs) under drfferent Mrmstrres,Departments and Agencies (MDAs), whrch are chaired by therespectlve oversrght instrtutrons wrth specific roles namely. (r)The Natronal Plannrng Authonty (NPA) which ensures thatplanning frameworks at all levels are well ahgned with the SDGs,(rr) Uganda Bureau of Stat$tics (UBOS) whrch coordrnates dataproduction for SDGs, (ru) Mrnistry of Frnance Planning andEconomrc Development which ensures resource mobrlizatronand financing for SDGs, (iv) Mrmstry of Information,Communication, Technology and National Gurdance whrchcoordinates commumcatron and popularrzation of SDGs (v)Office of the Prrme Mmrster which is the overall coordrnator ofthe rmplementatron architecture4.2 UGANDA'S NEW NATIONAL SDG ROADMAP 2O2O/202I -2024/2025421, On 15 September 202^1, $e Prrme Mimster, the Rt Hon RobinahNabbanja launched Uganda's second natronal "Roadmap for theII13Implementatlon of the Sustarnable Development Goals rn Uganda2020 /27 - 2024/25" (Attached as Annex 2 is Uganda's NewNational SDG Ro admap 2020/2021-2024/20251.422The new roadmap r focused on a vrsron to create "A Transformedand Prosperous Uganda in the Decade ot Action" and rs gurded bythe 5 ob;ectrves to (r) promote poltcy revreiv mechamsms andcoherence processes for the SDGs (rr) revitahze the SDGTechnical/Programme Workmg Groups and make them moreeffectrve (ni) promote locahzatron, popularrzation andmarnstreaming of the SDGs rnto programmes, MDAs and LocalGovernment plans (rv) enhance local resource mobilization effortsfor SDGs and (v) map out new partnerships and promote theFotential of exrstrng ones rn order to harness synergres of the wholeGovernment.4.2 3 Honorables, the SDG Roadmap outlmes rmplementationstructures, a trmeframe for the roadmap rmplementation and aresource mobrhzatron strategy It also provides reviewing,monrtoung, evaluatiory and reportrng mechanrsms, as well as nskmrtrgahon measures. Finalty, the roadmap presents a ResultsFramework and Cost Estimates for the perrcd 2020 / 21. to 2024/25.424The implementahon structure relates to the mechantsms that wrllfacrlrtate the rmplementatron of the SDG roadmap In thrs, keystakeholders have specrfic roles they will have to play for thesuccess of the roadmap Stakeholders rnclude actors from14Government, Development Partners, UN system, Ctvrl Socrety,Prrvate Sector, Academra, and Medta.4 2 5 The SDG Secretarrat continues to play a catalytic role and engagestrategic stakeholders and to ensure coherence among all theI echnrcal Workrng Groups4.3INTEGRATION AND LINKAGES OF SDGS TO BUDGETS,POLICIES AND PROGRAMMES4 3."1Honorables, the UN Inter-Governmental negohations on theSDGs rn 2015 corncrded with the preparation of Uganda's secondNatronal Development Plan (NDP II) Government used thrsopportunity to rntegrate the SDGS framework rnto the plan,resultrng in a 69% integration level During the development ofNDP III (2020/21- - 2024/25), appropriate measures wereundertaken to ensure that all sectors, agencres and localgovernment levels include SDGs rn their plans and strategies--NDP III rs at least 90% ahgned to the goals432 As such, the targets of SDGs are rmplemented through plans,strategies and projects by all Mrrustries, Departments andAgencres (MDAs), and Local Governments (LGs) through therrday-to-day activities, pro;ects and programsGrven the rmportance of localtzation and populanzatton of the2030 Agenda, SDG Secretariat rs coordrnatrng the development of15434435locahzahon gurdelnes to gulde the process coherently andcomprehensively among partners and stakeholders across theCountry.Parlament and Members of Parhament play a srgmftcant role rnmobilzrng and allocatrng resources, provrding overstght tn theimplementahon of the SDGS, and playrng drfferent other roles aschampions, advocates, mobrlsers, and ambassadors for the SDGsdue to their proxrmrty to people in therr Constituenctes To thtsend, the SDG Secretariat works tn partnershrp wrth the UgandaParliamentary Forum for SDGs to support the strengthening ofIegrslators' understandlng and actions In SDG implementatlon.Non-state actors, who rnclude Development Partners, CrvtlSociety Orgamzations, Rehgtous Leaders and Prtvate Sector, arerepresented at all levels of the SDG Coordinatton Framework Thework of non-state actors is complementary to govemmentmitratives and are algned to nahonal development Pnorrhes.Some of the initiatrves that the Government has undertaken tothrs end rnclude the following;i. Private Sector Platform for Sustainable Development GoalsThe Private Sector SDG Platform rs a natronally owned multi-stakeholder mechamsm to address varrous aspects of prtvatesector engagement rn the SDGs. The Platform, which is managedby the Office of the Pnme Miruster with support from the Pnvate16Sector Foundatron Uganda (tlSFU) and the Unrted NationsCountry Team offers a nahonal mechanism to engage wrth theprrvate sector rn the 2030 Agenda tn a comprehensrve and hoLstlcmanner The Platform was offrcrally launched by the PrrmeMrnister, Rt Hon Ruhakana Rugunda on May 4, 2021Civil Society Organizations SDG Core Reference ttGroupThe SDG Secretauat works closely wrth all Crvrl SocretvOrganizatrons rn Uganda through the SDG CSO Reference groupthat rs coordinated by the Uganda National NGO Forum. Thegroup launched a "Tondeka Mabega" Campargn as an effort tosupplement Government efforts to leave no one behrnd. Thevarlous CSOs have also been mstrumental rn supportlng specificconsultattve processes wrth vulnerable groups including Personswrth Disabrlitres, Minorr$r Ethnrc Groups and Women Groupsiii. The Youth Coalition for SDGsThe Youth Coahhon for SDGs is an rnihatrve composed of youth-led orgamzahons/companres from around the Country workrngtowards achieving the SDGS and workrng under the ausprces ofthe SDG Secretarrat. The youth partrcrpate n activities to rarceawareness on the SDGs and lead by example rn implementation174.44 4-l442PRESENTATION OF UGANDAS SECOND VOLUNTARYNATIONAL REVIEW (VNR) 2O2OHonorable Members of Parhament, you may need to note that rnJuly 2020, Uganda prepared her second Voluntary NatronalRevrew (VNR) Report and presented rt to the UN Hrgh LevelPolrtrcal Forum on Sustainable Development VoluntaryNahonal Revrervs (VNRs) are armed at facrhtatrng sharing ofexperiences, successes, challenges, and lessons learned, with avrew to accelerating the implementahon of the 2030 Agenda(Attached as Annex 3 is Uganda's 2nd Voluntary NationalReview Report),It is also rmportant to note that accordrng to the SustainableDevelopment Solutrons Network and SDG Center for Afrrca,results rndrcate that Uganda was more than 50"/" on track toachrevrng SDGs by 2030. Among the 52 Afrrcan countnes,Uganda ranked 18th rvrth an overall score of 54.88 (hrgher thanthe regional avera ge of 52.7 n 2020) Also, the Global SustarnableDevelopment rcport 2022 by the Sustarnable DevelopmentSoluhons Network (SDSN) places Uganda rn the 5th posrtion inAfrrca after (Benrn, Nrgerra, Ethtopra, and Morocco) regardmgGovernmenf s commrtment rn the coordrnatron andimplementation of SDGs1A4434444.5451In addrhon to the VNRs, the Government of Uganda has alsorolled out Voluntary Local Revrews (VLRs), a new approachadopted by UN member states to reYiew progress at sub-natronallevels The VLR process seryes as a rval,for local governments toengage crtrzens rn the SDG review process, whrch contributes tostrengthemng accountabrlrty and rncreases inclusrve governanceIn 2020, the UN Economic Commrssion for Afrrca (UNECA)piloted the VLR process m four selected countrres rncludingUganda, where it was carried out rn Ngora drstrrct Results fromthe Ngora VLR rndrcate that the drstrrct has rntegrated the 2030SDG Agenda and asprrations ot Agenda 2063 rn the drstrrctdevelopment processes, feasrbrhty studies and budgetsPRODUCTION OF THE NATIONAL ANNUAL REPORT ONSTATUS OF IMPLEMENTING THE SDGS 2021In October 2021, flte Government conducted an annualassessment on progress made on the rmplementatron of the SDGsand developed a National SDG Progress Report 2021 The reportouthnes progress made under each goal, highlghts bottlenecksper SDG and sets out recommendations wrthrn the context of theNDP III (Attached as Annex 4 is the SDG Progress report 2021).Below are the key hrghlights from the SDG Progress Report.194.52453Honorables, you may wrsh to note that SDGS are momtored andevaluated by 232 global indrcators of whrch 201 are apphcable toUganda Currently Uganda has 119 rndicators wrth data pomts(59%), 24 mdicators are globally computed (127") and 58rndrcators rvrthout data pornts (29%).Goal 1; No Poverlr,The level of poverty in Uganda reduced shghtly ('I l't ) fuom 21. .4percent rn 2016/17 to 20.3 percent rn 2020 / 2^1. Cvrenlly, there areabout 3 5 mrlhon persons hving below the poverty Lne and theproportron of populatton hvrng below the nahonal poverty Lnerncreased srgnrficantly in urban areas (2 2) t e, from 9 5 percent mFY 20^16/^17 to 1^l7 percent rn FY2020/21 compared to rural areas(1 8) re, from 252 percent nF\ 20-16 /-17 to 234 percent rnFY2020/2^1. The urban poor are more concentrated in othercitres/towns in the country rather than urban greater Kampala(Kampala, Mukono and Wakiso).Results show an rmprovement in housrng condrtrons whrch rs acrrtrcal factor m poverty reductron For example, the percent ofhouseholds with grass thatched roofs reduced to 23 percent20^19 / 2020 lrom 24 n 201.6 / 20'17 Addrtionally, total Governmentspendrng on essentral servrces such as educatiory health andsocral protectron rncreased from 22 40 percent rn 2020 lo 231.percent in 2021. However total Government spendrng on healthreduced from 9.2 percent to 7 3 percent for the respectrve years204.5 4Thrs poses a huge threat to poverty eradication since health is akey determmant of labor productrvrtyIn order to reduce further the poverty levels, GoU rs scalmg upefforts through expanding socral protechon programmes such asSocial Assistance Grants {or Empowerment (SAGE), providingstart-up capital for vulnerable persons such as "emyooga",boosting rnvestments rn agrrculture sector through theAgrlculture Credrt Facilrty (ACF) and low interest financlngthrough the Uganda Development Corporatlon (UDC) and therecent established Parrsh Development Model Govemmentshould also approprrate more funds for the health sector to fosterlabour productivrtyWhile Goal 2 Targets Zero hunger.The proportron of food poor persons in Uganda rncreased by 2percent (from 37 to 39 percent) between 2016 and 2020 Thrsmeans that nearly 3 rn every 10 households rn Uganda do notconsume sufficrent quanhty of food with the proper nutrientcontent Rural households were twrce as more hkely to be foodpoor than the urban households (47% and22% respechvely) as at2019/20 The Eastern and Northern regrons consrstently had thehighest number of food poor households wrth 5 rn every 10households considered food poor between 2016 and 2020.2145 5Addrhonallp there was a declme rn the Total offrcral flows(offrcral development assrstance plus other olficial flows) to theagrrculture sector frorn72,353,784 n2020 to 35,97^1,934 n202^LThe recommended actlon pornts to address the bottlenecksrnclude,(t) Provrsion of good quality agrrcultural rnputs such asdrugs, seeds, pestrcrdes to rmprove the quality of productson the marketGi) Ensure adequate food storage at all levels local, regronaland natronal The few avarlable food reserves (e g, thoseoperated by the Grain Council of Uganda and thoseestabhshed wrth support from World Food Programme rnspecrfrc dstrrcts) are small and they are mostly grarn silosowned by Prrvate Entities(iir) Provrde food secunty facrhtres and or rnfrastructure at thehousehold level and overalt public health level e g,granarres, farmer field schools, and school gardens to feedchildren while at school(rv) Ensure approprrahon of adequate funds for the agrrculturesector to support development interventions.On Goal 3, about Good health and wellbeing,The malarra Incidence per 1000 populatron rose to 340 rn 2019from 242 rn 2018 In FY 2020 /21., malarra was the commonestcondrtron among admrssrons for all ages accounting for 39.5percent (635,586 cases compared to 722,679 cases inF\ 201-9 /20)22of all admrssrons There was a notable rn.rease rn totalrmmunrzations from -1,864,074 n F\ 20L9 / 20 to 2,394,-195 (28 4%)n 2020/21- In addrtron, the proporhon of the populatron wrthaccess to affordable medicmes and vaccrnes (essentral medicinesand health supplies - basket of 40 commodrhes - such as antr-malarral, antrbrotrcs, neonatal care medrcrnes etc.) on asustainable basrs increased from 11.5 percent rn 2016 to 35 8percent rn 2020, shghtly hrgher than the 35 percent NDP III targetby 2020/21-.Addrtionally, the number of new HIV infechons per 1,000unrnfected populatron reduced from "1.6in20^17 to^141n2018 Thecorrespondrng figures rn 2019 and 2020 were -12 and ^Lrespectrvely Thls shows a steady declneAccording to the Annual Crrme Report, the death rate due to roadtraffic mjurres rose from 76 percent rn 2018 to 80 percent rn 2020among the males The correspondrng figure among femalesshows a steady dechne from 24 percent rn 2019 to 20 percent in2020The followrng recommendatrons should therefore be adopted,> Increase access to health services through construchon andupgradrng of more health facrlrtres, equipping of healthcenters, and provrsion of medrcrnes, contrnuous recrultment ofhealth personnel and provrcron of a nahonal health msurancescheme23! Provrde sex educatron to adolescents r e. drscuss health rrsks ofun protected sex, teenage pregnancies, HIV and other SexuallyTransmitted Drseases.F Improve and contrnue to support the UPE and USEprogrammes to encourage 'Education for all'! Strffen and put more-strict penalties for traffrc offenders.4 5 6 Goal4 on Quality Education.As measured from proficrency levels rn readmg and nmathematics, the average proficrency rn lrteracy for P3 reducedfrom 50 percent n FY 201-8 /1-9 to 49 9 percent n FY 2019 /20,rvhile that of P6 rncreased from 53 percent rn FY 2018 /'19 to 53'lpercent in 2019/20.There rvas also an rncrease rn the complehon rate among Prrmarystudents (P 7) from 63 percent rn 2019 to 67 percent rn 2020 Therewas a dechne in completion rate among Lower Secondarystudents (S4) from 34 percent rn 2079 to 32 percent n 2020Accordrng to the National Service Delivery Survey (NSDS) 2021report, 45% of household respondents rated the quality ofteachrng at prlmary schools attended by household members asgood. A higher percentage of respondents rn urban areas (48percent) rated the qualrty of teachrng as good compared to thosern rural areas (45 percent) The Ugandan Government shouldcontnue to scale up fundrng to the educatron sector andstrengthen inspection, monitonng and reportrng of nterventrons2445.7Goal 5 on Gender Equality.Women representahon rn Parhament has been rncreasrng over theyears For example, rn 2016 General Electrons 157 seats were wonby women comparcd to '1.74 rn 2021 general electrons Relatedly,the number of women rn cabrnet rncreased from 28 in 2016 to 35in 2021 general electrons. equality At the local government level,the country rs yet to attain gender parrty rn pohtrcalrepresentatronTo increase women's rncomes, the Government has made effortto support women entrepreneurs by way of boostrng therr start-up caprtal and provrde on-job skrlhng through rnterventrons suchas Youth Lrvehhoods Program, Uganda WomenEntrepreneurship Program, among others However, manywomen rely on agrrculture or rnformal trade for therr hvehhood,both of rvhich have been adversely affected by the lockdowns, asa result o[ the Covrd-l9 pandemic.Furthermore, the proportion of grrls and women aged 15-49 yearswho have undergone female gemtal mutilahon/cuttrng (FGM)reduced from 1 4 percent rn 2011 to 0 3 percent on 2016 However,the practice has conhnued because the community still beheves rt tobe a necessary rrte of passage for young girls Now, FGM rs oftenperformed rn a rusfu in unsafe and unsarutary conditions, thusmcreasing the health usks Therefore, Governrnent should work254584 5.9wrth the local Authodties to shffen and rmplement strrct measuresagamst the practice.Goal 6 on Clean Water and SanitationAs at 2020 /202^1,, 79 percent households had access to improvedsources of drinking water, although this was below the NDP IIItarget of 83 percent for 2020/2021 Ninety-one (91) percent of thehouseholds rn urban areas had access to improved water sourcescompared to three quarters of the households rn rural ar eas (75%)There has been increased access to hand washrng rvrth soap, rnpart, marnly as a result of advocacy protechon campargns agarnstCovrd-19.The proporhon of populatron usrng a safely managed torlet andhand-washrng facrlity wrth soap and water rose to 20 7 percentand 7.6 percent respectrvely rn 2020 from 17 9 percent and 6.2percent respectrvelyGoal 7 on Affordable end clean energyStahstics indrcate that the percentage of households wrth accessto electricrty (grrd, solar home system and solar kit) was 56.7percent which was hrgher than the NDP III target of 30 percent by2021. Uganda's rnstalled generatron capacrty was ^1,252 4 }'lW,still below 1,884 MW NDP III target 2020 /20n. Whrle there rsrncreased generation of power, the challenge remains withtransmtssrory distribution and cost to further lncrease access andutilzatlon There was low access to modern and efficlent energy26sources and servlces such as solar home systems, hqueftedpetroleum gas, brogas and improved stoves for hghtm& heatin&and clean cookingAdditionally, the total number of electncrty consumers rncreasedby 3 7 percent, lrom "1,572,605 consumers m Calendar Year (CY)2019 to ^1,630,769 consumers rn CY2020 This was due to anrncrease rn the number of customers of UMEME Uganda Lrmrted,Uganda Electrrcrty Distribution Company Lrmrted (UEDCL),Pader Abrm Community Multipurpose Electric CooperatrveSocrety Lrmrted, Bundrbugyo Energl, Co-operatrve Socrety,Krlembe Investment Limited and Kyegegwa Rural ElectncrtyCooperatrve Society The Government u enhancing efforts toexpand the rural electrification programme and encourageelectriclty consumption wrth a target of bringrng down the cost ofelectrrcity to US 5 cents per umt once all ma;or generattorytransm$srory and drstrrbutron prolects are completed Inaddttton, the government has also leveraged partnershrps wrthcrvil socrety and private sector partners to attract investment inthe manufacture and use of improved stoves, such as the rocket-lorena stoves, for households and inshtuhons4 5 10 Goal 8 on decent $'ork and economic GrowthGross Domestrc Product for the F\2020/21 rndrcates that theeconomy grew by 3 4 percent rn 202-l from 3 percent rn 2020Agrrculture, forestry and fishmg sector actrvitles grew by 3 8214 511percent rn FY2020/21whrch rs one percentage point lower thanthe prevrous year's growth (  8 %) The rndustry sector actrvltiesgrew by 3 4 percent rn F\2020/21 whrch was a 01 percentagepornt hrgher than the prevrous year's growthIn terms of employment, the malority are employed rn theinformal sector, mainly m the agrrculture sector The overallunemployment rate was 8 8 percent m 2019/20 hrgher than the8 5 percent NDP III target by 7020/71 The unemployment ratervas higher n the r:ural (9 "l%) compared to urban areas (8.2'l.) m20^19 /20 Government should further strengthen povertyeradrcation programmes such as emyooga and the ParrshDevelopment Model especrally in rural areas to foster inclusivegrowth and reduce rncome rnequahhes.Goal9 on Building a Resilient Infrastructure, P(omote Inclusiveand Sustainable Industrialization and Foster Innovation.Data mdicates that the proportion of rural populatron livrngwrthrn 2 km of an all-weather road rose from 31 percent in 2017to 57 percent in 2018 and 53 percent by 2020 According to theNSDS 2021 Report, ma;orrty of households (5796) had commumtyroads as the nearest type of road There was a decline rn thepercentage of households that reported commumty roads as thenearest type of road from 62 percent in 2015 to 57 percentn202^lDrsaggregation by residence and sub-regron indrcates thatgenerally community roads were the nearest type of roads to2ahouseholds Bukedr (88%) and Teso sub regions (83%) had thehrghest proportron of households that reported to be nearest to acommunrty road whrle Tooro sub regron had the lowes t (42%) Tolncrease access to all-weather roads, Government rsrmplemenhng several prolects to rehabrlrtate, upgrade andmarntarn roads across the countryThe manufacturmg value added as a proporhon of GDP and percaprta was 15 3 and 142 respectively rn 2019 Thrs rose to 16 and146 respectively in 2020 Total officral internahonal support(official development ass$tance plus other officral flows) tornfrastructure also rose from 479,896,705 in2020 to 648,388,662 rn2021 The Internet penetration rate (mternet users per 100 peoplern Uganda stood at 25 percent rn 2019 whrch was strll below 30percent NDP III target 2020/Zl Ffty-two (52) percent of adults(9.7 mrllion) had mobrle phones and 10 percent (1 9 mrlhon) hadaccess to the rnternet4.5.12 Goal 10: Reduced Inequality:The recrurtment cost borne by employee as a proportion of yearlyincome earned rn Country of destination was constant at 16% rn2019 /2020 Total resource flows for development, by recrpientand donor countries and type of flow (e g , official developmentassrstance, forergn drrect tnvestment, and other flows) decreasedfrom 2,354,0'12,959 in 2020 to 1.,765,893,042 rn 2021 (MoFPED).Thrs rmphes that the decrease m officral assrstance, forergn drrect29lnvestment and others will cripple the government developmentProgramsThe mean per household monthly ncome rncreased from UGX324,288 n 20-16/-17 to UGX 339,263 n 20'19 /20 representrng anannualzed growth rate ot 14 percent The growth is driven byrural areas rvrth per household consumptron expenditure of UGX285,-119 n201.9 /20 fromUGX269,-197 rn 2016/17, translating rntoan annualized growth rate of 1 8 percent (UNHS, 2019/2020)The per caprta consumption expendrture stood at UGX 73,988 n20'19 / 20 hom UGX 73,"174 n 2076 / 77 This implies an annuahzedgrowth rate of 0 4 percent. The growth rate rs hrgher for ruralareas (0 9%) than for urban areas (1 8%) In nomrnal terms, meanconsumptlon expendlture per caprta rs estimated at UGX"135,223in 201.9 /20 from UGX121, 931 n 2016/"17 This presents a 10 9percent nominal increase in consumphon per caprta (UNHS,201.9 / 2020).The real mean consumptron expenditure per capita rn 20^19 /20 rs11 percent higher than the comparable figure estrmated from20^16/-17 - that rs, from UGX 75,330 n20^16 /^17 to UGX.76, 136in20^19 /20 T\rs rise rmphes a very modest annualized growth rateof a 0 3 percent Thus, between 20'1.6/1.7 and 20-19 /20 there hasbeen extremely hmrted growth rn hvrng standards. The observedlow growth is drrven largely by the urban areas from304.5.13UGX 719,730 to UGX'L'12,894 wrth an annuahzed growth of -1 9percent, the correspondrng estrmate for rural areas rs 0 9 percentIncome inequalrty as measured by the Grm coeffrcrent, Ugandahas marntained medrum level of inequalrty for some trme Forinstance, the national Ginr coefflcrent ranged from 0.41 in2005/6to 0.42 in 2016/^17 and now stands at 0.41 in 20-19 / 2 Spatnlmequalrtres remain a srgnifrcant development challenge inUganda whereby the urban populatron account for only 26 6percent n 20^19 /20 of the total populahon, but accounts for 38 9percent of the natronal total consumphon expendrture.Therefore, Government should ensure availabrlrty of adequatefunds to support development programs that are rnclusrve innature for Women, Youths, disabled and elderly in rural andurban areasGoal 11: Sustainable cities and Communities.This goal provides targets and guidance for urban planmng tosupport crtres with rts growing populations According toMrnrstry of Tourism and Wild hfe Authonty, the totalexpenditure (publc and private) per caprta spent on thepreservation, protection, and conservatron of all cultural andnatural heritage, by type of herrtage (cultural, natural, mxed andWorld Heritage Centre deslgnahon), level of government(natronal, regional and local/munrcrpal), type of expendrture(operatrng expenditure/investment) and type of pnvate fundmg314.5.744.5.15(donations rn krnd, private non-profit sector, and sponsorshrp)decreased by ^196 i e ln 2020 rt was 3,265 and decreased to 3,069rn 2021 Thrs rmphes that there rvas a reduction rn private fundingand government expendrture Therefore, the government shouldencourage private funding (donations m krnd, private non-profitsector, and sponsorship) to rmprove on the public/privateexpendrtures.Goal 12: Responsible Consumption and Production.The goal rs meant to ensure good use of resources rmprovlngenergy efficrencp sustarnable infrastructure and provrdrng accessto basrc servrces, green and decent;obs and ensuring a betterqualrty of life for allThe lmplementation of standard accountrng tools to momtor theeconomic and envrronmental aspects of tourrsm sustarnabilrtyincreased from 4 rn 2019 to 5 in 2020 This imphes that there wasan rncrease rn the Implementahon of standard accountrng tools tomomtor the economlc and environmental aspects of tourrsmsustainabrlrty in the countryGoal 13 on Climate actiorLThis goal calls for urgent action not only to combat climate changeand its impacts, but also to build resilience in respondrng tochmate-related hazards and natural drsasters Under thrs goal,324.5:t 6there's only 1 mdrcator wrth data and 2 wrthout There is norndicator whrch rs globally computed for thrs goalAccording to Office of the Prrme Miruster, the number of deaths,missrng persons and drrectlv aflected persons attrrbuted todrsasters per 100,000 populatron decreased from 148 persons rn2017 to 103 persons rn 2018 Thrs rmplies that drsasters reduced rnthe country. This was due to government rntervenhons hkerelocatrng people from dangerous spots on the mountans to saferplaces and plantrng trees around rlvers hke rrver Nyamwamba inKasese. Also, the government has rmplemented and formulated aNational Chmate Change Pohcy Thrs is a national sectoral pohcyof Uganda Its mam obiective is to ensure that all stakeholdersaddress chmate change rmpacts and therr causes throughappropnate measures, whrle promotrng sustainable developmentand a green economyGoal 14 on life below water.The Oceans, seas and other marrne resources are essentral tohuman well-berng and social and economrc developmentworldwide Therr conservatron and sustainable use are central toachrevrng the 2030 Agenda. Thrs goal has only 1 rndicatorapphcable to Uganda However, rt has no data pointsRelatedly, according to the state of envrronment report 2020, itwas estabLshed that, Uganda's water resources cover about 16percent of the country's total area The brggest pressure on the334.5-17water resource 1S from the growng populahon and poor wastemanagement practrces of industnes located near the watersystem Uganda rs on track to meetmg the Standard DevelopmentGoals for access to improved water within the country of 100percent by the year 2025Frsherres activlhes provrde an rmportant source of Lvehhoods tomany Ugandans and forergn exchange to the country. Between2018 and 2019 Uganda's frsheries export rncreased by 82.5 percent from US$ 78 15 mrlhon to 142 69 milhon Fish harvestrncreased from 249,000 metric tonnes rn 2008 to 416,000 metrrctonnes rn 2019 58 percent of Uganda's fish harvests come fromLake Victoria followed by 16 per cent from Lake Kyoga and 26percent from the remaining lakes and rrvers.Goal 15 life on land.Thrs goal has 11 rndrcators, 2 of whrch have data pointsPreserving drverse forms of hfe on land requues targeted effortsto protect, restore and promote the conservatron and sustainableuse of terrestrral and other ecosystems. Thrs goal has gotten only2 indrcators with data pomts,6 rndrcators wrthout any dataavailable and 3 indrcators computed globally.The forest area as a proportron of total land area stayed at 9%between 2018 and 2019 It then, however rncreased to 12 4percent rn 2019/20 as a result of growrng and protectrng of forestsby the National Forest Authorrty Furthermore, the proportron of344.5.18traded wildhfe that was poached or rlhcrtly trafficked rncreasedfrom 0.32 rn 2018 to 0 33 rn 2019 Thrs rmphes the life of wrldammals were fully protected by the government through ltsauspice Uganda Wrldhfe Authonty Thrs was possrble byrecruitmg more Rangers to protect the boundaries of all gameparks in the country.Goal 16 on peace, iustice, and strong institutions:Wrth thrs goal, there's need to promote peaceful and nclusivesocietres based on respect for human rights, the rule of law andhansparent, effectrve, and accountable instrtuhonsThe number of vrctrms of rntentronal homrcrde per 100,000populatron, by sex and per 100,000 populatron rncreased from4922 in 2019 to 5183 rn 2020 Thrs rs unlarvful and Governmentshould set new laws or strffen the exrstmg ones to reduce on thesecasesAccording to the Annual Criminal Report, the number of vrctimsof human traffrckrng per 100,000 populatlory by sex, age, andform of explortation increased from 455 rn 2019 to 666 m 2020 and1-149 n 2O21 .According to the Uganda Prrson services statrstlcal abstract, theun sentenced detainees as a proportron of overall prrsonpopulahon mcreased from 48.1096 in 2019 to 54 50% rn 2020 Thrsrmphes that many prrsoners are held m detention without trial rn35courts of laws The government should therefore ensure that alldetarnees are sentenced to ensure equal access to jushce for all.Accordrng to the Judrcrary, the proportron of the populahon rvhohave experrenced a drspute rn the past two years and whoaccessed a formal or informal drspute resolution mechanismrncreased from 0.5073 in 2020 to 0 5098 n 2021. rmplying that thepopulation has accessed formal or rn{ormal drspute resolutionmechanrsms.Proportrons of posrhons (by sex, age, persons wrth drsab rtres andpopulatron groups) in pubhc rnstrtutrons (nahonal and locallegrslatures, pubhc servrce, and ludrcrary) compared to natronaldrstnbutions, amongJudicrary offrcers decreased from 384 n2020to 375 rn 2021 Pubhc servrce officers decreased fuom 329,633 n2020 to 342,039 n 2021 The Ugandan parliament has 529 officerswrth 352 males and 177 females4.5.19 Goal 17 on partnerships to achieve the goal:Achievmg the ambitious targets of the 2030 Agenda requires arevrtalzed and enhanced global parbrershrp that brrngs togetherGovernments, crvrl socrety, the prrvate sector, the United Natronssystem, and other actors, mobrhzmg all avarlable resourcesAccordmg to Uganda Revenue Authorrty, the total govemmentrevenue as a proportion ofGDP, by source decreased from-17 99%in2020 to7299% rn 2021 Volume of remittances (rn Unrted States354.646^L4.6 24.6.3THE FIRST NATIONAL SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENTGOALS CONFERENCE 2022dollars) as a proporhon of total GDP decreased from 41 rn 2019to 2I n202^L (BOU, MoFPED).Honorables, Uganda like all other countrres acknowledges thatsolutrons towards burldmg back better from the Covid 19pandemic wrll not come from outside our communitiesSolutrons to burld the Uganda economy better wrll be mformedby local models and approaches that wrll accelerate the pace ofdevelopment, innovate new ways of working and unlocking theresihence of women and men across the country.Agamst this background, the Government of Uganda hasrnitnted a natronwrde forum that brrngs together all Stakeholderswith an interest rn the SDGs rmplementation process ThisPlatform has been - code named - Uganda Annual SustarnableDevelopment Goals Conference (Attached as Annex 5 is the firstSDG Conference Report). Thrs was the first of its krnd rn UgandaThis forum facrhtates sharrng of ideas and good practrces at thelocal and national level and catalyze actions to achieve the 2030Agenda and the SDGsThe Uganda first Annual Sustarnable Development GoalsConference was preceded by regronal forums attended by more174.6 4 The key rssues that emerged from the conference include,than 800 people, that comprrsed Local Government politicalIeaders, techrucal officers, prrvate sector leaders, cultural andtradrtronal leaders, rehgrous leaders, crvrl socretv orgamzatrons,youth and children The natronal conference was attended byover 400 delegates who mcluded the Vrce Presrdent, Speaker ofParliament, the Chref Justice, Pnme Miruster, GovemmentMrnrsters, Permanent Secretarres, Dlplomatrc communrty, centraland local government officrals, prrvate sector, civrl socrety,religrous and cultural leaders, youth and children.(a)Underscored the centrahty of frnancing agrrculture and thatsolving problems of hunger in Uganda wrll have a clearmultrpher effect on all the SDGs(b)The Conference underscored the central role of digrtaltechnologies rn young people's busrnesses(c) It was also noted that since there are only erght years left to theyear 2030 when the SDGs goals must have been reahze{ thereis a need to mobrlze citizens to rdentify what works at locallevel, mcrease collaborative work with citrzen formations andgroups and contnue to find ways of making sure that crtzensare at the center of the development processes(d)The Conference noted that whereas the Government andpartners have tried in placing resources and dedicating38rnterventrons to reducrng vulnerabrlrtres, a lot more needs tobe done.(e) The parhcrpants in the Conference also noted that smce theestabhshment of the SDG Secretariat at the Office ot the PnmeMrnister, there has been vrsrble tractron regardingcoordrnatrory implementatron, momtorrng and reporting ofSDGs(f) The Conference noted that whrle Uganda has made goodefforts rn coordmatrng SDGs, there rs need to integrate thiswith other regronal agendas such as the African Union 2063Agenda whose implementatron remarns srlent4.7 HIGH LEVEL POLITICAL FORUM IN NEWYORK }ULY 20224 7.1472Honorables, Uganda partrcrpated rn the Hrgh-Level PohticalForum on Sustarnahle Development Goals whrch was held rnNew York from 5th to 18th luly 2020. The obJective lvas to notonly share experiences from the SDG Conference with the rest ofthe member states but also to Iearn from them especrally on keymodels and Voluntary Natronal Revrews (VNRs).Uganda also orgamzed a srde event at the Uganda PermanentMissron to the Umted Natrons rvhrch attracted partrcipation ofdrfferent stakeholders and member states394.7 35.051The 2022 Hrgh Level Polrtrcal Forum 2022 assessed the globalsrtuahon regarding the SDGs and the rmpact of the COVID - 19pandemrc The HLPF supported d$cussrons and peer Iearning tordentfy pohcres, strategies and achons to overcome the pandemrcand rts impacts while trrggerrng the deep changes and transrhonwe need to accelerate the realization of the SDGs It burltmomentum and insp[ed internatronal sohdarrty and multilateralcooperahon Attached as Annex 6 is a report on outcomes of theHigh-Level Political Forum held |uly 2022).CHALLENGES AFFECTING THE IMPLEMENTATION OFSDGs IN UGANDAColleagues, the pertinent challenges affectrng thermplementatron of SDGs rn Uganda are.(i) Financing for SDGs, amidst other Competing Priorities,Achrevrng the SDGs requrres immense support from allstakeholders srnce they represent the globally agreed and mostpressing envrronmental, social, and economrc issues, resourcesallocated to SDG Coordinatron and popularrzatiorymomtonng and reporting.(i)Data Challenges; Standardrzed monrtonng of thermplementation of the SDGs is sometimes hampered by thefact that not all global mdicators are apphcable to Uganda orhave sufficient national level data Currently, we are able to405.2report on 119 SDG rndrcators wrth data pornts out oI 201apphcable to Uganda(rrr)Low Levels of Awareness of the Local Leaders to IntegrateSDGs with Local Development Initiatives, The ParishDevelopment Model we rolled out at the local governmentlevel does not integrate the SDGs ,(rv)Low Levels of Digitization; As a country moves from theCOVID-19 pandemrc, there is need to embrace digrtaltransformatron which presents signif icant opportunitres.Colleagues, rt goes wrthout sayrng, that achievmg the SDGsrequrres immense support from all stakeholders. More pohtrcaland highJevel techmcal support rs requrred rf the Government ofUganda is to achreve the pledge it made to leave no one behindand reach the furthest first6.0 COMMUNICATION STRATEGY FOR THE SDGS6.1,As a means of commumcating and popularrzrng the SDGs, theGovernment through, Mrnrstry of Informatiory Communlcationand Nahonal Guidance and Offrce of the Prime Mrnrster willdrsseminate the implementation of SDGs Progress to allstakeholders armed at ensuug that all stakeholders are rnformedabout the country's progress in SDGS attarnment. In the sprnt of"leaving no one behind", the proposed medra plan is intended tobe robust and all-rnclusrve41627.07."172Different medra Platform wrll be used to engage stakeholders andcitrzens. Gaming thrs feedback will requrre utilizing vanouschannels hke TV and Radro talk-shows wrth call-m sesstons andmteractlve onhne channels Websrtes and soctal medta platforms(Trvrtter, Facebool WhatsApp among others)CABINET APPROVED RECOMMENDATIONS TOACCELERATE THE ATTAINMENT OF SDG TARGETSWITHIN THE FRAMEWORK OF OUR NATIONALDEVELOPMENT PLAN AND- THE PARISHDEVELOPMENT MODELHonorable Members of Parhament, the Cabinet Meeting inOctobet 2022 under mrnute No 359 (CT 2022) approved thefollowrng recommendatrons to accelerate the attainments of theSDG Targets wrthrn our natronal development trameworksThe Offrce of the Prrme Mmister and Mrnrstry of Healtll led bythe Rt Hon Prrme Mrmster should convene a meeting with theMinister of Health and concerned stakeholders to devise meansto address the persistent outbreaks of malaria in the countryTo follow-up wrth Uganda's Ambassador to Azerbar;an, AmbMuhammad Tezrkuba Krsamrra on the Pledge made by theGovernment of Azerbaqan to give a Grant to the Government ofUganda to support Programs directly benefitrng Persons withDrsabrlitres.427374757.677Mrnistry of Health, to submrt a Paper to Cabinet explarnrng therncrease of malarra cases in the CountryMrnistry of Frnance Planning and Economrc Developmentshould, fast track the rmplementatron of the Integrated NationalFrnancrng Framework (INFF) as a means of mobrlizing resourcesglobally and nationally to support sustarnable developmentMoFPED needs to revsrt Uganda's Domestrc ResourceMobrhzatron Strategy and assocrated pohcres that take mtoconsrderatron these emergmg realitiesThe Mrmstry of Inlormation, Communrcatrons Technology andNational Guidance, to work wrth Office of the Prrme Min$ter topopularize the Sustarnable Development GoalsMrmstry of Agrrculture, Ammal Industry and Frsheries, torncrease investment rn agrrculture to foster food security andstabihzmg food supply charns through pohcy incentrves toencourage value addition, support the central role played by e-commerce, and expand the drgrtal rnformation rnfrastructure inthe country. This wilt ensure that data remarns supreme and anrmportant part of prrvate sector growthUganda Bureau of Statrstlcs, should contrnue to expand thenumber of SDG rndrcators that have data pornts in Uganda The43787.97 "t0development of statrstrcal plans by different enhtres should alsohe encouragedMrnistry of Pubhc Service and Uganda Bureau of Statrstrcs, to re-instate the positron of Statrsticrans in the structures for MDAs andHLGs for effective and efficient delivery on the qualrty datarequred at both national and local Government levels for SDGsand other Government programs Lke Parish DevelopmentModelMrnrstry of Local Government, to tram local leaders to rntegratethe SDGs rn the PDM rmplementatron and the all-localdevelopment plans - rncluding the new crhesMinistry of Science and Technology, to strengthen theengagement and mobrhzahon of the pubhc and privatestakeholders with drgrtal innovatrons and support them for scaleuPThe Offrce of the Prrme Mrmster (SDG Secretarrat), shouldconduct a comprehensive documentatlon to identfy the peopleleft behind, those at a risk of berng left behrnd, where they arefound and rn what areas of servrce dehvery they have been leftbehindThe SDG Secretarrat should take on an addrtronal role ofcoordinatrng the follow-up on the Afrrca Umon s Agenda 2063447.11712slnce it has not been well coordinated srnce its adoption This isbecause the 2030 Agenda and Afrrcan Umon Agenda 2063 areboth mutually rernforcrng rnternatronal and regionaldevelopment strategres that support the national prrorities ofUgandaThe Office of the Pnme Miruster should present the SDG progressreport and status of implementahon to Parhament as a means ofmobilizrng members of Parhament rn locahzatron of SDGsThe Government of Uganda coordinated by the Offrce of thePrtme Mmister and Mmstry of Forergn Affarrs, should presentUganda third Voluntary Nahonal Review (VNR) report to theHrgh-Level Pohtrcal Forum m New York rn 2024 and thrs requrresconcerted efforts by all three arms of Government8.0 CONCLUSION7.137148.1The successful rmplementatron of Agenda 2030 requres anintegrated approach, partnerships and particrpatron throughinclusrve politrcal processes and responsrve, effechve,accountable mstrtuhons It wrll requrre varrous stakeholders tordentrfy soluhons for planning, budgehng, implementing andmonrtonng progress towards achieving the SDGS, as well astrackmg where and how funds are spent and assess the impact ofthese inrtratrves on the lives of people - especially ke), nterestgroups We hope that this report will enhghten the thought45process of Honorable Members ot Parhament m thelr effortstowards a fuller realzatlon of the 2030 AgendaMINISTER FOR GENERAL DUTIES/FOCAL - POINT MINISTERFOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALSOFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTERPLOT 9-11 APOLLO KAGGWA ROADP O BOX 341KAMPALAV UGANDAJANUARY 202346