Tuesday, 2 March 2010

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I would like to appeal to you to internalise the provisions of the Constitution, especially on the timing of elections. I hear some of us are in the constituencies trying to prepare for the elections that will come next year, though today is only March 2010. And my understanding is that elections will start maybe by end of February or March next year.

Since the last elections, there have been comments and observations to the effect that we need to reform the electoral laws so that the next election does not see the problems that were faced in the 2006 elections. But if this is the case, we must then support it with actions by doing electoral reforms, which must be done in this House when you are all here. Therefore, before we go to the villages to campaign to be elected, it is necessary that we reform the laws that will govern the elections. 

Many months ago, we indicated to the country that any reforms that we would have to make would come a year before elections so that those to conduct and participate in the elections are able to internalise those provisions. 

However, my position is that it is now less than 12 months to the elections – the Bills were submitted to us by Government for amendments to a number of laws that are relevant to elections. I remember us committing ourselves to process these Bills by February. Unfortunately, February has passed. This is to appeal to you to commit yourselves to this exercise by ensuring the Bills are passed at least within this March. 

However, you should note that this will necessitate curtailing your travels to constituencies for us to finish this. It is to enable you go to the constituencies when everything is already in place. My appeal to you, hon. Members, is for you to readjust your plans so that you can be here to pass these laws. 

I would like to add that your going away will be subject to indicating to me where you will be going. This is so because if I count you absent 15 times – now I am going to be strict on that – I know where each of you sits and I will be noting in my book whoever will not be there –(Laughter)– and I know this will not be in your interest. 

So, just fill the Chamber so that I do not have to do that. If some people get to stand, I will not be in a position to tell who will not be here. That is my honest appeal, hon. Members – please, give us your time so that we can do parliamentary work especially on those laws relevant to elections. I thank you very much.

2.47
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank you very much for that timely appeal, but I would, at the same time, like to say that I would have wished to see you appeal to all of us. I am saying this because you are only appealing to us who –(Laughter)- are ever here and those who always are not here are not listening to you. I request the you reduce this appeal to maybe a write up to be circulated – 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know the box number of those who are not here. (Laughter)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Secondly, Mr Speaker, I think there are two things here. First of all, the primaries in some parties, which are about to take place - the other one is the roadmap of the Electoral Commission, which says that nominations will commence in October this year. I would like to say that if that is allowed, then this Parliament will end in October. After October, you may be sitting in that chair alone –(Laughter)– because I do not imagine a candidate who has been nominated sitting here when the competitors are in the field campaigning. 

My suggestion is that the roadmap be amended. But also, Mr Speaker, you cannot conduct a parliamentary campaign for six months; that is not sustainable. Besides interfering with parliamentary work, it is a very tedious programme. I thank you.

2.49
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I go to the issue that I would like to raise, allow me respond to what you have said.

I believe as Members of Parliament, much as we have a lot to fulfill before we officially begin our campaigns, we should also look at committee field trips. In this situation, I think your office should direct the chairpersons of the various committees - in order to have all Members – these field trips are also contributing to the small numbers you see here. If need be even trips abroad should be suspended so that we can sit down and finalise whatever we have to do before we get to the next step.

Finally, it is true you have appealed to us as Members of Parliament, but I would like to request the Leader of Government Business to also do the same to His Excellency, the President. These days the President is very rare in the office – he is now campaigning under the guise of touring NAADS programmes. Everything is now stuck in the office because he is never there. I request the Leader of Government Business to inform the President that campaigns have not yet started so that he can also settle in his office to execute State duties -(Interruption)

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to inform hon. Members of Parliament that His Excellency, the President is not campaigning as alleged.

MR SEBAGGALA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Leader of Government Business for that clarification although I still think the President is doing exactly what Members of Parliament are doing.

Anyway, allow me say that I rise on an issue of national importance. There is an exercise going on, which is the registration of NRM supporters. But I would like to request the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to clarify on this issue. I am saying this because we are getting various phone calls from our constituents especially in Kampala that that exercise has been mixed up. 

Last week, some LCs and people from my constituency called me saying that there was an exercise going on, but that the way it was being done left a lot to be desired. According to them, the people conducting it moved from house to house that they are registering NRM supporters, but that what they were actually doing was to ask people to produce their voters’ cards from which they would record their voter’s numbers. I have been approached by the chairpersons of LCs in my constituency that this exercise cannot be taken as merely registration of only NRM supporters.

Actually, two weeks ago we had some officials from the Electoral Commission together with some chairpersons of various parishes. They told us they were to come and update the voters’ register, but when the chairpersons asked to be showed the existing registers, the LCs were told those were official documents meant only for the Electoral Commission. However, after four days, the chairpersons got those very registers with the NRM people who were registering their supporters.

My humble request to the Electoral Commission, through the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, is for them to come out and clarify whether this exercise is about updating the voters’ register or not. And if so, let is be known so it is not mixed up with registration of NRM supporters. I am saying this because some people have been registered as NRM supporters but after being told it was all about updating the voters’ register.

Thirdly, two weeks ago, there was an advert in the newspapers by the Electoral Commission with various posts including sub-parish and parish supervisors. The information we have is that this exercise has been taken up by the RDCs – they are the ones taking the names of the presiding officers in the various constituencies saying those are the people to monitor elections in those respective parishes and sub-counties. The reason we had asked the Electoral Commission to do away with parish chiefs is because they had turned to be NRM agents. Now what is going on with RDCs presenting names of people? I would like to request the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to clarify this kind of situation.

2.55
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank hon. Latif Sebaggala, for raising this issue on the Floor of the House. As you may remember, I earlier complained about an exercise, which was named re-demarcation of villages.

I remember that time, the Minister of Local Government made an undertaking - about two weeks from that time - saying he would present an explanation to this House in that regard. That did not happen. I only thought he was honest, but he wasn’t.

After that, I discovered there were letters on headed paper of Electoral Commission circulating through Makindye Division and other areas of the city together with a letter from the Chairperson of the Electoral Commission, but on further verification, I got to discover these letters were rather strange. The signature was not so similar to the one I know as that of the current Chairperson of Electoral Commission.

I, together with my colleague, the MP for Makindye East, hon. Mike Mabikke, wrote a formal letter to the Electoral Commission inquiring about those documents that also indicated zones that had already been re-demarcated – the zones are the equivalent of villages. Later, the Electoral Commission wrote to us disassociating itself from the exercise. However, that did not stop at that. Further to that, meetings were held in Makindye Division and other areas in which headed letters from the Electoral Commission recognising the newly created villages were circulated, but this time calling them new polling stations. This forced us to go back to Electoral Commission to inquire about this, but I again went to Ministry of Local Government – 

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Kyanjo, we are mixing two issues because what you are talking about are activities of the Electoral Commission. But the issue before us is about the current programme of NRM registering its supporters. And a Member wanted to know whether NRM is also carrying out the functions of the Electoral Commission or not. I notice that yours is a different issue.

MY KYANJO: Mr Speaker, maybe it was the story that was long, but with your guidance, I can quickly reach the conclusion.

Last week, I received calls from constituents to the effect that there were persons who were registering people supposed to be voting. I told them that was not an exercise of the Electoral Commission, it having dissociated itself from it. But later they came to me with documents and said the villages that had been created in the first place – that is the polling stations that had been named had been allocated chiefs who were now registering people on the pretext that they were from the Electoral Commission when in fact they were registering members of the NRM. They were calling themselves members of the Electoral Commission instead of saying they are members of the NRM. I do not know whether these members were dishonest or they were using the cover of NRM to go and register everybody as if they were all members of NRM. When I came and discovered that hon. Latif was presenting the same matter, I felt that I could add this information so that we can prepare ourselves either for the very best of the elections or the worst.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you hon. Kyanjo for giving way. In Pader District, that same group has managed to successfully register 90 percent of everyone in my constituency, whether they are in FDC or NRM. And the message they are giving is that if you do not register and get an NRM card, you are not going to get the NUSAF II funds and you are not going to get the PRDP funds. So, people are being forced to register as NRM members so that they get the resettlement package and treatment in health centres and hospitals. That is what is happening in Pader district now.

THE SPEAKER: Let us curtail our contributions because the issue is: what is this programme for?

MR KYANJO: My plea is that when such an issue comes on the Floor and before you, Mr Speaker, we would request that you expressly instruct the minister concerned –

THE SPEAKER: I think you want to be relevant. The question is about the nature of the programme NRM is carrying out.

MR KYANJO: I comply, Mr Speaker. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you. The matter raised by hon. Latif Sebaggala is very serious because it is heading towards a crisis. 

In my constituency, the LC I leaders are registering literally everybody including those who are not yet 18 years. And they are told that it is an order from above. 

In one parish called Pachua in Mucwini sub-county, they claim they have registered 5,000 voters. The entire Mucwini with 10 parishes does not have 5,000 voters. It is a scheme to rig the coming elections. In fact elections are already rigged. It is very serious. 

LC I leaders are no longer in office but they are behaving as if they are employees of Government. They are ordered to rig elections. 

This Parliament cannot sit here and talk about reforms for an election that has already been determined. It will not help us. I think something should be done and now. 

In Chua, for example, in particular Pachua, because NRM leaders had a rally there last week and they were saying that if any votes do not go to the NRM in the coming elections, the few people who have refused to register would be known and they would regret their actions. You go to the village and intimidate people who have just gone back home from the camps; people who have been in the camps for 20 years; you follow them with intimidation. What do you want them to do? This is a very serous matter and if we are not careful, we are going to have chaos again in this country. I thank you.

3.04
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, if we were not ready for multi-party politics, we should not have gone there. Since we have agreed to go there, we must play according to the rules and regulations. The issue of NRM registering people is not bad. But for you to go and use state machinery is criminal. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: I would like to thank the colleague for taking the information. The NRM party, of which I am a member and a leader of a county, is using its party branch leaders, the LC 1 Movement committee chairperson. By coincidence because of our massive support, the same Movement chairperson could be the LC 1 Chairperson. Our yellow books, and of course not blue, have been sent directly to the LC 1 Movement branch chairperson leaders. They are not parish chiefs and they are not sub-county chiefs. 

I would like to inform the colleague that it is because of the worry that is engulfing you because of the massive support we are getting as a result of registration that you are making the noise. Thank you so much.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much hon. Frank Tumwebaze for having told big lies. You cannot tell us that all the LC I chairpersons are NRM. Regarding the issue of registering your members, you cannot go to everybody’s home and you say, “Give me the card and I register you whether you are FDC, UPC or NRM.”

It is unfortunate that the NRM, which is in power – the party should separate Government activities from party activities. Because people like Mallinga, who is here cannot understand and cannot separate Government issues from – 

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for hon. Nandala to use non-parliamentary language for example saying that people are telling lies; saying Mallinga does not understand when actually –(Interjections)- he is a doctor and he was actually referring to him because he was facing and pointing at him. And there is a Malinga, another one who is –(Interjection)- there is one who is a teacher. Is he in order to refer to honourable Members of this august House as not understanding and telling lies? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, my appeal to you is to use parliamentary language and not to be emotional.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling.

DR STEPHEN MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for this honourable Member to refer to me as a man who does not understand? Is he in order to refer to somebody who is older than himself as being unable to understand? I went to school in Bugisu and everybody was seeing me -(Laughter)– and maybe he was not even born then. I was one of the first people in the Mbale area to get a degree in medicine. (Laughter) Is he in order to refer to me as a man who does not understand?

THE SPEAKER: With that information, he is out of order. (Laughter) But hon. Members, we have a lot to do. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I thank my brother, Dr Mallinga. He is not from Mbale but from Budaka or Pallisa. If he is the first person to get a degree, we congratulate you. But it also goes by age. Otherwise, I also got a degree and a very good one at that and I have more than one. 

What we are saying is a serious issue. We want to ask the government and the Electoral Commission to be an independent commission and not mix their independence with the NRM party. And we want this House to come out clearly on the issue of registration. We are now getting calls from villages that they want their cards; that they want to keep people’s cards. Some LCs are even picking cards to keep. 

We want democracy in this country. Today you might be happy because you are on that side but tomorrow it could be you. You recall a man called Magezi, Balak Kirya, Ibingira, when they were sitting on the Frontbench, they said this law was overdue and the following day when the law was applied to them, they said it was dangerous. 

Do not do things not knowing that there is tomorrow. We want to ask the chief executive of this country, that is, the President, to separate NRM from his functions as the executive of the country. And we want to ask our colleagues on the Frontbench to know that the Frontbench is not permanently for them. Tomorrow it will change. Uganda will go nowhere; Uganda belongs to all of us and we must all be here. Nobody applied to come here but we are here. And if you want us to force ourselves to be here, we shall do so. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can we get somebody to respond to the issues?

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): I have heard the comments, observations and indeed challenges that we face in this time of electioneering. I would like to say that most of the allegations made are entirely new to me. I will, in due course, try to ascertain but I hasten to add that the Members making some of these allegations could do very well by mentioning specific areas and examples, which we could take – (Interruption)

MR BWAMBALE: Mr Speaker, I would wish to inform the Attorney-General that in Bukonjo East, in a sub-county called Nyakiyumbu, a one Boduin Masteaki, who is a secretary in the NRM head office in Kasese District, took a list of 17 names of people to the office of the Registrar Electoral Commission in Kasese town, Plot No.2, Alexander Street, who are going to work as electoral supervisors. If you gave me 30 minutes, I would even avail you the list of those names.  

MR RUHINDI: Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would be very happy, as a player in this sector, as one of the responsible ministers in the electoral process, if that information can be availed to me. We can then take it up with the appropriate stakeholders.

3.14
MR JIM MUHWEZI (NRM, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise up to inform Parliament that the roads in Rujumbura County and in Rukungiri District are in a very bad state – (Interjections)- yes, I know. I am raising this matter to ask Government to tell us what they are going to do about it and when because we have been telling people that we are looking for district road construction equipment. 

We know that some of the major roads have been taken over by central government but because of the recent rains, the roads have been run down and the situation is bad and it is affecting the economy badly. Only recently, in Nyakagyeme County, six buses were stuck for over three hours. They were full of people –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, the issue before is about the exercise being carried out by NRM as a party to register its members. 

It is good the honourable minister and the Secretary-General of the NRM is here, the issue that was raised sought to know the nature of the programme that you are carrying out in the name of registering members. Are you carrying out the Electoral Commission’s work or is it party work and what is involved? Would you help us understand this programme because there are complaints and people are thinking that you are mixing up things; that you are even registering people who are not members of your party? 

3.17
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I would like to make a clear statement for the benefit of those who did not know that the National Resistance Movement is going through an intensive exercise of preparing for 2011. 

We have embarked on the exercise of registering our members in time for our internal elections and to ensure that all NRM supporters who wish to be members and registered as members of NRM are appropriately registered. 

In this exercise, we are also involved in a massive recruitment exercise to register those who did not belong to NRM previously and either belonged to other political parties or did not belong to any to join NRM at this point in time. It is an exercise that I am extremely proud and happy of that it is hugely successful.

It is not true that we are using any means other than the means of the political party called NRM to carry out this exercise. I heard before I came that someone complained that we are recruiting and registering members of his party. That is precisely the target of NRM. We intend to recruit everyone and I look forward to approaching that Member to give him the message that this is the time even for him to register with NRM. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Muhwezi, we are not talking about roads.

MR MUHWEZI: Mr Speaker, I thought I was raising a matter of national importance.

THE SPEAKER: No, let us conclude the other one.

3.20
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Secretary-General of NRM for what he has stated. I think FDC that I belong to cannot begrudge NRM or stop NRM from recruiting new members either from FDC, UPC and other parties. But it is wrong for your members who are recruiting and registering people to intimidate the population that if your name does not appear on this list, you will not appear on the National Voters’ Register of Electoral Commission. 

This compels everybody to comply and register. It has been widely discussed in Tororo to the extent that the Registrar of Electoral Commission of Tororo had to go to the radio to dispel the intimidation and harassment. However your agents in the villages continue to intimidate the women and youth that if their names do not appear on the NRM organisation list, they will not appear on the national register.

What some of us did was to tell our members that please, get NRM cards. We shall determine the NRM candidate in our constituency because now these people are helpless. We told all the people to register as NRM and we are going to meet and determine who should be the NRM candidate. Let us face the ball.

THE SPEAKER: But isn’t this taking an hour?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I am an NRM member and I attend most of the functional bodies of the NRM. Our greatest worry has been, how can this exercise be so successful as not to register people who are not NRM and who may cause problems for the NRM members when the time of elections come? So I don’t really see how any NRM functionary can go on the ground to conscript people to belong to the party. 

3.23
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Recently parties signed the Inter-Party Organisation Dialogue. Instead of NRM going on the defensive that things are not going wrong, isn’t it right for the parties to go back to the Inter-Party Organisation Dialogue and have the courtesy to explain the methods that you are using so that there is - 

There is already an Inter-Party Organisations Dialogue, which we signed as parties. What I am saying is that is it very hard, in the name of a smooth exercise, for you to go to this organisation and explain the methods being used? Can’t we do that so that you are understood by other parties concerning what you are doing? Then what is the Inter-Parties Organisation Dialogue for if you cannot even explain? I think we are wasting a lot of our time.

THE SPEAKER: I think it is a good suggestion. Since we have this dialogue and there is a misunderstanding, maybe take it to the leaders of the parties so that they sort it out because I see a lot of time being wasted.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to assure our colleagues that NRM will not use false intimidation or any unlawful methods to recruit members into its ranks, definitely not. If you have any information that any of our members or leaders is doing it, please feel free to let us know and we will certainly -(Interruption) 

3.26
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have got a copy of the lists that are being used by NRM functionaries on the ground to recruit or register and this form has got a voter’s ID number, name, sex, village, occupation, party et cetera. This means that if this record is for the NRM, there is no need for a party and a voter identification number; because it appears like part of the record of the Electoral Commission. 

Mr Speaker, the fear on the ground is that when the NRM functionaries go from home to home with the voter ID asking people about which party they belong to, then that is already intimidation on the ground. This is the beginning of interference in the voter register. This is the process through which rigging an election starts and we must take this very seriously. We are very concerned that the process of rigging the 2011 election has started and it has started with this. I wish to lay this on Table. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we are not focused; in order to be helpful, one should suggest the way forward and then we end.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that we established the Inter-Party Organisation for Dialogue (IPOD) together, and indeed I am happy to say that since then we have been engaged in discussions. In that forum, there is nothing that we cannot talk about. If members of political parties have concerns about what NRM may be doing, this is precisely why we established the IPOD. It is supposed to be a channel through which we can communicate with each other. For instance, I am not sure whether what hon. Mabikke is presenting is a genuine document or not because I know for sure that we do not ask for political affiliation of a member we register. However, if these things came up, it is okay; we can talk about them. 

I simply want to assure you that we will not do anything that is not within the law or that will not promote NRM or that is against you as political parties. As I said in my speech, when we signed the IPOD, the NRM party was interested in building capacity in the country as a whole, including the Opposition, in order to promote good governance in Uganda. So, I simply wish to call upon the Opposition, if you have any fears; that is precisely why we have the IPOD. We will discuss them and tell you what we are doing and you can tell us maybe what you are doing and all these things will be sorted out. Thank you. 

3.31
MR MICHAEL NYEKO (FDC, Kilak County, Amuru): Mr Speaker, thank you so much for giving me an opportunity. In this country we have a history that at one time somebody picked the AK-47 and went to the bush because of rigging elections. For that matter, it is very important that if there is any suspected rigging process that is taking place, it must be stopped forthright. 

The way forward is that we cannot stop the NRM from conducting their activities, but they should not let their activities go hand-in-hand with the activities of the Electoral Commission. For that matter, either the NRM suspends their registration exercise or the Electoral Commission suspends theirs until one is over. If the NRM’s exercise is ending on Friday, then can the Electoral Commission begin fresh registration which is not confusing at all; maybe in the other week or next week? I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I think we have said enough on this issue. 
 
3.33
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I stand here to represent Ugandans who cannot be able to speak here - Mr Abdullah Kawuwa and Mr Ibrahim Magulu. They are hospitalised in Mbale Hospital. These people were shot at on the day they were holding elections in Mbale. We have read in the press that this involved some honourable ministers. We have been waiting to get a statement from them or from the Leader of Government Business. One of our colleagues whose husband was the owner of the car would have been widowed by now, but nothing has come out from Government and we have not had any disciplinary action taken by the NRM Party to sort these things out. 

These gentlemen, who are languishing in hospital in need of assistance, are being intimidated. My request is: Can we hear from the Leader of Government Business or can we get a formal statement from the ministers involved, especially hon. Werikhe who was mentioned in the papers? 

We read in the papers today about chaos in Sembabule. What image is being portrayed? We need a good relationship even if it is happening in the NRM Party. We need sober and proper elections and parties without intrigue and without this issue of do or die. Politics is not life and death; it would be embarrassing if what we hear in Sembabule leads to death. So, can we get a statement like we always get here? If members of parliament are involved or if there are any allegations levied on them, they come here and make personal statements or the Leader of Government Business makes a statement, especially where it involves Cabinet ministers. Thank you. 

3.36
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, Hon. Elijah Okupa is raising a very important matter. I have been directed by the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to inform the House that the Minister of Internal Affairs will, at an appropriate stage, make a statement because this matter is being handled by the Police. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Let the minister make a statement on Thursday.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, I will communicate your directive accordingly. 

3.36
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I am rising on another matter of national importance. Last week, we buried 10 people in Lubaga North because of boda-boda related accidents and many more are hanging their legs up in hospitals around Kampala. In response to the rampant boda-boda accidents, the Police have instituted a crackdown and have impounded over 4000 boda-bodas in an operation which is basically intended to crack down on failure to wear crush helmets.

My concern is about the policy of crush helmets. What I see in Kampala is that the number of deaths is going to rise and rise. I have watched a boda-boda man carrying one little child in front and four little children behind while riding at a high speed, dodging potholes in traffic. The boda-boda person has a helmet and the little children have no helmets and there are no helmets for kids on the market.

What I have heard or seen about the crackdown on crush helmets is that the boda-boda person is required to have a crush helmet. I have also heard that passengers are also required to have a helmet. However, Government or the Police have not given guidelines on who is supposed to provide helmets for the passengers. Is it the boda-boda person or a passenger? Helmets are like personal clothing; you cannot share them. People have got skin diseases, lice, unpleasant smells; how can you share helmets? What about the younger children? If the older people are supposed to have helmets, is the boda-boda person who is carrying four kids supposed to provide helmets for grown-ups and helmets for young children? 

I think that the problem is lack of a transportation policy in this country. I would like Government to explain to this country whether boda-boda is in the official Government transportation services policy. If it is, then Government should give guidelines on responsibilities of different stakeholders. Are you supposed to give a helmet to your five-year-old child who is going to school every morning so that they bring it back? The helmets might save the 100,000 or so riders, but what about the millions who are exposed to everyday risks of travel by boda-bodas? 

I think that the designer of the boda-bodas never intended them to be used for public transportation because they come with one helmet and they are supposed to be used by one person for 12 hours a day. Can you imagine someone wearing a helmet in this heat for 12 hours? We have a huge  problem with our public transportation policy and safety; can Government explain what the safety and comfort of the people that use boda-bodas are? When I was coming this morning, some boda-boda people stopped me and said, “We are here Beti Kamya; you said that they should stop us from working”. I do not want that, but I want them to be protected and the public to be protected.

3.42
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central, Kampala): This is a very serious matter and we need guidance. We need a policy from Government because what we witnessed today is that we have failed to guide the public and the users of these motorcycles. The reason is that the crackdown is carried out in such a manner as if Government is phasing out boda-bodas without stating it clearly that it is the policy. If it is Government, let us know whether you do not want boda-bodas to be used in town or not. 

The statutory instrument of 2004 which the Police is enforcing ruthlessly provides for a lane for boda-boda cyclists. It provides that Government shall make sure that on each and every road there is a lane specifically gazetted for boda-boda cyclists. But you look at the roads that we have in the city here; the boda-bodas are just manoeuvring all over to see that they also fit on the road. It is extremely difficult for the boda-boda cyclist to survive on the road; and instead they are treated as if they are not part of the road users in this city. Could Government tell us when they are implementing that statutory instrument on observance of traffic rules such as keeping in the proper lane? Would the Government explain to us why they have to provide specific lanes for the boda-boda cyclists? We have been to organised cities and it happens.

The brutality being meted out against boda-boda cyclists is uncalled for. You go to all Police stations around town here and you will see the way boda-bodas have been impounded and they are packed there. At times I feel like getting out of my car and dealing with Police officers. This is a cyclist who is carrying a passenger and they just kick the motorcycle and it lands on the ground in an effort to arrest for non-compliance with the law. I think what they are doing is wrong. May we know why Government is condoning that kind of brutality by the Police in clumping down on the boda-boda cyclists, but most importantly, why they do not organise the boda-boda industry like any other industry such that we know that it is allowed in Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: We are not going further with this. Hon. Prime Minister, would you like to say something?

3.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Simon Ejua): I am saddened by the fact that honourable members of parliament would want to contradict the law which they passed here. They would like to bring out political statements in the process of trying to stop these dangerous actions by the operators of the motorcycles that carry passengers. I must say they have raised a number of issues

MR LUKWAGO: I rise on a point of order. The minister is fully aware that the instrument they are enforcing was never passed by this Parliament; it was a statutory instrument which was passed by the Minister of Works and Transport in 2004. It was never even brought here for approval. Is the minister in order to put it to us that we are contradicting a law we passed, well knowing that we are not the ones who passed that instrument? Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know what to say. We could see this from two sides because your language is different from his language. You could be talking as a professional person while he is not. I think what he was saying is that he authorised the issuing of a statutory instrument and you passed it. 

Hon. Minister, you should not be surprised with what has happened here because they are concerned. Hon. Kamya started by saying that last week they buried 10 people. That is enough to cause concern. What we need to know is how the boda-boda industry should be run in Uganda; should it follow the law or not? I can give you an example of a recent case. As I was travelling, I saw a lady sitting on the boda-boda – we call it ekikyala because men sit differently and the bakayala sit differently –(Laughter)- and this mukyala was holding a three-month-old baby. Imagine somebody sitting on a boda-boda like that; if there is an accident who is the first victim? This is the kind of situation that has warranted the expression of concern here. What we need from you is a detailed statement explaining the operation of the boda-boda industry in Kampala and other areas. I think that will be enough for us. (Applause) 

MR EJUA: I thank you. We will make a comprehensive statement together with the Ministry of Internal Affairs in three weeks’ time.   

THE SPEAKER: Okay. We go to the next item. Honourable members, if you want to utilise the procedure of raising matters of urgent importance, the Speaker needs to be notified. We have spent almost two hours on this matter and yet it was not on the Order Paper. It is high time that we start business, but you can notify me tomorrow or the other day so that we can liaise. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS

3.51
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): I thank you. I would like to make a statement on landslides and floods in parts of Uganda.

Honourable members, tragedy struck the country yesterday when landslides and floods washed away people and property in Bududa District. Following three days of continuous rainfall in the villages of Nametsi, Kubehwo and Namangasa; all of Nametsi Parish in Bukalasi sub-county, Manjiya County, Bududa District. The landslides erupted at about 6.30 p.m. from about 800 metres above Nametsi Trading Centre. A mudslide covering an area of more than 200 metres wide came down and buried three villages including Nametsi Trading Centre and Nametsi Health Centre III. The health centre III had one nurse and two support staff. Bodies of two of the three medical staff have been recovered.

By 12.00 o’clock today, a total of 55 bodies had been recovered by the rescue teams comprising of UPDF troops from the 3rd Division Mbale, resident survivors and Red Cross volunteers. Over 307 people are still missing. Only 31 survivors have been accounted for from the three villages. 

The three villages were highly populated with over 3,000 people located high in the mountain without any access road to the district headquarters. Currently, even a caterpillar cannot reach the disaster site; the place can only be reached by foot. It is 15 kilometres from Bududa Hospital and five kilometres from the nearest health centre III at Bukalasi. Rescue operations are on-going and Hon. Musa Ecweru and Hon. David Wakikona reached the disaster site early this morning.

The landslide disaster also struck the neighbouring sub-county of Bumayoka at Ulukusi Parish destroying a church. Six bodies have been recovered from this disaster site. The landslides have also affected Bukwo, Sironko, Mbale, Manafwa and Kapchorwa districts. Assessment teams are in each of the affected districts and a comprehensive report will be issued before the end of today if we can get all the information.

Response by Government and Humanitarian Partners

A team led by Hon. Dr. Maj. Gen. Julius Oketa from the Office of the Prime Minister, Disaster Preparedness Department, UPDF, Uganda Police and doctors flew to the site by helicopter this morning to provide First Aid and clean drinking water for the survivors. The UPDF 3rd Division in Mbale dispatched an ambulance and rescue team with relevant equipment such as shovels, hand hoes and spades at 6.00 a.m. this morning. 

The Office of the Prime Minister is providing survivors with bottled drinking water, and a trailer loaded with 26 metric tonnes of relief food left this morning for Bududa. The Uganda Red Cross Society is providing blankets, tarpaulins, tents, jerry cans, saucepans, plates and cups. The medical team flown from Kampala will be reinforced by Mbale Hospital doctors. It should be said that this has already happened. 

In Butaleja District, the sub-counties of Kimuntu, Mazimasa, Kachonga, Butaleja rural and Butaleja Town Council are experiencing flooding. Over 600 people are displaced in Butaleja. About 217 people have camped at Nampologoma Town Board and 97 people at Doho Rice Scheme, offices while others have taken refuge at relatives’ homes in safe locations.

The Office of the Prime Minister has dispatched another trailer loaded with 25 metric tonnes of relief food to Butaleja. The Uganda Red Cross Society is delivering blankets, tarpaulins, tents, jerry cans, saucepans, plates and cups to the displaced in Butaleja. 

Background to this problem

Members will recall that on 7 October 2009, I issued an El Nino warning and informed the country that there was a likelihood that the country would experience above normal rains for an extended period of time covering the month of October 2009 to March 2010. Most parts of the country have experienced above normal rains over the period focused, and it is the same El Nino conditions which are still active now reaching their peak. The conditions are likely to begin declining somewhere in mid March, with a brief dry spell during April, and expected to end early June. As honourable members know, climate change is showing a lot of fangs in different parts of the world. 

An El Nino task force was formed in early September 2009. The task force developed a preparedness and response plan that I presented to Cabinet and was approved although the challenge has been its operationalisation.

A more detailed report about the impact of the landslides, floods and windstorms covering the whole country will be presented as soon as we get a full picture of what is on the ground throughout the country. I would like to point out that areas like Mbale, Bundibugyo, parts of Kabarole, Kasese and other areas where we have always had these landslides should be watching out. There is hardly anything we can do to direct the rains because the rains are coming at their will. However, we are trying as much as possible to prepare and handle the situation as it arises. 

I want to inform the House that the President is fully aware of this and has been giving directions. The Prime Minister has been sitting since morning and we have been working on this. We want everybody to co-operate. The issue is not criticism; the issue is attempting to address the situation, which seems to be above our control in terms of the changes that have occurred globally due to climate change. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.59
MR FRED BUKENI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable Minister of Disaster Preparedness for the information. I also want to confirm that it is true the honourable ministers are on the ground and Government is doing everything possible to save people who are still alive. I also wish to confirm that the helicopter is there and is trying to assist our people in the disaster-hit areas. It is true that people have died from the churches. Also, school children have died and the health personnel in a health centre at Nametsi have died. They have found only one person and the others are still missing. There are many people who are missing. The number cannot be determined now.

The worst thing is that it is still raining. As we entered the Chambers, some of the people in the area were running away because the rains were coming again. They feared that anything could happen again. 

This is a matter, as the honourable minister has said, that has happened continually. However, this is not the time for blaming whoever did not play their part. What is important is that we take a lesson from this. We have always told Government that there is still a very big problem there. Sometimes we can solve that problem using fewer resources than those being used now. 

We requested Government to buy land for some of these people who are staying near the national park; some of them are even in the national park. They are the ones who have cut down the trees that were holding the soils. The soils can no longer hold the heavy rains. If only these people were moved to another area as was done in Bushenyi where land was bought and given to people to settle. Land can be bought and the people on Mt Elgon can be resettled so that they do not stay there to be buried by landslides.

In my neighbouring constituency, the situation was also becoming worse as we entered here. This is due to the heavy rains. Houses have started crumbling and those that have not crumbled are being filled with water coming from the soils. The crops have been covered and the bridges, including the small ones, have been swept away. Children cannot go to school. The children in Buwagogo cannot go to school; the children in Mwikaye cannot go to school; the children of Bukewa cannot go to school; the children of Butoto cannot go to school; and many other schools cannot be accessed because of the situation now.

Following the El Nino of 1997, we requested Government to build some bridges following a promise. Only two were built and the remaining eight have never been built. Until the rains subside, the children will not be going to school because they cannot cross. The rivers’ water levels cannot be determined and people cannot predict where they can easily cross from, let alone swim. 

Even last time when there was a problem, nothing was done in Bugisu area; it is only Teso that was assisted by building bridges; but nothing was done in Bugisu. Even now, people are failing to escape because there are no rivers to provide escape routes. 

I hope the honourable minister will tell Government that this time funds be availed to relocate the people from Mt Elgon, and for those areas where people can still stay, bridges be built like it was done last time. I also wish to request that other areas, all the way from the border of Kenya up to Bududa, including Sironko and Mbale, be studied because the situation is the same. Our people need assistance. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the minister’s statement about this area. Lives of our brothers and sisters have been lost. It is appropriate that we observe a moment of silence.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

4.05
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the Minister of Disaster Preparedness for having issued this statement.

This morning, I was woken up by my constituents telling me that the whole area had been flooded. The roads have been cut off and the gardens are full of water; cassava and the crops that had been growing very well are all covered with water. Here, I am seeing a report detailing what is happening in Butaleja District and it is very close to what is happening in my constituency. Therefore, I would like to inform the Minister that the ministry should brace for greater interventions beyond the district of Butaleja. The district of Tororo requires substantial interventions as well. It would be in order - as he has promised, a more detailed report about the impact of the landslides and so on will be coming - to let his team visit this area as well. 

This morning I was trying to connect with the disaster committee of Tororo District and they said they were also driving there to see what was happening; but they will not reach the place because it is flooded. 

I request that the minister also takes up this issue seriously so that at least when the report comes, he is in a position to handle the issue of Paya Sub-county, Merikit Sub-county, Petta Sub-county, Kirewa Sub-county and possibly, Nabyoga Sub-county and Molo as well in Tororo District. These are places which are prone. When Butaleja suffers this kind of problem, they also suffer the same because the levels are the same. It will be important that these people are also assisted in the same way like the Butaleja people are going to be assisted. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.08
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I come from Bugisu where the landslides have taken place and as Chairman of Bugisu Cooperative Union I have lost my farmers and this is quite bad.

We want to thank the Minister for Disaster Preparedness for the report. He stated that in October last year he warned us. If indeed he warned us, he should have taken action to deal with the issue of the rain. Landslides are common in the mountainous areas as a result of rain. If the minister was really a serious minister, he would have gone and removed those people of the mountainous areas and resettled them somewhere -(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, you can hear people saying “Ah!”; we know the reasons. 

Mr Speaker, you recall that during the Seventh Parliament, there was a time cows lacked water and they called us from wherever we were and we came and passed a supplementary budget for emergency - UShs 7 billion - to get water for cows. All of you recall that. Now, here we are talking of human beings; people who contribute to the economy; and I hear the frontbench saying “Ah!” Even the “minister without work” who has been affected in Butaleja cannot see that it was important that people should have been safeguarded.

Mr Speaker, the minister comes up very clearly and says that over 307 people are still missing. Now, to come with the exact number, to put that seven at the end, you must know the numbers. He should have said, “over 300”, but he says, “over 307”. This report must have been made to just blindfold us. In Bugisu, in a village alone there are around 200 homes and if you take it that on average there are three people per home, those are 600 people. So, if you have recovered 55, know how many are missing. You go ahead and talk of another village and you say only six bodies have been recovered. How many survived? You have not even told us how many survived. 

I am saying this because I am feeling pain that they are not telling us the exact number of people of Bugisu who have died. If you do not know, you have the Uganda Bureau of Statistics -(Interjections)- You can hear “Ah!”. You can see how they do not understand. Uganda Bureau of Statistics will tell you the number of people in that particular area according to the census which took place -(Interjections)- You shoot me and keep quiet.

There are 31 survivors. Now, what have we taken there? We have taken a helicopter and a major general. If you can run with a helicopter because of 31, why didn’t you run when there were many? 

It is so painful when I see the other side laughing yet you can save cows. I feel so hurt. I feel so hurt, Mr Speaker. In Bugisu we contribute to this country’s national economy. We pay taxes but when it comes to disasters like this, we cannot have a fallback position and people are laughing. I feel unhappy -(Interruption) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: The information I want to give is that I was part of the Seventh Parliament when we passed UShs 7 billion to go and save the cows which were dying in Mbarara District. I was also part of this Parliament when we allocated money to go and resettle people in Bushenyi, something the honourable member was just talking of some minutes ago. So, I was there in all these parliaments and I saw these things happen. What hurts me is that they only happen if the disaster strikes certain areas and they do not happen when disaster strikes other areas. We are watching.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, we have approved money for the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and I got a copy of the Prevention of Disaster and Preparedness Draft Policy. That policy brings together all sectors and experts of this country. Also, in this country we have geologists who predict disaster and who know the movements of the earth. This is not the first time we are experiencing landslides in this part of Uganda and now the minister has talked of Bundibugyo. The minister should come with a very clear statement. You know there is El Niño and you know that as a result of El Niño we have had landslides. You should have asked Government for money to move people from the dangerous points as the disaster policy provides; but you did nothing. 

Mr Speaker, the minister needs to know that even in Tororo County the gardens are flooded. He is just giving a three-page statement and yet in that policy we constituted district disaster committees and the district disaster committees are supposed to have the latest technology to inform the Centre so that life can be saved. I am so disappointed with the statement of the minister. There is something on Bundibugyo, but he is not telling us what has happened in Bundibugyo. We may even lose more lives in Kabale. What kind of action has been taken? How much money do you want this Parliament to give you?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, in the second last paragraph, there is a statement which says: “The landslides have affected Bukwo, Sironko, Mbale, Manafwa and Kapchorwa Districts. Assessment teams are in each of the affected districts and a comprehensive report will be issued before the end of today.”

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, my concern and the information I am giving my brother is that why should the minister wait for people to die and then start giving information and yet you knew El Niño was coming? Why haven’t you asked for supplementary money? 

Mr Speaker, you know that this Parliament chased a Government supplementary, but within that supplementary, there was no money to take care of people living in Bugisu area and those expected to die due to El Nino. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, when I see a man like hon. Pereza Ahabwe laughing at us who are dying, it is so unfortunate. This Parliament has settled people who have come out of camps; if it was necessary for us to move our people to somewhere else and wait until the rain settles, we would have been happy to be taken there. If we cannot afford to walk from the mountains, how can we afford to reach the place in Kitgum? 

Mr Speaker, it is very bad – I do not know if you have heard that 55 dead bodies have been recovered so far; they can fill this Chamber; you can see the pain we are going through. How can the minister say, “We passed the issue to Cabinet and they said that there is lack of funds?” And you come here and say you are in charge of Government? How can you talk of lack of funds when people are dying? It is so unfortunate. 

In conclusion, we have agreed to face the loss and grief; even our roads have been cut off. I heard the Chairman of Bugisu Parliamentary Association mentioning the streets which have been blocked. Mutufu – Budadiri Road has been blocked; Namagumba – Budadiri Road is also finished; if you go up there in Bududa, the roads are destroyed. Today, it may be for Bugisu, but tomorrow may be another place. 

It is very important that if we have a Minister In-charge of Disaster Preparedness, then we should be prepared for disaster. But what do you prepare for before disaster? You should stop coming to prepare after disaster. I think I would rather we scrap that ministry so that we know that we have no one in-charge of disaster. Anyway, if you look at the minister himself, he is disaster. These are the major problems we are incurring in this country. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.19
MS FLORENCE EKWAU IBI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I share my grief with the grieving people of Bugisu and we pray that God comforts the bereaved families. 

My concern stems from the minister’s statement on page two, where he gave the example of Nametsi Health Centre III that was meant to offer emergency aid. We were told it had only three staff. Under normal circumstances, a normal trading centre, according to the statistics and the records that come from the Ministry of Health, is supposed to have 17 members of staff. One does not get surprised to find three staff managing a health centre III –(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, I am sorry to have failed to restrain myself. I fully associate with the cries of my brothers and sisters, especially those that represent areas that have been hit by the disaster. I sympathise more specifically with hon. Nandala who has expressed a lot of passion for the people over there and the way Government is doing business; but I felt that it would be unfair for the minister to be referred to as “Disaster itself”. I wanted this impression to be corrected so that we can proceed properly. I pray that you rule on this, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Sometimes, there is what we call a slip of the tongue, but the reckless use of language is not a slip, but somebody is intentionally trying to provoke somebody by being personal. I think that is not acceptable. I agree with you, hon. Kyanjo that the language used by our friend against the minister is not acceptable. 

Hon. Nandala, it is the view of the House that the language you used against the honourable minister, that he is a disaster himself, as a person, is not acceptable. 

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, you know that when you have lost somebody, you can cry badly –(Interruptions)– Yes, please give me a chance – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, the language you have used is not acceptable. 

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, if I have offended anybody, I withdraw. 

THE SPEAKER: I think it is a virtue for one to realise a mistake and apologise. You do not lose anything; actually we glorify you. 

MS EKWAU: Mr Speaker, I was on the verge of expressing my concern on the health centre where disaster struck. We were told that by this time, there was only three staff. This shows how the system in this country has failed. Under normal circumstances, a health centre III is supposed to have 17 staff, and here we have only three. Who will explain for the 14 that are missing? 

If you went to verify this information, you would be lucky to find a district with a health centre III that has even eight staff. I think a lot still has to be done to rectify the state of affairs in this country.

My other concern is about the 25 tonnes of food that were sent. Mr Speaker, through you, I would like to reach the minister and really cry that the 25 tonnes that were sent were very insufficient, bearing in mind that I watched the scuffle that ensued and followed the distribution of the items that were taken. It was a battle of the mighty. 

At the end of the day, you find the men and the energetic boys with their strength benefitting and the innocent women and child-headed families definitely losing out. If there is a way of improving how some of these relief items are distributed, it would be far much better. The area leaders could not distribute the items that were taken because of the struggling and the scuffles that ensued. 

Whilst this is happening, it brings me to the other concern. Every district has a Disaster Management Committee, but do you know what happens when items are taken? People who come from Kampala take them, dump them there and at times begin participating in the distribution, and that is how the relatives and friends get plenty of supplies and the masses that are meant to benefit end up losing out. 

The Ministry of Disaster Preparedness has completely failed to coordinate and work with the Disaster Management Committees in the districts. You find people fighting over the few relief items that have been taken from the centre. I think it is time this ministry styled up.

Otherwise, we have mourned, we have pleaded, we have shouted and we have addressed press conferences but each time we hear that God is going to send a disaster through rains, your heart sinks because you know how the items are going to be handled even before they are distributed. I do not know where to address my concern this time because this is not the first time, neither is it the second. I have pleaded over this a number of times.

As the Member who is most affected with the landslides gave his concern, he said that when there were floods in Teso, we had the bridges constructed. I stand to be corrected; apart from the road linking Moroto Road, that is Katakwi Road and Agu, I do not remember any road or bridge that was worked on as a result of the floods. We just waited and the rains receded until our roads became moderately passable and life continued as usual; but we did not benefit from the UShs 10 billion that was released for the floods. Wherever it went, heaven will live to tell; but we did not benefit out of this.

Lastly, there are challenges that come out of the environmental hazards that are facing this country. There is the threat of climate change world over, but we have problems, some of which can be postulated. For the case of the areas that experience landslides, the area Member of Parliament has said something would have been done working hand-in-hand with the Ministry of Environment.

If it continued raining even for one more day, I would not have been able to access Kampala City. I stay in Ndejje. I would not have accessed Kampala City. We would have been completely cut off here at Lufuka. In fact, each time people complain, they write articles blaming hon. Otto; I just smile when I see him. I think they do not know that we are two who stay in this place.  

Honestly speaking, when it comes to the issue of the challenges of climate change, the flooding city -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, my neighbour in Ndejje. In fact, the people of Ndejje were lucky during my wedding when I graded the road –(Laughter)- together with hon. Nasasira and they graded the road very fast because the Speaker of Parliament was coming there. Since then, the road in Ndejje is very needy. I have files of letters written by the residents to me, some are even asking if I could wed again so that the road is graded, but I said I would not. 

The situation in Ndejje, especially in Lufuka valley, is so terrible that we have now started crossing through Lubowa Estate to join Entebbe Road. We have now abandoned this swamp and wetland. I do not know if we can take someone to see that lake or we have to call it “lake someone”. Thank you.

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much, hon. Otto for the information. As I summarise, I do not know what can be done in areas upcountry which are cut off according to the contributions we have had. 

But the issue of roads - I was smiling when hon. Muhwezi was struggling to raise his concerns about roads. If the issue of the roads and the floods continued and we kept on blaming Kampala City Council, the district councils and authorities, and the sub-counties who work on their roads; and we continue with this circus, the merry-go-round will continue and the floods are prone and more likely to wash more people away. I thank you very much.

4.31
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for bringing us this information. I am saddened with what happened to part of my relatives in Bududa, and I am also very sad that I have also lost some of my relatives.

My concern is, we have been talking about this disaster and the hon. minister has been in that office, I think since this Parliament started. Year in, year out, we have been experiencing these problems. It seems it is reaching the climax with climate change. My worry is, do we have funds in this ministry to do the work and to prepare for any disaster which we know because it is not the first time it is happening? Do we have enough funds?

My colleague has just talked about the flooding right here next to Parliament in Kampala. Last Sunday, I was not able to attend my colleague’s son’s wedding and I live in Akright Kakungulu where the roads were impassable; two trucks had fallen across the road. Bwaise people have been crying; rains have just started in Kitgum, Northern Uganda a week and a half ago, and we are about to experience flooding. So, the disaster work is so huge and is predictable because it is not the first time. 

Is the minister going to be very sincere and tell us that he has an office which has no instruments to work as he has even alluded that the disaster taskforce was put in place, approved but there were no funds? My submission is that this is lamentation without really pushing for what is tangible because it is expected that more people are most likely going to suffer because the rains have not stopped.
I would propose that the minister comes with a supplementary attached to the report here; you include all other areas which are predicted to suffer the effect of the rains, including the flooded areas of Bwaise around us here; the North when it is about to rain, and any other part of the country. Bring the supplementary and instead of lamenting and we go away without a solution, we approve this money and we make sure that our brothers and sisters in disaster areas are quickly rescued.

The little supplements and food they have sent there are going to be a disaster itself. People are going to start fighting for those little items and they are not going to be enough.

Recently, you saw people fighting for the jerry cans and little items on TV. I would propose very strongly, Mr Speaker, that the Minister is directed to bring a supplementary as quickly as tomorrow so that we debate and conclude this disaster arrangement with passing the supplementary budget to rescue this country. Otherwise, I do not see us moving forward. I thank you.

4.36
THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Dorothy Hyuha): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for the statement and the quick response by Government to the disasters we experienced. I wish to share my grief with the people of Bugisu for the loss of lives. 

I heard my neighbour, hon. Okecho, mentioning Butaleja and felt that I should give more information about what is happening in Butaleja District. Butaleja District, which I represent in this Parliament, is prone to floods. First of all, we are in the lowlands and all the rains from Mt Elgon end up in Butaleja. We are a district that is crossed by several rivers; Manafwa, Namatala, Mpologoma and Nakwasi.

Each time we receive heavy rains, this area, which is a low lying area has the mentioned rivers overflowing and hence flooding the neighbouring areas. Right now, as we have heard from the statement, five sub-counties are seriously affected as indicated in the Minister’s statement. We have had a number of homes destroyed; houses have collapsed and those numbers of people who have been mentioned have been displaced. 

Butaleja is a rice growing area where we have over 800 hectares of rice growing in Doho Rice Scheme, plus the outgrowers scheme.  This disaster caught the farmers unaware; it was a harvesting period and the entire rice crop which is our major cash crop has been washed away.  It is not only that, but also other food crops like potatoes and cassava have also been washed away. 

The last five days have seen Butaleja headquarters cut off from Mbale; the main road from the headquarters to Mbale has become inaccessible; no vehicles can cross and even the staff who live on either side of the river cannot cross to the headquarters. Quite a number of the other roads are also inaccessible. You find Namulo - Doho cut off; Doho - Namehere cut off; and even Namulo to Merekite cut off. A number of schools have been cut off and children are out of school. 

Mr Speaker, I know that Government is planning to construct a dam for Doho Rice Scheme as one of the four rice schemes that have been planned by Government, and I am certain that if Government constructs -(Interruption) 

MR ERIAS LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I have patiently listened to hon. Hyuha making a statement on the conditions obtaining in Butaleja. In his brief statement, the Minister promised that he is going to bring a more comprehensive statement by the end of today and we are patiently waiting for the Minister to make that comprehensive statement. So, is it procedurally right for the information that would be contained in the detailed report of the Minister to be brought by hon. Hyuha? 

THE SPEAKER: First of all, the honourable member on the floor is local in the sense that she is a Member of Parliament representing the area and is contributing to the debate. Maybe what you are suggesting is that since we expect a comprehensive statement, we suspend the debate and only resume when the comprehensive statement is brought to this House; we can decide on that. 

Is that the general view? Otherwise, you are okay. But since it is the view that we expect a more comprehensive statement - because this one was criticised due to being a three-page statement - maybe when you bring a ten-page one, more clarifications will be made and, therefore, with her ending, we suspend the debate on the statement and resume when we get the statement.

MS HYUHA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.  I wish hon. Lukwago could know that I represent the people of Butaleja in this august Assembly. I wish to conclude that if the dam to be constructed in Doho Rice Scheme is going to solve many of these problems - and I emphasised the issue of Butaleja because my neighbours could not know what is pertaining and how serious the problem is around Butaleja. 

I want to thank the government for the quick response and I know that you can do much more. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much. Now, honourable members, in view of what has been expressed by the consensus here, we shall continue with debate on this issue because it is serious and since we have been promised a comprehensive statement tomorrow or the other day, we shall continue debating this matter. But our appeal to the government is to take every step in order to help people who are in need, and save the lives of those who have survived. 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I am just seeking guidance and probably a clarification because the Minister here stated that the comprehensive report will encompass a number of other areas. So, I just wanted to know whether Kampala will also be included because the statement is saying that the conditions are going to be worse not only in the eastern region and Bundibugyo, but throughout the country. So, I wanted to get information about that due to the scanty information we are getting from hon. Otto about Ndejje. Someone else is about to talk about Bwaise and I may talk about Kisenyi. Are we going to get a comprehensive report about these areas? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukwago, when the people of Bududa hear you saying there is a disaster in Kampala, they may wonder. This is because the situation in which we are in here is not comparable to the situation there; so they will say he is comparing himself to us. Why don’t we spare ourselves this because they may say, these people are not serious. I think we can handle Kampala. Ndejje is not in Kampala, but in Wakiso.

4.46
PROF. WILLY ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to inform this Parliament about the magnitude of what the hon. Minister has presented. I would like to call the attention of this Parliament to page two, paragraph two.

There is an oversight on what has happened. 3000 people located high in the mountains without any access road to the district headquarters are actually stuck and we don’t know their fate. Why doesn’t Parliament declare this situation a disaster? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think there is a procedure for declaring disaster and we shall follow it up.

4.47
MS ROSE MUNYIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Busia): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In my home area, that is Busia district, the people are also being affected by floods in such a way that the ones who were mining gold - the artisan miners - are being buried underground because of the rains. I don’t know whether this can be taken as part of the disaster. Should I address this to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness or to the Minister In-charge of Minerals?

THE SPEAKER: I think you should help the minister by giving him the information then he will be in position to assess it. I think you are in position to get the information and pass it on to the minister.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.47
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS (Mr Gabriel Opio): Mr Speaker and honourable members of parliament, the 8th March of every year is designated by the United Nations as the International Women’s Day. Member states have commemorated this day since 1975, which is the International Women’s Year. 

In Uganda, the International Women’s Day is gazetted as a public holiday and ceremonies are organised at national level as well as within local governments. The importance given to the observance of this day in Uganda lies in the commitment by Government to the goals of gender equality and the empowerment of women.

Gender equality is upheld by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which guarantees equality of all citizens irrespective of ethnicity, age, sex, and ability without discrimination.

On this day, we reflect on the progress and achievements made by women and celebrate acts of courage and determination by women who have played extraordinary roles in the empowerment process of the women of Uganda. We also remember that women’s struggles will be won by democratic means organised and led by women with the support of men.

The day is used further by both Central and local governments to take stock of the contributions made towards the empowerment of women and what needs to be done to accelerate the empowerment process.

This year 2010 marks the 33rd anniversary since the adoption of the UN Resolution proclaiming the Day for Women’s Rights and International Peace. The United Nations theme for 2010 Women’s Day is, “Equal Rights, Equal Opportunities, Progress for All” which is the follow up of the UN Secretary General’s observation on women’s empowerment and social transformation through economic and social investment.

In line with the above, Uganda’s International Women’s Day theme is, “Consolidating Equal Opportunities for Women; a Path to Prosperity for All”.

This theme has been selected in line with Government’s vision of employment, growth and prosperity, which is the focus of the newly formulated National Development Plan.

It is a reflection on the fact that women’s increased access to development opportunities such as health, education, employment and credit services is a prerequisite for household well-being and contribution to economic growth and prosperity for all.

It is, therefore, in our Government’s interest to consolidate these achievements and work towards a new era of accelerated development.

As we celebrate this year’s International Women’s Day, 2010, this is a year of particular significance for the national, regional and global women’s movement. This year marks the start of the African Union’s Decade for Women proclaimed by AU Heads of State and Government in 2009. All member states are expected to reflect on their commitment to the goals for gender equality and women’s empowerment during this period. Further, 2010 also marks 15 years since the adoption of the Beijing Declaration and platform for action on women. 

1st to 12th March, member states’ representatives of Non Governmental Organisations and UN entities will convene at the United Nations Headquarters in New York and participate in a session of the commission on the status of women to review the implementation of declarations over the last 15 years.

It is, therefore, within this context that we prepare to mark the years of International Women’s Day events where His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda is expected to officiate at the national celebrations in Bushenyi district.

Honourable members, the day is usually preceded by the Women’s Week 1st to 7th March during which various actors engage in self-help activities to show solidarity with women. In this regard, all actors in various sectors including district political leaders, women leaders, civil society, government departments, the media and private sector are expected to participate in the preparations to make this year’s International Women’s Day memorable.

I, therefore, call upon honourable members to show solidarity with the women of Uganda and join us to observe the International Women’s Day in Bushenyi District at Kizinda Market Grounds, Ishaka and also support constituencies to celebrate this day. I thank you, Mr Speaker. [Hon. Karooro rose]

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Since she is going to be the host, I will give her the first opportunity.

4.53
MRS MARY KAROORO OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. First of all, I really feel good that this day is going to be celebrated in Bushenyi. I want to take this opportunity to invite all my honourable colleagues because if you don’t come, there will be a very big vacuum. Come and show solidarity with us and let us celebrate because there is everything worth celebrating. Bushenyi is a district which with very hospitable people. So, honourable members, you will not lack hospitality. But more importantly, what are we celebrating as Ugandans? What are we even celebrating globally on this day? 

The other day I was on a talk show and some people asked me, “Do you women feel gratified to celebrate only one day out of 365 days?” I stand here to ascertain that since the advent of the NRM administration, all the 365 days belong to women. I say this because women are now visible and once you have attained visibility, there is no way your issue can be swept under the carpet. I see hon. Lukwago sneering, which is very unbecoming.

Secondly, we celebrate the affirmative environment which was brought in by the NRM administration. It is not just affirmative action, but the affirmative environment. Some of our colleagues here in Parliament - the women who have come in to directly represent the constituency - there were other reasons, but there is also the major reason of the affirmative environment. 

We are celebrating a lot - girl-child education and political empowerment; but we also have a lot of challenges. For instance, in the law enforcement area, when you look at cases of rape, defilement and murder, women are now endangered species. There are many murders. You remember this poor girl Brenda in the latest case – actually she is not the latest. I saw another case again in one of these papers – this poor girl who was murdered and thrown in a septic tank - and I implore people not to call her “the septic tank girl” because we are traumatising the family by labelling her as such. 

We have been talking about language, but there is the enforcement of law; how many of these murderers have been apprehended? How many of these rapists and defilers have been apprehended? They are walking free and they will find more victims. So, honourable members, as we celebrate this day, let us look also at the challenges which we still face as women, as your mothers and as your sisters. 

I wish to thank the minister for this statement. On page 2, he points out “…it is a reflection on the fact that women’s increased access to development opportunities such as health, education, employment and credit services is a prerequisite for household well-being.” 

I just wanted to comment on the credit services. The interest rates in this country are so high and when we talk about credit services, how are women going to access credit when they do not even have land titles? The other day we supported the Land Bill and we stood here and said it will help women; but still, women do not own property in many of our households and there are many who are going around credit societies offering them money on credit at such high interest rates – 10 percent, 15 percent per month - and Government does not intervene; and it is mostly women who are victims. So, when we talk about credit services, we really need to come out and educate our people, especially the women, because they are being ripped off everyday, and when the woman fails to pay, you know what the man demands for next, and then we have a break up in marriages.

Once again, I welcome everybody to Bushenyi next Monday, but I also want to look at these challenges such as maternal health care. I want to commend the Deputy Speaker, hon. Kadaga, who has put it on record and said we should have maybe a different ministry because we know that at least 14 women die in childbirth everyday in Uganda. Therefore, when we talk about health, my brother-in-law hon. Dr Mallinga, we are taking about the health of women. Those are some of the big challenges that we should be looking at. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.59
MRS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to thank the minister for this statement and to also appreciate what my sister hon. Mary Karooro has said. But when I look at this statement and the theme, “Consolidating equal opportunities for women; a path to prosperity for all” I find this a contradiction especially when you look at the reality on the ground.  

While I appreciate that the Movement Government has done a lot to emancipate and empower the women of Uganda, I think there is much more that we need to do as a government and as a country. My sister, hon. Karooro has talked about maternal health and in this Parliament, we have been talking ourselves hoarse, yet the women of Uganda continue to die from preventable causes as she has rightly put it. 

So, for the minister to talk about achievements and for him to reflect on women’s increased access to development opportunities such as health, is to belittle the women of this country. As we know right now, I am from a conference on cervical cancer; hon. Dr Epatait attended and when we looked at the statistics of the women who are dying of cervical cancer in this country, it is unbelievable; and yet a non governmental organisation called Path by the way has just donated two machines for screening and treatment of cervical cancer. When I inquired from the doctor who represented that organisation, he told us that each set of machine is Shs 35 million only, yet we know that most of our regional referral hospitals in this country do not have a single machine to support our women whom we represent. I would like to know from the Minister of Health, at an appropriate time, why the ministry has continuously failed to prioritise issues of women’s health in this country. I would also like him, at an appropriate time, to tell us how far he has gone with funding for the roadmap on the reduction to maternal and child morbidity and mortality in this country. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, while the other women may be celebrating about the achievements, I am just mourning the women and children who continue to die in this country from preventable causes and it is high time that the Minister of Health and all the stakeholders worked together to ensure that we reduce the death of mothers and children in this country. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.03
MS SUSAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): International women’s day was first observed in 1911 by several European countries until 1975 when the United Nations decided it would be celebrated every 8th March. 

It is on this day that Uganda will join the rest of the world to celebrate but a number of women are not happy. In fact they do not want even to celebrate this day. They feel that there is nothing to celebrate; in fact there are a few who know that 8th March is their day.

This year’s theme is “Consolidating Equal Opportunities for Women: A Path to Prosperity for All”. I would like to ask, are there equal opportunities to consolidate? You cannot consolidate what you have not achieved; you will not deceive Ugandans that you are consolidating anything because there is nothing to consolidate.

The Government of Uganda has committed itself to provide equal opportunities and according to our Constitution Article 32(3), it establishes the Equal Opportunities Commission but where is the commission to do away with the imbalances and inequalities among the marginalised groups of women?

THE SPEAKER: For your information as far as Parliament is concerned, it has completed the process of vetting the people who were appointed on this commission. The Equal Opportunities Commission can now start working because we have finished vetting them here.

MS NAMPIJJA: The Act was passed but it was not operationalised.

THE SPEAKER: I am giving you the information. I am the Chairman of the Appointments Committee and we have already sent the copy to the President having finished the task that was assigned to us.

MS NAMPIJJA: Thank you for that information, but we do not know how much was allocated to the Equal Opportunities Commission for it to operate. This Government has not consolidated anything in regard to equal opportunities for women. What it has consolidated maybe is just corruption, nepotism, dictatorship, violence against women but nothing like opportunities to improve the status of women.

The honourable colleague talked about the affirmative environment and she was praising Government about the active participation of women in politics. I do not think political participation of women is a solution; it is not a solution because there is a very big gap between participation and influence on the decisions that benefit the majority of women out there. We should not praise this Government because there are so many political positions occupied by women.

How many women do we have as judges? How many permanent secretaries do we have? How many commissioners do we have? Those are the people that we need. Those are the people that can make a change. Remember that policies emanate from the parent ministries. We want women representatives in all areas of decision making. We should not give credit to this Government for the laws that we make because passing laws in this Parliament is not enough. What have we done to ensure that these laws are enforced? Where are the programmes for women? 

Recently we passed the Domestic Violence Bill and up to now the President has never assented to it; it is absurd. He hurried to sign the Land (Amendment) Bill because of his interests. We shall not tolerate this, women Members of Parliament, let us stand up for the rights of our women out there. Otherwise, if sit here and wait for the goodwill of Government, it will not help us as women leaders.

I would like to comment about the health services in this country. The quality and availability of health services for women in this country are so poor and Government has not considered health services for women as a priority. Women should be accorded quality of health services as men; men spend so much on other things leaving their women to suffer.

Recently, I was about to shade tears in Masaka, I witnessed the death of a woman who haemorrhaged after giving birth in a health canter in Masaka. Before she went to that health centre, she spent two hours on the road waiting for transport that she could not get. When she reached the health centre they took two to three hours before attending to her. That is not fair to the women and mothers of this country.  

Government should invest more in the health sector for better health services of women because we are the mothers of this country. Without our strength, Uganda would be in utter chaos. Male Presidents have killed Africa -(Interjections)- yes, if women were in charge -(Interjections)– Africa would be a better place! 

As women we are very concerned about the area of justice. We are concerned about the high incidents of violence against women in this country. Almost all women are victims of sexual and gender based violence and they have no capacity to seek legal redress for the violation of their rights -(Interjections)- I do not want that information so just sit down and listen. (Laughter) Beside that, they do not even have resources and cannot access the justice institution because they are hampered by the social pressure and stigma. I think that something should be done to them just like other citizens in this country.   

Finally, we also need women in the justice institution because the more women we have, the more justice -(Interjection)- of course those women will stand up for the rights of their fellow women. There is a women activist in Burkina Faso who said that, “One woman can change many things; many women can change everything.” -(Interjection)- what are you talking about? (Laughter) (Applause) There is nothing to celebrate and what we have to do is to moan for the women out there who are suffering; the women who cannot even access the basic services like microfinance. How many women access the Prosperity-For-All funds? I call upon Government to consider and prioritise all the issues that are affecting women in this country. I thank you very much. 

5.17
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): I thank the minister for this statement, and sincerely speaking, I do congratulate all the women of the world, including the women of Uganda. 

It is true that if you look at the status of women today compared to 50 years ago, there is tremendous change -(Applause)– and we have the reason to congratulate you -(Applause)– today women can talk freely and in public. The women are highly educated. When you go to Kikuubo, women are participating in business -(Applause)– women are flying to Dubai to do business abroad and there are women in the army -(Applause)- unlike 50 years ago where it was unheard of. I, therefore, congratulate you.  

However, on the other hand, the mothers of the world and Uganda must be very careful because in most cases, you are being misused -(Laughter)– people are taking your freedom for granted and that is why women are being involved in murder; women are going to court as witnesses to give wrong testimonies in cases. 

The other day, they invited me in my capacity as an acting Leader of the Opposition of Chief Whip. I met a group of women calling themselves, Akina Mama Wa Afrika - what does it mean? It means the “Mothers of Africa”. What were they promoting? Homosexuality! (Interjections) I asked myself, “What does it mean to be a mother of Africa? How is a mother supposed to conduct herself?” Mothers of Africa” being used by imperialistic forces to promote homosexuality in Africa! 

As we celebrate this day, I kindly request the “Mothers of Africa” to be fair to Africa, your children and the people of Uganda. I found children aged about 15 years and they were confessing, supported by the “Mothers of Africa”, that they were lesbians. The children were reading statements and the women were seated behind cheering them. 

My mother could never do that even in normal circumstances of sex – to support a girl under 18 years to engage in sex. Today, the “Mothers of Africa”, the mothers of Uganda, support these girls to engage in lesbianism –(Interjection)- I will take the information.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I thank you for giving way. Coincidentally, I was invited for that conference at Imperial Royale two weeks ago where I met hon. Kibanzanga and hon. Lukwago. I was surprised to see a lady being invited in the middle of the presentations to go and make a 20-minute presentation and in her presentation she was saying there was violation of women’s rights in Uganda and the law on homosexuality should be dropped and they should also be allowed to marry fellow women when they want. 

I got out and called the Inspector-General of Police –(Laughter)– because I knew – imagine for someone to make a presentation in Uganda claiming that she is a lesbian in public. Unlike me who was given only two minutes, she was given 20 minutes. So, I called the Police but unfortunately, no one came to my rescue and that is why I wrote an article praising Dr Nsaba Buturo, hon. David Bahati and hon. Hamson Obua that the role they are doing is worth supporting. 

There are very many organisations using women; organising workshops in air conditioned rooms to advocate for rights that are not African. I actually attended what hon. Kibanzanga is talking about but unfortunately, we had a very rough time. In fact we walked out in protest because they mobilised over 500 people who think like them and yet we were only three dissenting voices (Laughter).

MR KIBANZANGA: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, what we are saying is that women worldwide and women in Uganda should not take their liberation and emancipation for granted. You fought for it; you lost lives; nobody gave it to you. Stop misusing it.

There are so many issues women would embark on. Women dying in hospitals without medicine; isn’t this a denial of your rights to access medicine; medicine for your children? These are issues of human rights. 

As I conclude, take the destiny of women issues in your hands. Don’t think anybody owes you a living; you owe a living to yourselves. Stop being misused by those who think women are the softest spot to do anything. Stop that. Advocate for affirmative action for women in other areas. Who told you that affirmative action for women should only be in politics? Don’t you need affirmative action in business? That is what I am doing. I want you to adopt it up. If we are borrowing money at an interest rate of 15 percent, why don’t we give it to women at 0%? That is affirmative action. That is where I think women will make an impact.

I love women; I like women –(Laughter)- but sometimes, you frustrate this struggle. Take the struggle for women at a revolutionary level. This reformist action is getting problems. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity.

5.24
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I congratulate the women for celebrating this day, I am really disappointed with the minister. This statement is not rich enough to help us appreciate the importance of this day so that we can critically reflect on the issues, which were raised in that protocol.

I expected the Minister to give us statistics about something like MDGs. We needed to get information about that and then critically reflect on these issues. How far have we gone in achieving the Millennium Development Goals as far as empowerment of women is concerned? I am really disappointed.

On page 2, the Minister clearly highlighted that the theme worldwide, which was adopted by the UN for 2010 is: “Equal Rights, Equal Opportunities and Progress for All.” I thought we would adopt that theme in its entirety. Why did the minister come up with a different theme for Uganda? “Consolidating Equal Opportunities For Women: A Path to Prosperity for All,” as indicated on page 2.

There is politics in this, which is very unfortunate. This theme is biasing the listeners; it is biasing Parliament; it is biasing everybody. It implies that we have already achieved equal opportunities for women and what we are doing now is consolidation.

When you look at the original theme from the UN, it is very clear. We are supposed to talk about equal rights, equal opportunities in broader terms, not restricting the theme to consolidating these achievements. I think the minister is trying to import politics into this very important day.

Article 20 of the Constitution is very instrumental regarding our rights. Rights are inherent and not granted by any agency of the state or Government. Now, the mentality we have within Government circles is that rights are given –(Interruption)- let me get this information.

MR OGWEL: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for giving me this opportunity to give him information. He well articulated that within the statement of the minister, there is a bit of politics. But principally, there is nothing in any society that has no component of politics. Any programme of an existing government of any society, be international politics or these homosexual issues you are talking about have a political movement. There is no programme in any state or government that has no dimension of political ideology.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you for that information. Probably, I should qualify my statement. The minister is importing into this important occasion partisan politics. Partisan politics –(Interjections - I am sorry, I have very limited time. Partisan politics - and one can tell what is going to happen on that day; what is going to happen in Bushenyi.

I am sure hon. Karooro Okurut has just left this House to go and paint Bushenyi yellow. It is very unfortunate! You wait and see what is going to happen. People are going to be donned in T-shirts with inscriptions, “Fourth Term for President Museveni.” They are going to be just praising President Museveni saying, “Continue, continue. You are the father and Alpha and Omega for women rights in Uganda.”  

Hon. Minister, please save us from this. I have read it in this statement, “Consolidating Equal Opportunities for Women ….” Why did you depart from the original theme? Why? I am worried. I don’t know whether the banana plantations in Bushenyi are not going to be stripped now. Bisanja are going to be all over; Bisanja, sanja, bisanja, sanja, sanja and that is very, very dangerous. 

When we talk about human rights; when we talk about women empowerment; we should divorce it from partisan politics. This is a pertinent issue. When we talk about violence against women, it cuts across; it does not only affect women who believe in Movement politics or those who belong to other parties. When you talk about the mortality rate for women and infant mortality rate, it affects everybody. So, spare us this, honourable minister. Let us not witness dramatisation of Movement politics on that day.

I wish for once, as I wind up, I am keeping my fingers crossed. I am praying day-in-day-out that on that day, I do not see yellow or fourth term in Bushenyi. (Laughter) That is my prayer: that we are going to focus on women’s rights and how we are going to promote equality in this country. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.32
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank the minister for this statement. The women from Pallisa County have sent me to find out from the minister as regards the theme of 2009 which was investment in women in this country. That year the minister emphasised strategic intervention for women on the side of credit services, employment, health and education. The women from Pallisa are saying that as regards last year’s theme, from March last year up to today, no woman has received a credit facility from the government coffers. Getting money from the micro finance support is almost completely difficult for a woman in this country because of the requirements from that institution.

Then on the issue of education, the women drop out rate is so high - the girls that is - and in health services, I am happy that this Parliament is very supportive to Dr Mallinga in pushing for the budget framework for the ministry to provide services for the women of this country. But when you go to the health centres women line up for medical treatment and they end up not even getting Panadol at the health centres because whatever they buy cannot even last a week. 

Therefore when you look at the theme of this year, in which the minister put the Movement slogan, “Consolidating Equal opportunity for Women: A Path to Prosperity for All,” the term “Prosperity-For-All” is actually what an economist calls passing on a smooth road at a high speed whereas if you go slowly you will never see anything on the ground. 

On consolidating the issue of affirmative action, I want this Parliament to tell me whether there is affirmative action in Uganda when I see that in Parliament, hon. Hyuha or some of these women who are in this Parliament year in, year out. Is that affirmative action? What we want to see is actually to go to the village and see what my grandmother deserves and what women in the village deserve - (Interruption)

MS HYUHA: Mr Speaker I like my brother’s contribution but is he really in order to use me as an example -(Laughter)- when he never served one term and he is serving his second term? He has never given up. Don’t we have other men? Why don’t you give space for women in Pallisa? Is hon. Opange in order to use me as an example when he has never given up space for women and this is his second term?

THE SPEAKER: I think your brother is admiring you. (Laughter)

MR OPANGE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just used hon. Hyuha as an example so that when all the Ugandans, mostly Government, are talking about affirmative action, they should really look at a woman in the village. The policy that we talk about - even this consolidating of issues - we are consolidating for a small percentage of women in this country whereas the majority of women in this country are left out.

For example, when you talk of Women’s Day celebrations, it the elites who know about this celebration but the women in the village do not know about this function and they are not even interested in attending these functions. 

We request the Government and my honourable minister Opio to give a theme, which is achievable. Let us ask the Minister, in 2009 when the theme was, “Investment in Women”, let us lay on the Table what the Government did on the ground for the women of Uganda. 

Go and look at NAADS - let me be challenged - and tell me how many women are benefiting from NAADS for that six per Parish programme. I have the data in Pallisa County, six per parish. Lay on the Table how many women are benefiting. 

So, we need strategic intervention to say, “This year if we are investing in women, Ministry of Finance has put in place some money at free interest terms or 1 percent interest rates geared towards supporting of women,” so that a woman who is now busy with a business in the market will have access to these loans which is actually a very achievable thing. 

Like the theme of this year, I do not see anything they are consolidating. If anything, they are politicising this programme to make women expectant that something is going to happen and at the end of the year a new theme comes up and they have forgotten the other one just like investment in women is now forgotten and there is a new theme. It is just politics. Let us actually have themes which are achievable and which should be felt on the ground. 

Women are considered to be the poorest among the poor. This is worldwide and not only in Uganda, and I would  wish to see affirmative action with budgets by the Ministry of Finance to cater for credit services for women, effective health services for women, opportunities for employment for women and now we are just - even those  who are employable cannot access employment. They do not have access to the employment. Last year around November, this Parliament advertised jobs and I saw a thousand women here lining up. That is already an indication that there is a problem as far as opportunities for all are concerned. 

So, honourable minister, let us not use the high speed path. Let us use a rough path because even if you tell people that this is happening and after a year you think they have forgotten, they will never forget. The results will be seen at two levels. Thank you very much, Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, don’t you think we have sufficiently - because very soon as the budget process continues we are going to visit this matter when we are dealing with the budget for Gender. We shall have another opportunity to debate it. The statement was to give us information on what is going to happen, and I think bear with us so that we can take up another subject. Otherwise, I thank you and wish you successful and meaningful celebrations on the 8th in Bushenyi.

5.40
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Mr Speaker, you will recall that on the 2nd of February, an honourable member of this House brought up the issue of Guinea Worm. 

Guinea Worm Disease is one of the diseases that this Government of the NRM identified for eradication, and this objective was achieved when the World Health Organisation Declared Uganda free of the disease last year. 

In the case of Kitgum District, as a result of concerted efforts of district health services, the partners and the communities, the last case of Guinea Worm was reported in Jaka central in Pajule sub-county and that was in 2001. The communities in the district are aware of the disease and are aware of the cash reward as a financial benefit for early reporting of confirmed cases of this disease. 

We recall that on 2nd of February this year, the woman Member of Parliament for Kitgum, hon. Beatrice Anywar reported in Parliament that there was an outbreak of Guinea Worm Disease in Kitgum due to consumption of muddy water by the population because all the safe water points had dried up. Today, she was complaining of something else. 

Following this report, the Government Chief Whip, directed that the alleged Guinea Worm Disease be investigated immediately and findings be submitted to Parliament. Our ministry carried out investigations as directed and I will proceed to present the findings, Mr Speaker.

There was no outbreak, no local transmission of Guinea Worm in Alero Ward, Kwao Village in Koch parish in Amida sub-county, Kitgum District as was reported by the honourable member. The alleged victim she mentioned, Dorrine Akullo, a 48 year old lady was found not to be suffering from Guinea Worm at all. However, in July of last year, this lady was treated in Kitgum Hospital for Cellulitis of the index finger, locally known as “Entunuka”.

Regarding non availability of safe water in the area, it has been established that this village has a functioning borehole which supplies safe drinking water to the residents. In Amida sub-county, there are 58 hand pumped boreholes, two motorised boreholes and eight wells giving safe water to coverage of 75 percent and functionality as we reported was 100 percent. Over all, the safe water coverage in Kitgum District is 55 percent with a 90 percent functionality compared to the national average of 63 percent and functionality of 63 respectively. 

According to the vice chairperson, Mr Bosco Ocholla, more boreholes have been allocated to be drilled in Amida sub-county in the course of this year. Therefore, the issue of the residents getting Guinea Worm Disease because of consuming muddy water does not have a scintilla of truth considering the fact that the incubation period for the Guinea Worm is about 12 months. 

Kitgum District has a well established and active Guinea Worm surveillance system which involved village heath team, the health facilities and the district health office, all of which have the capacity both financial and human and are capable of detecting Guinea Worm Disease outbreak within 24 hours. 

Following the review of the patient records for 2009 and since the beginning of 2010 at Okidi Health Centre III, Kitgum Hospital and District Health Office showed no case of Guinea Worm Disease. 

This is, therefore, to assure the country that there is no Guinea Worm Disease outbreak in the country or in any other part of the country. Our ministry has set up a robust system capable of responding to any rumour promptly and containing any such cases. 

In conclusion, our ministry and partners in health – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, the term used is, “My ministry”. It is your ministry because you are the minister, why do you avoid it?

DR MALLINGA: I was trying to be humble, Sir, but if you insist, I will do so. 

In conclusion, my ministry and partners in health will continue to consolidate post certification interventions (Integrated disease surveillance, rumour documentation) investigation advocacy, social mobilisation and cash rewards, it is Shs 50,000 for a case of Guinea Worm Disease reported by an individual, so that the communities in all formerly Guinea Worm endemic districts continue to be aware about the disease to ensure that the disease is not reintroduced from Southern Sudan where it is still prevalent. 

Under the Peace Reconstruction Development Plan, (PRDP) Kitgum District will continue to receive boreholes in places where the internally displaced persons will choose to resettle in the district. Thank you very much, for listening.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. This is a technical finding and I do not think we need to debate it. This is a disease and there is a report by a technical team. Now, what else are you going to say? I do not see need for debate.

5.50
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this belated report. I call it belated because I remember you directed that this report should have come in a week’s time. However, we appreciate the effort.

Let me first make a correction from the minister’s statement on page 1; the findings. He is referring to Kwao village. We do not have Kwao village in Koch parish in Amida sub-county. We have Wao. Let that one be corrected and that could have meant that the report maybe came from another village, but if it is where I reported; it is Wao.

When I reported this case, I had gone for a consultative meeting with my people in that village and it is the people themselves who reported that there was a person they suspected to have got Guinea Worm and one of the people they suspected - I am saying “suspected” because of the report now coming out; but for them they reported that they had it in the village. What I did on my part - I do not like doing post-mortem - I had to come and alert this House as I did with hepatitis E and many others. 

I want to point out from the report of the minister on page 2, that there are 58 boreholes in Amida sub- county -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the issue was that there was an outbreak of a disease which the technical team has investigated and found there is no disease. Nobody is blaming you for having raised it; actually it was your responsibility to do so. Now you are assured that investigations have been carried out and you are okay.

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, I would want to be on record and correct the bad impression that the minister is giving because if we can come here and accommodate lies, especially from the ministers, it will be very unfortunate even for other colleagues of mine to hear from other parts where there is water shortage that one sub-county has 58 boreholes. Are they on trees or where are they? 

I want to tell this honourable House that this very village where I held a meeting, that is Koch parish, has only one borehole. The second one is one which is contaminated and the water was declared unfit for consumption.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much for giving way. The area mentioned – Pajule, is in my constituency and I actually border Kitgum. I think it is prudent at this point for me, first of all, to appreciate the level of vigilance, if a minister can come to this Parliament and specifically report, even mentioning the name of the person who they tracked; and give a historical background of the nature of the disease. I think that is worth commending. That level of precision is worth commending.

The information I wanted to give which this House may want to know is that, formerly in the camps, the NGOs and Government had put so many boreholes because the population was about 12,000 in a camp. Government and NGOs invested in boreholes and motorised pumps. Now that people are going back home after 20 years, the boreholes and water are serving as a pull factor to keep people from rotating around the camp. Probably the request and information I want to give is that the Prime Minister can take on this issue seriously so that people getting back home can have boreholes where they are heading to. Otherwise, I personally think I should thank the minister for being very vigilant and we are proud of that method of work. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think there is a sigh of relief in that, the technical investigation has revealed that the disease is not there. The issue of water; the need to provide more boreholes; we have not disputed; and I think the appeal should be made that more should be given; at least for the disease. I think we take the report.

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, that is most appreciated and I just wanted to keep this House well informed. As my brother hon. Otto is saying, where this report came from, they do not have boreholes, they have only one – (Interruption)

MR KAGWERA: Mr Speaker, I think you have guided the House and there is no reason why we should continue debating this issue. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, wind up please.

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, as my brother is saying, really, where the people are going, you should not count the water supply which was there before. We would want to see that where people are going, they get clean water. I had come to literally show how grave the water problem is. I have a photo here which is showing a woman fetching muddy water in Kitgum District. I would like, with your permission, to lay it on Table so that people know the level of no clean water to the people of Kitgum, as they are going back to villages.

THE SPEAKER: It is unfortunate that hon. Maria Mutagamba is not here. Hon. Jessica Eriyo has just left, but I think the Prime Minister is here; he has heard that there is a need to look into the supply of water in this area. I think that concludes it. [Prof. Nsibambi: “There she comes”] Okay, hon. Eriyo has come.

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, with your permission, I would like to lay the photo of this woman fetching very dirty water on the Table for record purposes, and I thank you for that direction so that my people are helped to get clean water as they go back to their villages. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, we thank you for the report and we now know the situation. Hon Jessica Eriyo, please look into the requirement of water in that area. 

Do you want to say something?

5.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER & ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Jessica Eriyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I sympathise with the people of Kitgum. The issue of water is definitely still a big problem in many parts of this country. We are progressively trying to provide clean water for the people, but we still have a percentage of Ugandans who do not have water and this is a challenge to all of us.

We sympathise with the people who have been affected and we will do everything within our means to ensure that these particular people receive clean and safe water. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can we proceed on the Bill or we adjourn to tomorrow?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, there were just two clauses left on the Bill and it has really been keeping some of us who are so interested on our toes. It is just Clause 1 and the other amendment I had brought for part vii.

THE SPEAKER: You had covered others?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Yes, it could be disposed of.

BILLS
 COMMITTEE STAGE

THE WHISTLE BLOWERS PROTECTION BILL, 2008

6.01
Clause 1

MS OBURU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. On Thursday, 25th February, we stood over Clause 1 and we want to propose to make amendments as follows: Clause 1(a) Authorised Officer; to rephrase the provision to read as follows: “Authorised officer means a Police officer not below the rank of Assistant Inspector of Police, an Inspectorate Officer of the Inspectorate of Government, a Human Rights Commissioner with Uganda Human Rights Commission, a Senior Ethics Officer with the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity, Resident District Commissioner or Deputy Resident District Commissioner, the Executive Director, NEMA, Speaker or Deputy Speaker of Parliament.” The justification to clearly state the officers authorised to take receipt of disclosures.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. I am 90 percent in agreement with the definition, but we did not agree on deputy resident district commissioner. We had agreed in the Bill, if you look at clauses 3 or 4, at least the RDC had been incorporated. Because the moment we start saying RDCs - like in Pader there are over 20. I think we can stop at RDC. That office can always be delegated accordingly.

THE CHAIRMAN: There is a suggestion that we drop the –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, first and foremost, these institutions they are mentioning have capacities to investigate or carry out research on something, but an RDC is somebody who is looking at implementations of programmes of Government. In fact, he should be one of the whistleblowers and not one to report to. So, RDC does not really fit in this item. The others are okay, but the RDC is irrelevant.

DR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Chairman, I am afraid the honourable member wasn’t here when we discussed this matter very extensively. There were lots of compromises on both parts of the House and, therefore, he is taking us back. We had resolved -

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, the question is on assistant. What do you say?

DR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Chairman, I do accept that once you have a resident district commissioner, you have a deputy.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, the two are different. If you thought they were the same then why did you mention them?

DR NSABA BUTURO: This followed the insistence of colleagues, but I do concede that RDC suffices.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. So, it appears that assistant is dropped. I put the question on the proposed amendment minus assistant RDC.

MR OTADA: Mr Chairman, on the issue of NEMA, there was a proposal that we should say NEMA in case of environment issues.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, let us start with assistant RDC. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. How about NEMA?

MR OTADA: There was a concern that if we leave NEMA as a reporting authority openly, then anybody would report any matter even to NEMA. So, we wanted to qualify NEMA to say that specifically for environmental issues.

THE CHAIRMAN: Of course, NEMA would only be interested in environmental issues. So, I put the question to the proposed amendment.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think hon. Otada has a point. The moment you leave it as one of the places you report, I can go and report even an issue that does not concern them. It is important that for NEMA it is quite clear because this is a specialised organisation.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, you can put an addition for environmental issues. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, there was an amendment proposed by the committee in their report as far as the definition of whistleblower is concerned. It is Clause 1. I also had an amendment in addition.

THE CHAIRMAN: Any other amendment to Clause 1?

DR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Chairman, I wish to propose that we insert the words “contract for services” after the words “contract of service” in the definition of employee. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Chairman, I also wish to propose that we insert the words: “contract for services” after the words “contract of services” in the definition of employer.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Chairman, one more proposal which is on the definition of whistleblower, which means a person who makes a disclosure of impropriety under this Act.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, there was an aspect of “on behalf of Government or non-government institutions” which was raised by the committee in the report and I don’t see it here. I don’t know why they are not raising it before we conclude the matter.

THE CHAIRMAN: We are dealing with the interpretation of Clause 1. Does it come under interpretation? What did you want to put there?

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, this is a matter, which involves Government and private institutions and they had used the words “non-government institutions” which was a bit confusing with non-government organisations. There was need for that clarification, which I thought-

THE CHAIRMAN: Is there a difference?

MR LUKWAGO: Yes, with non-government organisations, which are specifically defined -

THE CHAIRMAN: What is it?

MR LUKWAGO: Organisations registered under the NGO, but this Whistle Blowers Bill is broader than that. Here they are talking about non-government-

THE CHAIRMAN: So, say “non-government organisations and….” If you want, say so.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, that is one of my worries about the whistle blowers’ definition. When you talk about non-government institutions, there are those which are registered under the NGO Board; but supposing a private company is doing business with Government and the organisation is involved in impropriety with a government institution, where does that whistle blower fall? 

That is why we need to define non-government institutions and what it means. For me, I would ask the lawyer to define and we put there non-government organisation. That is one of the things I wanted to add.

MR MENHYA: Mr Chairman, on page 4 of the Bill, there is a term “employer”. The definition for employer encompasses and deals with non-government organisations and government ones. Allow me to read this verbatim for the interest of my colleague and O.B. hon. Nandala. “Employer for purposes of this Act means any person or group of persons including a company or corporation, a public, regional or local authority, a governing body of an incorporated association, a partnership, a parastatal organisation or other institution or organisation”. I think NGOs fall in there. I thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, you can see that they defined an employer. That means if the whistle blower is defined as such, we should copy what has been defined here to be included this side. What I mean is, if we are saying an employee is one working in Government or non-government institutions then we should include partnership, parastatal and institutions of whatever nature because we have defined an employer. So, whistleblower should fall under this. Let us carry everything and not make exceptions that because of the word employer there, you have assumed that is a whistleblower; no.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. The new definition, which the minister gave, would cater for your concerns because he is saying a whistleblower is a person who reports impropriety under this Act. So, now you read it conjunctively with the other related definitions in the Act. It makes it a little broader than us trying to list them, which will tie our hands.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, so we have cleared the misunderstanding. Now I put the question that Clause 1 as amended -

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I know you have gone too far, but I wanted to introduce something. I don’t know where to introduce this because we are coming to the end. If you look at Clause 18 and I don’t know if we have already dealt with this. Even if it has been passed -

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 1, as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

DR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Chairman, when we came to Clause 17 on page 14, we did agree that we should create part vii, which is on rewards to the whistleblower. So, we now have part vii, which is rewards to the whistleblower under which we have Clause 18.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, what amendment are you making?

DR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Chairman, the amendment I am making is that reward to the whistleblower under Clause 18 reads as follows: “18(1) a whistleblower may be rewarded for his or her disclosure five percent of the net liquidated sum of money recovered consequent upon a conviction in a criminal offence based on that disclosure. (2) A whistleblower shall be paid within six months after the recovery of that money”.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, you recall that we have passed laws about compensating people who give information. There is one we passed in the IGG and we mentioned the rate, which was five percent. So, is it in line with the same? If so, I want to get clarification. Supposing someone reported that someone was going to steal and stopped a theft; is there no recovery here? He has stopped a process, which was going to lead to a loss. How do you compensate such a person? We must be realistic. 

There is some information, which may not translate in physical recovery, but it must be aimed at saying we reward everybody who brings information. This business of saying on recovery is not right. Should you wait for them to steal? No. I would suggest that we should say, five percent of the intended loss or loss. If I have declared that there was a loss here which was incurred, it is up to the government to pay me and recover your loss.

THE CHAIRMAN: If he reports a theft, how will you know that actually that theft did take place?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, what I am trying to say is, if you say you should allow people to report –

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, unless they are planning to steal so that you catch them - when they have carried out the act of theft? I am saying probably they are going to receive the things in the stores and then you find them there and you claim that you have recovered the things. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if you do not make a law to help people to blow the whistle before the act – 

THE CHAIRMAN: The problem with that, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, is that they are going to steal and everybody will become a whistleblower by saying that they are going to report when actually there is even no intention to steal. It will be abused. There should be a recovery or stopping an attempted theft. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, thank you so much and I want to thank the minister for having considered an amendment we brought on the Floor without adequate notice; and I think save for some of the drafting issues, I would agree with the minister’s considered ideas on this amendment. Now this amendment reads: “… a whistleblower may be rewarded for his or her disclosure five percent of the net liquidated sum of money lost consequent upon conviction in a criminal offence based on that disclosure.” 

I just wanted to improve it a little bit to make the reward mandatory by inserting the word “shall” and then it will read “… a whistle blower shall be rewarded five percent of the net liquidated sum consequent upon…” and then we can leave the issues of conviction in a criminal offence because it is not in any way liquidated because it does not add much value. “...consequent upon recovery based on that disclosure”, so that we do not tie the payment to –

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. I put the question to the amendment as improved on by hon. Odonga Otto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Just before hon. Nandala-Mafabi comes in, part two of the text reads: “…a whistleblower may be paid within six months after the recovery of that money.” We could still replace “may” with “shall” and I beg your guidance, Mr Chairman, if we could add “and such rights can be enforced in the courts of law”, because we have a similar provision in the IGG Act. On the issue of enforcement, we want a situation where, if Government has recovered its UShs 100 million and I have not been paid after six months, I can seek for redress in the courts of law to compel Government to pay me.

THE CHAIRMAN: It becomes a debt. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Yes. But we need at least a timeframe within which someone can reap the fruits. So, I am saying, “and such recovery can be enforced in the courts of law.”

THE CHAIRMAN: It is obvious.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Whistleblowers are supposed to be concealed. If you go to court, you are exposing yourself – 

THE CHAIRMAN: But if he doesn’t go to court - or are you going to say it should be a direct charge on the Consolidated Fund? 

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Chairman, what he has brought is very interesting because these people have to sign somewhere underground. The minister might collect money for him to sign and the minister can do part payment and not give him all the money. Now, what redress has this person got? I think in order to avoid all these problems, there should be a direct charge on the Consolidated Fund such that we avoid problems of this minister keeping something and saying the money has not been recovered. 

Secondly, Mr Chairman, there are cases where it will take long to recover the money. This person has done his job, but the enforcement methods are part of Government. Now if you delay to pay him, does he wait for the enforcement methods? For, this man should be paid his money and then the government recovery – 

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think we have finished the two clauses that were remaining. 

The Title

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the title stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

DR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Chairman, following that part vii, we now have part viii, which is miscellaneous and then we create Clause 19, our regulations.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Chairman, it looks as if the minister is amending Clause 18 to become 19. I want to seek guidance from you. There are two issues here and one is the date. If you say the minister should appoint a date, this minister can decide to bring this in 2011 or 2012. Secondly, penalties are part of the main law and the moment you have prescribed penalties, there cannot be one man alone to decide on the penalties, since when you look at Clause 17 there is false declaration, victimisation and so on, and there are penalties. The moment penalties are part of the main law, you cannot make them become a regulation where somebody can sit and decide. 

So, I wanted to propose that we give a timeframe when this law must become effective; and two, that this description of penalties down here by the minister, should be part of the main law, and not in the regulations. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I think the issue of timeframe is also what we had informally agreed on with the minister that it should come out today with clear provisions. After how long should I report? It does not seem to appear anywhere and the other time you said you were going to look at the Limitations Act so that there is a timeframe. I may want to report someone after I have retired from Parliament after 20 years; it would then become more of witch-hunting. 

So, Mr Chairman, we need your guidance if we are to let the Limitations Act regulate the time aspects, but we needed to make the reporting expeditious so that investigations can take off and this was hon. Okupa’s proposal. I do not know whether you have come up with any proposal as to the timeframe, but we had left it to the minister. 

MR OKUPA: I think that day we had left the three issues to the minister to come up with the proposals; we have just been waiting. We have finished with the first one and the second one and the issue of the time within which to report was left to the minister because I had given an example of the US’ which ranges from 10 days to about five years depending on the matter the whistleblower is bringing up. So, we had wanted to hear of your proposal, if you did look at it. 

DR NSABA BUTURO: Well, Mr Chairman, our view was that inherent in this Bill is an understanding that the whistleblower is reporting about what he or she has heard or what he or she has seen; in other words, it is in the present. But if the honourable members do feel that we should maybe look into the future, clearly I would be amenable to such proposals. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, first, I want to make a proposal that this law becomes effective within three months because if we leave it to the minister to decide on the day when he will make it law   -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: I think procedurally we finish with the amendment; I think what hon. Nandala is trying to bring is the final after we have finished. We can agree later when this Bill can become law after signing.

DR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Chairman, I am being advised by my legal team that criminal offences do not have a time limit; that, therefore, restrains our attempt to put time to criminal offices. Time limitation only applies to civil matters.

MR SEBUNYA: The time we had wanted to set was that one between when the crime is committed and when it is reported. The person may not report when he is benefiting, but decides to report when he has fallen out with the people involved.

THE CHAIRMAN: Or when he has become the enemy of the “friend”.

MR SEBUNYA: I wanted to set the time between discovering declaration. 

MR OKUPA: Mr Chairman, not necessarily an enemy but we are looking at the most likely scenario. Most people report this especially after leaving office just because they are no longer there and not necessarily those occupying the office.

We have been getting such in Public Accounts Committee. There should be a time for reporting; but if members are comfortable, I am ready to concede to what the minister is proposing.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, instead of leaving it open-ended, let us look at this scenario. I have retired from Parliament in 2016; I wake up in 2030 and I start saying I want to report the Speaker, probably when he has retired from politics. It becomes witching-hunting. I had come out with something like this, “A whistleblower shall report any impropriety within the six months period” and then part (b), “The minister with a statutory instrument shall dispense with the above to allow further reporting depending on the circumstances.”

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, the reporting should be in good faith; good faith is exhibited by the promptness you do it with, but not five years later.

DR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Chairman, that is precisely the point. You have made a very good point which I implore honourable members to take note of. The strength of this whistle blowing is in the uncertainty it creates for those who are involved. It should not matter whether revelation is today, tomorrow, next year or the other year. It really creates uncertainty in the thief and keeps them on their toes.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I would concede to that agreement of not putting a timeframe.

MR CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the schedule stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

I put the question that the title stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS & INTEGRITY (Dr Nsaba Buturo): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

MR CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed and the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS & INTEGRITY (Dr Nsaba Buturo): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Whistleblowers Protection Bill, 2008” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS & INTEGRITY (Dr Nsaba Buturo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
 THIRD READING 

THE WHISTLEBLOWERS PROTECTION BILL, 2008

6.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS & INTEGRITY (Dr Nsaba Buturo): Mr Speaker, I would like to move that the Bill entitled, “The Whistleblowers Protection Bill, 2008” be read the third time.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

A Bill for an Act entitled, “The Whistleblowers Protection Act, 2010”

6.35
MR ELIJA OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): I just want to thank the minister for a very wonderful work done on this Bill. It has been one of those Bills that we have been waiting for and pushing him for. He committed himself and he has been very accommodative.

We are just waiting for assent by the President and it is our prayer that the President does his part within the shortest time possible.

6.36
MR NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Mr Speaker, I saw that the minister was keen at accepting amendments from every Member, but also, this one is very good to deal with issues of corruption. But there is another important law which I want to ask you kindly if it could come tomorrow. It is a very urgent law; more urgent than the whistleblower because this big money they get they will launder it. If we pass that law, you will even have sleep.

DR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Speaker, I want to reciprocate comments made by hon. Okupa and by observing that we have all wanted this Bill to go through all the stages. I want to appreciate the committee on Presidential Affairs and all the honourable members who have given support. We do believe that this is a very vital piece of legislation that will really produce a new dynamic in our campaign, that has hitherto not performed particularly well. 

The Members may wish to know that Cabinet has been particularly keen on this money laundering Bill and before long, it will be before the House. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much Members for your time and ideas. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.37 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 3 March 2010 at 2.30 p.m.) 

