Wednesday, 18 March 2015

Parliament met at 4.09 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, honourable Members of Parliament, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting and I want to apologise for the late start. We have been engaged in the Appointments Committee, on a matter, which has been a key demand of this House, and that is to constitute the leadership of the third Arm of the State. We were vetting the nominees for Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice and we also dealt with the ministers. That is why we are late, but we hope to catch up. Thank you very much.

4.11
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have just received information that Government, through the KCCA, intends to siphon funds through the RVR Railway Consortium in a bogus scheme termed as Passenger Service Industry in Kampala.

We have also received information that Government, through KCCA, has entered various concessional agreements with RVR and remember the funds to be used would ordinary have been put to use to deliver services to our people.

We want you, Madam Speaker, to direct the Minister for the Presidency and in charge of KCCA to come and explain before this august House the circumstances under which KCCA has executed those concession agreements and explain how public funds will be safeguarded if they are spent on a private entity. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Do you have any documentary evidence to that effect? 

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, the minister will be able to explain but we are trying to source the necessary documents, which we hope to get in due course. We got this information two hours ago.

THE SPEAKER: We will ask the minister for -

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I know that you are the custodian of the Rules of Procedure and these rules stipulate that we cannot anticipate any matter, which has not been brought on the Floor of the House. I have heard my colleague, hon. Niwagaba, saying that the government is intending - you have requested for the evidence, which he does not have. Isn’t that legislation in anticipation? Is it procedurally right for this House to debate a matter in anticipation?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, I think he is asking for information as to whether it is true or not. When the information comes, we shall see whether to debate it or not. Let hon. Tumwebaze, the Minister for Kampala and KCCA, bring the information. I am requesting the Government Chief Whip to pass on the request from this House.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to seek clarification.

THE SPEAKER: On what?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: On the matter raised by hon. Kakooza.

THE SPEAKER: I have already ruled on that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Madam Speaker, I know you have made a ruling. We represent people in this House so when we get information, we bring it to the House for it to be followed up. The information I am seeking from you, Madam Speaker, is as hon. Kakooza is contesting to be the Deputy Chief Whip, is this the reason why –(Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, with due respect to my colleague, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, is he in order to bring irrelevant issues to what we are discussing especially when you have ably guided? Is he in order to drag us back by bringing irrelevant issues?

THE SPEAKER: No, he is out of order.

4.15
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This morning, I was perturbed, like many of you must have been, on seeing a picture of a Ugandan woman being mistreated in Kuwait. 

I am rising on a matter of national importance about an issue that came up this morning. One of our colleagues, hon. Baliddawa, posted a picture purported to be of a Ugandan girl being tortured by a man from Kuwait. This is not only sexual harassment but the picture itself shows that it is criminal.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, you may recall that we have discussed the issue of torturing Ugandan citizens, especially our daughters. This august House has passed a resolution of Parliament calling on Government to intervene and ensure that Ugandan girls are not tortured abroad especially in Arab countries. This august House also tasked the Ministers of Gender, Internal Affairs and Foreign Affairs to ensure that firms that export our daughters abroad are vetted strictly.

Madam Speaker, you may recall that the then Minister of Labour came on the Floor of this House and told us that he had been travelling to more than six countries and this House demanded for an extensive report about his findings but the report has not yet come up to this day.

The issue of torturing our girls and daughters has been going on for so long. The Equal Opportunities Committee and the Committee on Gender have discussed this matter. I want to make my final prayer that the Ministry of Internal Affairs investigates this matter to its logical conclusion to establish whether indeed this is a Ugandan lady. Even if she is not Ugandan, as long as she is a lady, a mother, a daughter and an African lady, this matter should be investigated to its conclusion. 

Secondly, the Minister of Foreign Affairs must, as a matter of urgency, bring that comprehensive report of the ministers that were globetrotting. I say globetrotting because I know they went during their leisure time and did not go through Government procedures.

Madam Speaker, I want us to constitute a select committee to investigate the firms that export our daughters. This is because some of these firms belong to these big people and we cannot continue in this manner. I pray and it is my humble request that the action that continues on our television stations where adverts are played calling for people and our daughters in particular be put to an end. I pray and I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in order for the Minister of Internal Affairs to assist and investigate, I think you must provide more information. What you have is a picture of a woman being beaten; I do not know whether it is in Juba or elsewhere. I think the minister will need more information to be able to start on that process.

On the second issue, I think we would need a proper motion naming the companies so that if we are to make a resolution, we know which companies we are dealing with. A general resolution will not help so if you can give a notice and arrange to make a formal motion, we will debate it and take a position. This is also to remind the Government Chief Whip that the Minister for Labour had made an undertaking to come and report to this House on the issue of trafficking and how they are handling it.

4.20
MR BOAZ KAFUDA (NRM, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance about the continuous killing of my people by crocodiles.

Within two months, in my constituency in the parish of Kasenyi landing site, there are seven causalities and so far, we have reported five deaths caused by crocodiles. These crocodiles are very many in Lake George and Lake Edward. The President made a directive to ensure that these crocodiles are relocated so that they are reduced from that lake but up to now, this directive has never been implemented by the minister. 

Right now, the entire community is in pain after losing their dear ones. They are also in fear for their lives and everything is in a mess. Following the directive of the President -

THE SPEAKER: Where is that directive? Is it in writing? Was it oral? When was it given? Do you have a copy?

MR KAFUDA: It was given in writing to the then minister, hon. Ephraim Kamuntu. The current honourable minister is also aware of this.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, join me in welcoming students of Mbuya College School in Nakawa represented by hon. Ruhindi and hon. Naggayi. They are here. You are welcome.

From this side, we have students from Exodus College in Wakiso. They are represented by hon. Seninde and hon. Sseggona. You are welcome.

4.23
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM AND WILDLIFE (Ms Maria Mutagamba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable member. Yes, we know the problem of crocodiles and it is not only in that constituency. It is a big challenge in all areas where we have water bodies but we are making every possible effort to recapture these crocodiles and we request the communities to alert us. We have even put up information in the papers that if you notice a crocodile outside a protected area, please make a report and we shall come capture those crocodiles.

In addition, we have also got farmers who are doing crocodile farming and they are desperately looking for eggs. I would like to encourage people that if you can find a nest of crocodile eggs, we shall take those eggs and make sure that we protect them where they are supposed to be protected.

As for compensation –(Members rose­­_)

THE SPEAKER: What order? No, you are just standing up now. The order was from this side and I do not know who has given it.

MS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think the order was declined. I want to request Members to just let me know where to capture them. We have got sufficient manpower to capture them but the process also takes money. However, we are doing that and even now, there are some crocodiles that are being captured today. Thank you very much -(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. The clarification I am seeking from the minister is about animals wandering away from the park and attacking the neighbouring communities. This issue has come on the Floor often since last year. We have heard from our colleagues from Nwoya who have complained about elephants. We have heard from Masindi and elsewhere and the minister has been in her office since then. I would like her to clarify to this House. Since those incidences have taken place, how far have you gone to calm the wandering animals from the parks?

Secondly, do you really have the capacity to address these increasingly wandering animals that are attacking the neighbourhoods? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, please answer. The question was from hon. Boaz.

MS MUTAGAMABA: Thank you very much. That was supplementary to an earlier question. As Uganda Wildlife Authority, we have the capacity and the personnel. What may be lacking are financial resources to respond immediately to what there is now. At the same time, I also want to point out that the increase in human-wildlife conflict is because of the dry spell that has persisted. We have seriously invaded the habitat of the wildlife and that is something that we have to debate and understand.

THE SPEAKER: Let us move to the next item.

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS

ARREST OF HON. MAYENDE STEPHEN DEDE, MP BUKHOOLI SOUTH CONSTITUENCY
                
4.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker and Members, I would like to start by apologising. I should have made this statement yesterday but through the Government Chief Whip, I requested that I deliver it today because I had an emergency to handle and I hope this message came across.

This statement is in connection to the arrest of hon. Mayende Steven Dede, Member of Parliament representing Bukhooli South constituency. 

Madam Speaker and Members, there has been a wave of criminal activities in the districts of Mayuge, Namayingo, Bugiri and Busia in the past few weeks. The criminal activities included the murder of a number of prominent Ugandan citizens:

    1. Sheikh Abdulkhadir Suudi Muwaya Daktur of Mayuge. 
    2. Mr Tito Okware, the LC III Chairperson of Buyinja, Namayingo. 
    3. Special Police Constable Tenywa Karim of Bugiri. 
    4. Police Constable Babaale Muzamir also of Bugiri. 
    5. Corporal Julius Owor of Namayingo. 
    6. John Owor, a security guard in Mayuge. 
    7. Stephen Mach of Bugiri.

Immediately reports on these activities were received, the Inspector General of Police went and camped in the area to oversee and coordinate the necessary police and intelligence operations to find out exactly what was happening. This was quickly followed by His Excellency the President and my own senior minister, the Minister of Internal Affairs, who visited the area to find out exactly what was happening in the area.

Police and intelligence were subsequently deployed in the region with the view to do the following:

    1) To stem the wave of insecurity that had cropped up in the area; and
    2) To investigate and gather information on the basis of which, further action, for example, prosecution of those suspected to be involved in the criminal activities could be taken.

Madam Speaker, during the course of the investigations, a number of suspects were apprehended and seven guns and many rounds of ammunition were recovered. The investigations also came up with credible information linking hon. Stephen Mayende Dede to the criminal activities connected to the murders. 

In view of this and following the intelligence leads, hon. Stephen Mayende Dede was arrested on 5 March 2015 at Muterere in Bugiri District. He was taken to Nalufenya Police Station for further investigations. He is currently helping the Police with the investigations. Should the investigation reveal that the honourable member has a case to answer, he will be charged and produced in court as the due process demands.

On the matter of not drawing the Rt Hon. Speaker’s attention to the matter before the arrest, we regret this oversight. This should have been done. However, Parliament will appreciate that the circumstances and gravity of the alleged crimes and the charged atmosphere arising from the murders were such that it was deemed necessary to take immediate appropriate action to apprehend hon. Mayende Dede. We, however, promise that oversights of this nature; of not first reporting to the Rt Hon. Speaker, as head of the Legislature, will not be repeated in future.

It was also necessary that hon. Mayende was taken into custody because the population had become so charged that there was danger of citizens taking the law into their own hands to dispense mob justice. Therefore, to save all the suspects, including hon. Mayende, they had to be taken into custody immediately they were identified or else there was real danger of them being lynched or even killed.

There was also another consideration causing their immediate apprehension. If indeed the suspects were involved in the criminal activities, there was a real danger of them fleeing the country in a bid to avoid the arrest. For example, one of the suspects, a male adult, was arrested in Mbale while dressed in female attire and trying to escape. Therefore, Police had to act very fast to apprehend these culprits.

Indeed, there are still some suspects who have not been apprehended. It was therefore prudent that those spotted were arrested and immediately taken into safe custody wherever they were identified.

Madam Speaker, following the actions that were taken, general normalcy has returned in the area. Security and intelligence are still on the ground doing their investigations but the population are going on with their normal daily activities. We will regularly update Parliament on all security related developments, not only in this region but indeed throughout the country. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am in some difficulty over this matter because I think it is sub judice as it is still under investigation –(Interjections)- no, if we debate, what are we going to conclude? I think what we want to know is whether he has been given the due rights under the Constitution of being produced within 48 hours. I think we can ask that but going to the merits, no. How many shadow ministers do we have? Okay.

4.35
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA-KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker and honourable members, Article 79(3) of the Constitution states that “Parliament shall protect this Constitution and promote democratic governance of Uganda.” 

Article 23(4) states, “A person arrested or detained –
(a) For the purpose of bringing him or her before a court in execution of an order of a court; or 
(b) upon reasonable suspicion of his or her having committed or being about to commit a criminal offence under the laws of Uganda, shall, if not earlier released, be brought to court as soon as possible, but in any case, not later than forty-eight hours from the time of his or her arrest.” 

That is the command of the Constitution and that is what is being abused in this case. It is not about a Member of Parliament who is privileged but so many others who are Members of this Parliament.

Madam Speaker, my simple office is aware - I am not privy to intelligence as my real minister but the numbers under custody are going as far as 48 and all these humble Ugandans have not been arraigned in any courts of law. This is an abuse of Article 23(4). This Parliament, under Article 79, which I have read, commands us, in no uncertain terms, to protect, defend and ensure that this Constitution is observed.

Therefore, in my humble opinion, and I would beg Members to agree with me on this, that we dismiss the statement of the minister and request him to abide by the commands of the Constitution, which he has already abused. That is not a privilege. A democratic government is under obligation to ensure that it conforms to the dictates of the law.

The statement of the minister, to be entertained as a document before this Parliament, would imply that the Constitution of Uganda can be abused. Therefore, I pray that we dismiss this statement of the minister because it offends the Constitution and if you permit me, may I move that –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what was the question that you wanted the minister to answer when you asked for his statement? What did this House want from the minister before he was asked to bring it?

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, what this House wants –

THE SPEAKER: No, what did we ask for when we asked him to bring this statement?

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: We wanted him to bring a statement before this Parliament to explain under which circumstances a Member of Parliament can be detained for more than 48 hours and this applies to any other Ugandan. He is coming up with a statement to say that under his own watch, he is abusing the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and this Parliament, under Article 79 that I have read, is under obligation to protect and defend this Constitution. It is in that light that I would move that this statement be rejected by this Parliament. 

4.40
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Do not go into the merits.

MR MAGANDA: Madam Speaker, I would like to speak as a neighbour to Namayingo –

THE SPEAKER: That is why I have given you the chance.

MR MAGANDA: The statement that the minister has brought on the Floor that says that hon. Mayende would, at one time, probably escape is very wrong. On Tuesday, before the Friday that hon. Mayende was arrested, he had been called by the young men who were being tracked. The young men feared that if they were arrested by security, they would be killed. They therefore thought that hon. Mayende, as their Member of Parliament, would hand them over peacefully. 

Hon. Mayende took those young men to the Police and he was very willing – Ii fact he has been pushing within the district to see that there is security and sanity. Hon. Mayende has been very cooperative to the extent that he even tried to put some security in his own district.  

What is surprising is that when you go the cells where hon. Mayende is being held, the security personnel tell you that he is being linked to the happenings because he delayed to submit the information from these young men. However, hon. Mayende says he could not just submit information without being in the same area as the young men, assuming that they disappeared.
Secondly, hon. Mayende is living in fear because he is mixed with the same young men who have made allegations against him. We are wondering how they are protecting him out there. The anxiety in Namayingo is great, there is no peace. People are burning houses. The minister is saying that there is peace but there is no peace in Namayingo. 

The minister should come out clearly and tell us whether the statement that hon. Mayende made at the burial of one of the victims that had been killed is the cause of his arrest. This is because they claim that he made a statement but the statement was only asking the people of Namayingo who knew anybody involved in the killing to come out clearly and name the people so that they are arrested and to reduce on the killings of his own people. They now claim that he must know the people. This is somebody who I believe has been sacrificed because he is also trying to fight the problem.

Let the minister tell us when hon. Mayende will come out because there will be sanity. I do not think that the hon. Mayende will run away. Some of us shall be there to stand surety for him. If you are unable to pin him within the two weeks, then what investigations are you still making?  

Madam Speaker, I am very sorry but I am angered by the statement because it has a lot of false information. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Members, we cannot have a very long debate on this matter. I think that our need is clear. Let us talk towards our need because I think you know our needs.

4.43
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Sunday afternoon, I had the rare privilege to visit Nalufenya Police Station to see hon. Stephen Mayende. As anybody else who reads the Bible may know very well, even those in prison need to be visited. 

Madam Speaker, what hon. Maganda has said is what I got but I am very careful, as a lawyer myself, not to pass any judgement or go into the merits of the case. What might be disturbing is the arrest of a Member of Parliament before any in depth investigation is done and this could be the concern of any human rights lawyer, whether in the NRM or elsewhere. (Laughter) [HON. MEMBER: “Now where are you?”] 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, it would be comforting, from the minister’s statement, to know how far the investigation has gone. I was there and was able to interact with the detectives who told me that the file had been sent to the DPP’s Office. It would be very comforting for all of us to know that there is something being done. I was told that within two days from Monday, which is today Wednesday, the opinion of the DPP could be out. 

Hon. Mayende is a very worried person and does not talk much. Even on the Floor, he does not talk much. He asked me for a phone but unfortunately, my battery had run out. He really wanted to speak to his wife and this made me almost weep. He said that he is not afraid of jail but of when the truth will be discovered so that he gets out.

Without going into the merits, the minister should avail us with information as to when this investigation will be concluded and whether he has a case to answer or not. This would be a matter that would follow the law but –[HON. MEMBER: “Forty-eight hours?”] Yes, 48 hours.

Madam Speaker, we are all candidates of arrest and if we cannot speak for one who is arrested now, who will speak for us? For those who made this Constitution, 48 hours was presumed that before you arrest a suspect –(Interruption)- I hope the information is friendly. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank hon. Oboth for giving me way to give information. The fact is that I always give relevant and useful information. 

The information I wanted to give is that a Member of Parliament can never run anywhere. I do not think that somebody cannot be given bail when you have not concluded investigations. There is what we call a bond and you can talk about this. 

I recall that there was clear evidence that when hon. Guma killed somebody, he was bailed out. Therefore, for hon. Mayende, who is just alleged and he has not been given an opportunity, this is unfair. If a Member of Parliament cannot be given police bond, then I think that we are really making a mistake. That is the information that I wanted to give you.

MR OBOTH: As I conclude, I would like to thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for that useful information. The issue of 48 hours goes into the procedures of investigation and prosecution of these matters. By the time you arrest anybody, it should be the task of the investigation department to work round the clock unless there are some exceptional circumstances which could be explained, but the issue of 48 hours matters; a Member of Parliament is a high profile person. It would be comfortable for us to know that our own member here is accorded justice according to the law. Even a criminal needs justice and we need this as human rights activists, Members of Parliament and as people who go by the constitution. The minister should tell us when we begin to count the 48 hours and when they are running out.

4.49
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.  We need to get very clear on this because I see some form of blackmail in that there is a general thinking that when we rise on our colleague, we are exercising double standards. We are not asking for much and we are not saying that hon. Dede should not be tried. What we are telling the minister is that there is a constitution. It clearly spells out the mandate of the Uganda police.

Madam speaker and honourable colleagues, under Article 212, the work of the Police is to detect and prevent crime. That is a constitutional command. What are we seeing? Police has failed to investigate; they are acting on speculation, apprehending people and keeping them in custody and then say that they have started on the investigation.

I have information that the minister is gambling; they had cogent evidence, but the DPP refused to sanction the file at first and then told them that there is no evidence linking hon. Dede to this act. They kept on holding him until they went on with this investigation by last week.

That is why the Minister is telling us that we are holding him as we are trying to look for information linking him to the murder. The sky would be the limit - it is the duty of the state to protect its citizens. What we are dealing with here, which Parliament must understand, is that we are not asking too much. We are saying that if Government has cogent evidence as it is alleging, let them take the file to the DPP. It cannot be the work of Police to sanction a file. Once the DPP says that there is no evidence linking this person to the crime, you do not hold the suspect and then say we are waiting for more evidence to link this person to the crime -(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I want to thank hon. Mwiru. Police is just trying to defend the blame it is facing from the National Security Council. About two or three weeks ago, The New Vision ran a headline that the Military and Police have disagreed on how to handle crime. After that disagreement, Police went around on rampage to justify that they are working. 

Even in Tororo District, there are arrests going on and relatives are not informed of where victims are being taken. They want to justify their actions because the National Security Council is questioning police’s ability to handle crime. That is the information I wanted to give you.

MR MWIRU: Madam, Speaker as I conclude. The right to liberty borders on the right to life. What we are saying and begging this House, I have seen the NRM caucus, caucusing to save people who have stolen public resources. I do not know whether they cannot caucus on this where there is abuse of people’s rights. We are only asking for one thing that if police have not concluded the investigations, let them grant hon. Dede bond, and then they go on with their investigations. That is what we are saying. And if they have evidence, then let them take him to court. He is a suspect in this matter, we cannot allow politicking because what is happening in that place - the situation is tense. Police has descended into the arena; they are politicking in that area. Police will never determine the issues in that district. What we want you to do, is to be professional. This is the effect of politicising Police. 

There used to be a special branch which comprised of senior intelligence officers who would analyse data. How have we replaced that intelligence department in Police? By mobilisers, because the way information trickles in Police, people cannot even know that there is evidence linking someone to the crime but they just cause the arrest and as a result, we need a statement from Government. It is within the powers of -(Member timed out.)

4.54
MR MOSES BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to bring it to the attention of this House that hon. Dede is actually in my constituency; it is where that police post is located. As far as I am concerned that is just mere politics; there is no base in that police post at Nalufenya. 

It is so sad that the IGP does not respect Members of Parliament despite the law being in place. Where are the privileges accorded to the Members of Parliament? If he comes and puts a chair in the compound and all the television channels come, and sits there as if he is in charge of everything, and says an MP has been arrested; he is at this post and nobody should visit him; it is very sad, and the whole country is watching. He is not yet guilty; we do not know what will transpire after. But for a Member of Parliament to be locked up in a place with no beds for all these weeks- even the minister who is presenting a report tomorrow you will also be suffering the same way -(Applause) 

It is wrong for you to accept because as citizens we should put our security first. Even if you are a minister, remember that the law will affect you one day. Go and visit this person because I am sure the minister has not visited hon. Dede before coming here. It would be prudent enough for the minister to go and visit a colleague and see the state he is in, then come and make a report and say, “Members, I have visited him personally”. That is what they call being accountable. But they simply write a report, type it and give you to present here; that is wrong, even if you are on my side. Let us have issues of national interest at per for all of us, because hon. Dede is in NRM, now what if he was on the Opposition, it would be worse -(Applause) 

Now, if he is on this side, what should it be? Madam Speaker, it would have been better if your office had been informed that we are going to arrest your member. When hon. Dede was arrested, he kept in touch with the IGP, and in fact the committee in charge should invite the IGP to come and explain this because -(Interruption)

MR KAWUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and my colleague for giving way. The information I want to provide, I am referring to the minister’s statement in bullet (iii) and I want to quote: “That investigations also came up with credible information linking hon. Mayende Stephen to criminal activities.” 

Now the word credible, if there is credible information and you are holding up a person for 10 days without bring this person to justice, then it is not credible information, otherwise, this person should have been brought to justice. 

MR BALYEKU: Thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, I want to end by saying, it is good enough that your office should be involved; they should write to you and inform us as Members of Parliament officially –
 
I also want to appeal to the minister that it is very important that the minister goes and visits the honourable Member of Parliament in my constituency. I will escort you and you will be safe, such that you can see the situation that this member is going through. 

Then it is also important that as Members of Parliament, we invite the IGP in the committee because he is really undermining MPs. You cannot just arrest. The IGP invited him in his office and he was talking to him, he pretended like he was attending to him but he later abandoned him. When he asked to go for a short call, they told him: “Honourable, you cannot go anywhere; you are under arrest. Honestly, you hoodwink somebody to come to your office, yet you want information from him then you arrest him! It is not proper and prudent for a senior citizen to be treated like that. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.59
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My colleagues have talked about the constitutional issue. I have always regarded hon. Baba as a very smart minister. However, when you read the statement of the minister referring to paragraph No. 3 which hon. Kawuma referred to and then the second line on point No. 3, the minister tells us that they have not found “credible information”. In the first statement, he talks about “credible information”, when you go further, he says “should investigations reveal that hon. Dede has a case to answer…” Then, what “credible information” are you talking about in the first statement to say again that you require more information to implicate hon. Dede? I believe this is not right. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Dede is a Member of Parliament who could not even abscond if he is given bond. However, it is amazing that the minister is coming on the Floor of Parliament to support arbitrary arrests; keeping somebody in prison even beyond the constitutional time. The minister is not ashamed to read a statement of that nature on the Floor of Parliament –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, hon. Ssimbwa, for giving way. Madam Speaker and members, I have listened to hon. Ssimbwa. However, I would like to inform this House that we now have two sets of laws: those who can be cramped and detained beyond the mandatory constitutional hours and then some other Ugandans who always go scot-free without anybody touching them.

I would like to give information that on 13th March a young man called Nkatunga Jonan was killed in Ntuusi, Lwemiyaga. Investigations were carried out and they led to the arrest of three suspects, one being the chairman LCIII, Mr Kamihingo. However, as they were arraigned before court and the file was sanctioned and they were already in the dock, an order came directing the prosecutor to stop proceeding with the case to amend the charge sheet and remove A1 – the chairman LCIII, Mr Kamihingo. He was given bond and the two co-accused were remanded. Therefore, I am informing you, if an intervention from the top level can come for a mere LCIII chairperson – when the file had already been sanctioned what about a Member of Parliament? What is happening in this country has pervaded the constitution and there is discordancy between the DPP and the police. It is a matter that needs to be investigated.

MR SSIMBWA: Madam Speaker, I would like to end by saying that as proposed by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, this statement is not credible and it is unconstitutional - it is a lie. Therefore, I request that this House rejects this statement.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the basis of what we want is contained in the statement. Therefore, if we reject it, what do you want? Let us deal with the area which we want to handle; forget the others.

5.03
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Article 23 of the Constitution talks about a person who is being charged with a criminal matter as being innocent until proven guilty. What I see in this case of our colleague, hon. Mayende Dede, it is an arbitrary action by the police. 

What we are interested in, as this House, is not about the police investigations or the details that they have come up with, but the question whether the police has abused the processes in terms of its investigations. In my view – certainly other members have already mentioned that already – the law has not been really followed. Therefore, the right of hon. Mayende and any other Ugandans in this country – we are equal – should be protected before and under the law.

Therefore, the way we treat a Member of Parliament – well there could be privileges – but it can happen to anybody. Today as Amoding, perhaps I can be accused of involving myself in some rebel activities. In the constituency where you come from, if some people do not want to support you, they can come up with that issue and you are linked to a crime. The police will swing into action, take you in and say we are still investigating. For two weeks, a Member of Parliament is in police custody not being produced for any reason to be charged; this point to a big challenge in our nation regarding the rights of people.

Madam Speaker, I belong to the human rights committee and we have been to the field trying to look at these human rights abuses. We find people on police detention facilities and they have spent there more than a week for simple matters and they have never been produced; regardless of the crimes they are being charged with. Some others are in prisons; they are inside the detention facility called prison but they have no case to answer and they have never been produced –(Interruption)


MR AYEPA: Thank you, colleague, for giving me way. The information I would like to give our colleague is that in Abim, there are people who were arrested by the DPC last Sunday. They are in prison for no reason; just because the DPC is involved in land grabbing. Before grabbing the land, they arrest the land owner, after arresting you, they beat you, and they rape the women –(Interjection) - and then take you to prison. 

As we talk now, two mothers are in hospital; they were raped last Saturday. I went to Kale Kayuhura yesterday and I did not get any help from them. The information I would like to give my sister is that it is true there are some people in prison for no reason. Thank you.

MS AMODING: Madam Speaker, the issue, therefore, is if you are not proven guilty, why does police even go to the media? They have just accused you, you are paraded all over the media that this person has done this, before you are even produced before courts of law. What are we talking about? There must be a fundamental problem in police. 

I would like to add value to what my colleague is saying. Abim is a district that is becoming notorious for raping women. I have a case of a woman that was taken for detention in police. She was put in a prison to share with men. They raped her throughout the night and police was there watching and advocating and adjudicating over the matter. Madam Speaker, this is pathetic; in a nation like this, I cannot be silent about human rights, because I can be a victim of this anytime too. There is a very big problem.

5.08
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is unfortunate for our colleague to spend all these days in prison without being charged. In addition, I am really not happy with this report that has been read to us. First of all, like my colleagues have said, our constitution and laws are very clear. I do not know why we make laws here and the people who are supposed to implement and follow up do not do their work when actually they know. If this is my understanding and I do not know whether we shall keep on coming to lament when there is nothing that is done. Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate. 

I know under our Rules of Procedure, this Parliament has powers which equal that of the High Court. I beg you, Madam Speaker, to guide me, but I would love to move a motion based on that point that we have powers which are equal to the High Court – let us order the police to give bond to hon. Dede so that they can carry out the investigation. We have members here capable of standing in for him as sureties and then he comes out. 

Two weeks are too much. I served with hon. Dede in the same committee and the way I see his character, I believe he can never be somebody who can easily escape from this country to avoid any kind of charges. For that matter, therefore, I beg to move that this Parliament orders the police - (Interjection)- Please, Madam Speaker, protect me.

THE SPEAKER: Order members!

MS KARUNGI: Madam Speaker, this House orders the minister to make an order now, because it is just ten minutes past 5 p.m., that hon. Dede be released on bond immediately -(Applause)– because, first of all, he has taken more than 48 hours in prison.

Secondly, we have seen very many cases which have similar situations and circumstances where the suspects were given bond. Thirdly, hon. Dede is somebody, who I believe with the support of some of my colleagues, cannot escape from Uganda. Therefore, I beg to move that they release him immediately.

Madam Speaker, we are tired of the police. It is not only hon. Dede, but even other Ugandans are in other prisons; for example in Kanungu, people are always put in prison for months -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let other members speak as well. I just need a few more from this side.

5.11
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am aware the issue of security and peace is the responsibility of all the citizens in this country. I am also aware that it is the responsibility of the police to arrest those they claim to be suspects.

However, Madam Speaker, it is also a right for every one that has been arrested - our Constitution states that after 48 hours he or she must be released on bond. I know that today when we are talking about hon. Dede, it is just an eye opener. People have been arrested and detained for so many months, especially the Muslims. This has created fear among the Muslims. It is now through hon. Dede that we can have the opportunity to hear from the minister.

Madam Speaker, schools have been closed and I thought it is the right of Ugandan children to study. If you have arrested a teacher whom you claim to be a criminal, let the school continue to operate. You can continue to investigate the teacher without closing the school. Five hundred children are now at home because the school in which they have been studying was closed. I know it is also in our Constitution that everyone has a right to belong to a religion where he or she wants to be. This is a Qur’anic school that has been closed. A mosque has been -(Member timed out.)

5.13
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister needs to explain to this House whether he is rewriting the law of the land. The 48 hour rule has been cited and Article 23 of the Constitution states that every Ugandan is considered innocent until proved guilty. 

However, here is a Member of Parliament who has been arrested and put behind bars for two weeks under the claim that investigations are taking place.

We know for example, that there are cases where investigations have taken place and people have been arrested as in the case of the widow of Kasiwukira. Is that widow more important than a Member of Parliament? Why could the investigation not be made before hon. Dede was arrested?

Then, the minister in his statement says “If found guilty, the necessary action will be taken.” Can the minister tell this House what action would be taken when hon. Dede is found to be innocent? What kind of compensation will be given for the suffering that he has experienced? What action will be taken for the loss that has been meted to his people for not being represented in this House for all this period and the shame that he has had to suffer?

All we are asking for really is for fairness. The Minister also said these people were arrested for their protection, but at the same time he said some of the suspects are still at large. We have not heard of anyone who has been killed because of the case that hon. Dede is associated with. Therefore, why put in a Member of Parliament under the pretext that you are protecting him from mob justice? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.16
MS ANN NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to say - actually, I do not want to say it, but I am ashamed; I am disappointed by my hon minister. Hon. Dede is your colleague. I would expect that irrespective of whether hon. Dede is guilty or not, he deserves the first protection of his dignity and privileges. 

Madam Speaker, what I found in Parliament and I am proud of are two things: dignity and privileges. I think many of the privileges we enjoy as Members of Parliament - the law was designed to first of all give us privileges and purposely protect our dignity.

The two things correlate. If a Member of Parliament’s dignity is entrenched on, it affects us all as Members of Parliament. We will be looked at as criminals and we cannot be respected. Anybody can infringe on our dignity. The hon Minister disappointed me in his statement when he said they are still investigating: “If hon. Dede is found guilty, then he will have a case to answer.” 

Therefore, for that matter, he goes on and says in his other statement that “He is kept in prison in confinement for protection.” I feel disappointed by the way the police are humiliating the Members of Parliament. I am not saying that being a Member of Parliament gives us a privilege to commit any crime, but I am saying, if not found guilty - I am proud of the laws of Uganda, where I am not guilty until proven so. I am innocent; that is why I am not happy with the French Law, but good enough, I am not French. We are behaving as if hon. Dede is already guilty before he proves his innocence. Is he going to prove his innocence in confinement? 

Lastly, if we are still investigating and the minister says that the Member is in confinement for security and that they are protecting them - the police does not want them to escape; we are asking: Wouldn’t there be any other avenue? Can’t they have any other choice? Can’t they arrest him as a Member of Parliament in this case in his home and give him the security? Who is supposed to give us the security? I thought it was the police -(Member timed out.)

5.19
MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I know hon. Ambassador Baba and I believe and I am convinced that he does not believe in the statement he has just given us. It must have been written for him and his duty was to read it to Parliament. I would like to say that the minister can do better. 

Madam Speaker, I do not know whether you realise that you are also being doubted and probably, you are also a suspect. Why couldn’t the Inspector General of Police ring you to inform you that he had credible information about your Member? Did he think that you were going to abet or help hon. Dede escape as they claim? This is not acceptable. 

It is the police that are exciting the people of Namayingo. They are going before the cameras saying that there are people - especially their Member of Parliament that they voted and trusted is involved - and they have not given him a chance to explain. What do you expect especially in this political world where people are hated and loved in equity? 

If they know that hon. Dede’s life is in danger, it is them to protect him and not to put him in prison but elsewhere in his home to provide security for him. As Ugandans, we are equal before the law. We say it is alright to suspect hon. Dede. You arrested him but let him be produced in court. If you are not yet satisfied, there is leeway in the law in the Constitution to be given bond as you continue with the investigations.  Has Government started implementing this call of no bail? In this situation, bail affairs do not apply because they have not even produced him in Court. 

It is unfair to try and amend the constitution and the laws of Uganda without coming back to this Parliament. Whatever the excuse, the command is 48 hours. We elected the Constituent Assembly, trusted people and we know they did a good job -(Member timed out.) 

5.22
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I have read the statement from the minister.  He had prepared it to meet a diplomatic mission because they are the ones who do not know the reality. From what hon. Baba said in paragraph 3 that they have credible information, at the end of the same paragraph they say, “Should there be any information, they will take him to court.” What should this House take? Are you holding him to get information? Does that exhibit the capacity and professionalisation of the police and the money involved? 

Therefore, hon. Minister, arresting a Member of Parliament is normal but it should be done in accordance with the law. What is he doing after two weeks? I do not want to say that Members of Parliament cannot be arrested because they can be arrested in accordance with the law; that is what I raised here last week and that is what he has responded to. We said, arrest him; you are doing very good work. 

There is a man called Kiyingi from Australia who has recruited people. There is a rebel organisation but you have not produced anybody in court; instead of keeping 1,000 people in court as suspects, you would rather get one person and arrest. Then you prove that there is output because the output for the police is how many cases you have put before the DPP and the files that have been sanctioned and charged. 

If the provision of the law is violated by Government, what should we do as voters or as Members of Parliament? I think when the provisions of the law are violated - because we cannot handle the IGP, we can handle the minister under Article 118. The minister has failed to perform the duty which he is supposed to do. So, I suggest that unless our colleague is given bail, a motion should be drafted to bar this minister, who has failed his duty under Article 118, and they appoint another one who has capacity. 

I always say that when the President is appointing ministers, he should appoint those who are able to perform. The minister has not performed. Why can’t we have another minister to perform? (Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, hon. Kwizera, for giving way. What you see as the police going off the expected standard of performance is because of the militarisation of the police. The IGP is not a professional police officer. He is a soldier of the Uganda People’s Defence Force (UPDF). 

As reported in The Daily Monitor of the 10th March, 500 police officers were sent for military training. Today, there are more military men taking over the work of the police. They work the military way because they do not know the civil police way. That is why you see this happening. Thank you.

MR KWIZERA: As I conclude -(Member timed out.)

5.27
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This Parliament legislates the laws that govern this country. I am glad we are talking about our colleague, hon. Dede but there are so many Ugandans languishing in prisons all over this country. If you took time and read the report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission, you will get a shocker.  

Two Members made very important statements not long ago. The honourable member just told us that a lady was arrested and locked up in the same cell with men and she was raped the whole night. Another member from Karamoja-Abim also told us that the police was involved in grabbing land and even raping. These are the issues that concern human rights. 

I have spoken on this Floor before about how this great country, Uganda the Pearl of Africa, is always lined up at the Human Rights Commission about the violation of human rights in Uganda. When you see a man who has studied law like Gen. Kayihura, a lawyer for that matter, taking the law in his hands - I expect him to have read the Constitution of his country. I understand he has got a masters degree in law but surely, with such qualifications and you know that the Constitution only allows you to detain someone for 48 hours and you go beyond that!

Now we in this House make the laws and we are the custodians of the law. The Constitution is very clear, honourable members; why should we bury our heads in the sand and not act to protect Ugandans who are languishing and suffering in prisons? Couldn’t this House order my good friend, James Baba, – He is very unfortunate to be in a bad position, given a bad ministry that comes here to make terrible statements with orders from above. Can’t we order the minister to see to it that hon. Dede and all those Ugandans who are being held in prison incommunicado beyond 48 hours must be released.

Madam Speaker, this House, which you preside over, makes laws and I am glad you are a lawyer yourself; we can order the Government to listen. Otherwise, we are embarrassing this country all over.

5.30
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like many of my colleagues, I listened to the honourable minister with a very heavy heart. This is not the first time that the Ugandan Police has arrested Members of Parliament and breached their constitutional rights. A case in point is the honourable Dr Baryomunsi. A couple of years ago, hon. Baryomunsi spent his Christmas holiday in jail. He was arraigned over very flimsy issues and was acquitted by the courts of law. The absolute evidence that the accusations were flimsy was the pronouncement of the court that they had an innocent man (Interjection) - I will yield the Floor, honourable.

THE SPEAKER: Allow Dr Bitekyerezo to give the information. (Laughter)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you very much, colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, when Dr Baryomunsi was arrested on Christmas Eve, somebody from the police said that somebody from somewhere - I think it must have been the IGP – had given an order that he should not be given a mattress. He had to sleep on the floor of prison. This is a whole doctor and Member of Parliament for Kinkizi. When I realised that this man was not going to be very friendly to me, I spent 11 days in the bush -(Laughter)- being the Mukiga that I am.

There is serious animosity between the police and Members of Parliament and I think hon. Dede must be facing the same wrath of the police. Hon. Minister of Internal Affairs, when you lose this ministry or when you get a problem, you will face it rough like we face it rough. I thank you very much.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, hon. Bitekyerezo, for that useful information. I am raising this because we all support the police in their duty to fight crime. However, it has been hastily stated here that it must be done within the confines of the Constitution with a human base, with the professional standard that is written in our Constitution. What do we see on a daily basis? We have a police force that does policing for the cameras and that is all. We have a very hollow police force that is there for a public show. 

Madam Speaker, have you ever asked yourself why, on a daily basis, you read in the Red Pepper excerpts from police files and statements from witnesses? Do you deliberately sell this information to the public to make a living? Don’t we vote sufficient money for your ministry to do policing? 

Hon. Minister, you owe this Parliament more than you did this afternoon. You owe hon. Dede bond and this must be done this afternoon. That man will not run away; he will stand trial like Dr Baryomunsi did. You humiliated him for a very long time and he defeated you at the end of the day. Please, release him –(Interjection)– and he is now a minister; he is your colleague. I do not know how you will relate with him in Cabinet. (Laughter) I hope to God that you have had the decency to apologise to him.

Madam Speaker, I would like to propose that as a way forward, we extract commitment from the minister that he will personally ensure that hon. Dede is released today on bond. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we need to move on.  I would like us close on the issue of the motion moved by hon. Karungi. I have looked at Article 90 of the Constitution. The powers of the High Court which we have are only in the following instances: 

i) Enforcing the attendance of witnesses and examining them on oath, affirmation or otherwise; 
ii) Compelling the production of documents; and
iii) Issuing a commission or request to examine witnesses abroad.
That is where we have got the powers of the High Court.

Honourable minister, we have not gone into the merits of the case but from the debate, it is clear that you are in breach of the Constitution; you have gone beyond the necessary 48 hours. Again from your statement, it seems you are still fishing for information and as you fish, you are detaining somebody. Therefore, honourable minister, we demand that he be produced in court immediately or released. It seems you do not have evidence. (Applause)

Let us finish with the minister and then I would like to talk about the issue for Abim. 

5.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I have heard the strong sentiments you have expressed about our colleague, hon. Mayende Dede, and the concerns you have raised. However, I would like to say the following: You all know that in the area where he comes from, there have been very serious murders and there has been a national outcry for investigation into these murders -(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This House is alive to the fact that people must face the law; nobody is above the law. In our debate, all we said is that let hon. Dede be held in accordance with law. Is the minister in order to rise and refer to the investigation of the police, which we have no problem with, other than responding to the issue of acting within the confines of the law? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we refrained from entering into your investigations. All we are saying is that you are in breach of the Constitution. It is more than 48 hours since you took hon. Dede and you have neither produced him in court nor charged him. That is the issue before this House.

MR BABA: Madam Speaker, I have also said that hon. Dede is being held for his own security -(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have been discussing a very passionate case about a colleague. You have rightly guided the honourable minister and showed that the Constitution, which we uphold, has been breached. You wisely advised the minister to do the needful. Is the honourable minister in order to ignore your wise ruling and guidance and take us back to the annoying issue that he has already breached the Constitution?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, for how many months do you intend to keep hon. Dede for his safety?

MR BABA: Madam Speaker, we all know that after investigations, the file is sent to the DPP to sanction prosecution. Until the DPP sanctions the prosecution, there is nothing we can do. However, having said that, let me go back and find out -

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members!

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This matter is becoming emotional and we are beginning to think hon. Dede is being tormented for ulterior motives. We have debated this matter, you have given guidance and we are all aware that however criminal a matter is, every suspect in any circumstance has a right to bail or at least police bond. 

In this case, the suspect or the file in regard to this very case has not yet been concluded. Therefore, we are requesting that under these circumstances, the honourable member qualifies for police bond or bail as a constitutional right. You have guided in this process; why is the honourable minister still insisting on dillydallying? 

Secondly, even here in the House, we have witnessed honourable colleagues being guarded by police and the army. Aren’t the police going to assure us - In any case, if they still know that this Member deserves to be guarded, can’t they provide security when this Member is out or leaves on bond? Is the honourable minister in order to continue wasting Parliament’s time when he knows that they have breached the Constitution?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you really taking issue with your breach of the Constitution? It is clear.

MR BABA: Madam Speaker, I wish you would allow me complete my statement. Let me conclude by saying I have listened to what you have said. I am going to consult the appropriate organs about the directive of Parliament to see whether it can be implemented.  I am going to consult. I am going to take your directive to see whether this can be implemented in order for hon. Dede to get bond.

5.44
DR MICHAEL LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Madam Speaker, I move under rule 70 that the honourable minister no longer be heard -(Interjections)- I have been seconded. 

Rule 70 says, “Motion that a Member be no longer heard 
If a Member persists in irrelevance or tedious repetitions or uses objectionable words and on being called to order fails to retract or explain the words and offer an apology to the satisfaction of the Speaker, any Member may, with the consent of the Speaker, move that the Member using the objectionable words be no longer heard, and the question on that motion shall be put forthwith without amendment or debate.” I beg to move.

5.45
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Whereas I have no problem with the motion being proposed, I have a challenge. According to the wise counsel of hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo, the best way to proceed with this matter is to extract a commitment from the minister. When he breaches the commitment, we can proceed to the next level as Parliament - contempt of Parliament. Now if the minister is no longer heard, then we get the challenge of having him make the commitment on the Floor.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we are taking too much time. What we are directing the minister to do is to comply with the Constitution; that is all we are saying. You either produce him or release him but you cannot continue holding him while you search for evidence. I think that is not right.

4.47
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker and honourable members, the hon. Minister of State for Internal Affairs, Ndugu Baba, has given a statement as required by this House. It is true that the statement, not surprisingly, has generated a lot of heat because all of us are indeed concerned about both the loss of lives in the area and also the plight of those who are in prison, including our comrade.

The fact that Government has not complied with the Constitution is something that is very much regretted. My view is that Government is going to do all that is possible to comply with the Constitution and report to this House a week from adjournment. 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members – 

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two concerns that I would pray the House and the front bench on the other side should appreciate.

Madam Speaker, you have rightly guided on extracting commitment and time is of essence. Hon. Mayende has a family. I do not have a family right now but these people have families and you know the dangers of your family missing you. Hon. Mayende has a family, he is a law-abiding citizen and he is very social here. He has been kept incommunicado and yet we know there is the writ of habeas corpus; we could as well go to court and invoke it. Any concerned citizen can do that.

However, the whole Speaker of this assembly, the third arm of Government, the most essential arm because we make the law and we give you the money, is giving a ruling that by the end of today’s business, hon. Mayende should be here; obey that. Not that he should be released to take off but he is going to be around. I am of the people who will stand surety for him if you want. What do we lose? He has a school and he has carried out developments in this country. Besides that, he is a Movementist. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to appeal to your conscience. We have a rule that says that if you have missed sittings for 15 consecutive times, you could be considered a criminal. What is his right after missing 15 sittings, when later, as hon. Kamateeka said, you find him innocent? How about the right of fending for his family? I want you to understand and appreciate this fact if at the end of the day, this person is innocent. 

I would like to push hon. Baba to act. As hon. Kwizera has said, we should move to censure hon. Baba so that he realises our pain. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister and the Members of this House, the directive of this House is that the Government complies with the provisions of the Constitution. You are in breach; you have gone well beyond the 48 hours. Produce hon. Dede Mayende in court. (Applause) Honourable members here are ready to stand surety. That is the directive of this House. Let us go to the next item.

Honourable members, there was a matter from Abim about the women who were raped and are now in hospital. Say something about it and then I will ask the Committee on Human Rights to handle.

5.52
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Uganda is a member of the United Nations. One of the segments of United Nations, the United Nations Economic Council, passed the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW). Uganda is a signatory to that convention, which requires that the Government of Uganda gives reports twice a year, and Madam Speaker, you have just returned from the UN.

It is embarrassing to hear that women, who could have been my mother, sister, or my daughter, are raped by security officials. Rape is the highest form of abuse of any human being. It leaves a permanent scar on a woman; that woman can never be a complete woman after rape. 

This is a serious violation. Somebody would rather shoot my hand than rape my sister, my mother or any woman because without a woman, I would not be in this House. If my mother had not withstood pain to give birth to me, I would not be here. (Applause) 

Therefore, I beg you and this House to immediately constitute a committee of Members of Parliament to head to Abim to bring the victims to this House so that we get the details and the police officer or the military officer should face the law accordingly. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the plea had already been made by hon. Ayepa and hon. Amoding. I am directing the Committee on Human Rights to go to Abim, interview those women and come back with a report very quickly. Thank you. (Applause)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STUDENTS’ UNREST AT MAKERERE UNIVERSITY

5.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This statement is about the students’ unrest at Makerere University. 

In the morning of 9 March 2015, some students of Makerere University staged a demonstration to protest non-payment of special faculty allowance to students. A statement was issued to the effect that the matter was resolved. 

Hardly a week after, the students again went on strike, raising issues about the new policy of 100 per cent tuition payment by the sixth week of the semester if they are to sit examinations. The policy shift from the original 12th week was intended to give ample time to the students to concentrate on their learning, lectures, course work and tests since the last three weeks of the sixteen weeks are purely for examination.

On 16 March 2015, the university management in consultation with the council resolved to suspend the new policy on the request of the student leadership until the academic year 2015/2016. Calm has now been restored at Makerere University. 

Our ministry’s appeal to you, honourable members of this House, is that you support the position taken by the council and the management of Makerere University, to enable the university achieve our ministry’s strategic objective of provision of quality and relevant higher education. 

I submit. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, apparently the matter has been resolved and they want our support.  

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, after the laying of these papers, I will permit the Government Chief Whip to lay a paper on the Tribunal of the Public Service, which was not laid yesterday. I amend the Order Paper to that effect.

5.57
MR WILLIAM NOKRACH (NRM, PWD Representative, Northern): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the financial statements and the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2014 for the following:
i) Kamuli District Local Government.
ii) Kamuli Town Council 

I beg to lay on the Table the special audit report by the Auditor-General on the operations of the Kamuli District Local Government, January 2015.

I beg to lay on the Table financial statements and the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for the year ended 31 December 2012 for the following: 

    i. Interconnection of Electrical Grids of Nile Equatorial Lakes Countries (NELSAP) Uganda.
    ii. Mbarara-Nkenda and Tororo-Lira Power Transmission Lines Project, loan No. ADF 2100150019944

I beg to lay on the Table financial statements and the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for the year ended 31 December 2013 for the following: 

    i. Mbarara-Nkenda and Tororo-Lira Power Transmission Lines Project, loan No. ADF 2100150019944.
    ii. Interconnection of Electrical Grids of Nile Equatorial Lakes Countries (NELSAP) Uganda.
    iii. Development of Urban Solid Waste Management Strategy, grant No.TF099697.
    iv. Leveraging Municipal Improvement Infrastructure Investment (LMIII) Project, Global Development Grant No.0PP1053920

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Commissioner Nokrach. All are sent to the Public Accounts Committee for perusal and report back. 

LAYING OF PAPERS
6.02
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (MS Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table a motion for a resolution of Parliament to approve the terms and conditions of service for the chairperson, vice chairperson and members of the Public Service Tribunal. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is sent to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government for perusal and report back.

Honourable members, when the Minister of Education presented his statement, there was a Member who had stood up but I did not see him; that is hon. Nzoghu. He said he stood up but I did not see him. (Laughter) He had a question to the minister. He will ask his question and then we go to the Prime Minister’s question time. 

6.03
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County, North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This morning, I received telephone calls from the students who come from my district and my constituency in particular, that they are still being compelled to go in the direction that the university had taken. What the minister has read seems to be contrary to that because I received phone calls up to today afternoon.

The issue of clarification I would like to seek from the minister is: can you assure Ugandans, this Parliament and the students of the university that what you are saying is the position of the university now? If so, at what time did it take effect?

6.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What I said is the position of the council and management. I would like to assure hon. Nzoghu that the position taken by council is to suspend the deadline and go to the original position until next academic year.

If anything has happened contrary to what I have said, that is not correct and I would like to ask you to refer those cases to me. I will do the best possible to enable them continue with their normal studies.

6.06
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira Couhty East, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, I have information that what the minister is saying is contrary to what the Vice Chancellor wrote. 

The situation is going to worsen because Government has failed to come in, to regulate the tuition or school fees structure. You find for a semester, you are paying Shs 3 million. The minister in his statement should be mindful of how much is being charged. We cannot take it that the minister has said this and so it is okay. The minister should address the issue of how much is being charged.
Secondly, you realise that the minister came without information. Actually, he is not in touch with Makerere. (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, hon. Kwizera, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give to the House is that Makerere University, through research, has come up with what the cost of educating a child at the university is and Government contributes half of that amount of money. So, for them to come and further say that they should regulate by curtailing the operation of the university and thereby even causing more problems at the university - Government should rather pay up 100 per cent of the cost of educating a child at the university than regulating further.

MR KWIZERA: Madam Speaker, even on the Floor of the House, we raised an issue of what Government pays. What does Government pay for the government-sponsored students? When does it pay? The minister has failed to go the committee to solve that matter; it is still pending there. 

In Uganda, it is where you find people carrying cement and paint to go back to university and schools. This matter is grave. What you are seeing in Makerere is just a sign but what is happening in the education system is much more, which must be addressed. We need a substantive statement from the minister.

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, different programmes cost differently. If the honourable member is interested in the minister giving the House the cost, I would request that you give me time and I will come with the costing of all programmes in all our universities. It is not true that government pays half; in fact, even private students are being subsidised by government to study in the university.

Madam Speaker, I pray that I am given more time to come with a detailed statement about how much government pays per programme. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Item 5. I start with hon. Tayebwa to be followed by hon. Auru, hon. Atiku, hon. Wamanga in that order. Let us start with those.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME
6.09
MR TAYEBWA ODOO (FDC, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Government started a syllabus of compulsory subjects in Senior Five that is Mathematics and Computer. At the moment, most of the schools do not have computers. 

When the Prime Minister was the Minister of ICT, he even visited Ruyonza Secondary School in my constituency. We told him the problem of acquiring computers and he even promised to give computers to that school from his ministry.

The broader question is, how far will the government promise without even installing computers in all schools in Uganda where the subject of Computer is compulsory and examinable at A‘Level?  What should we do as members of Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: No, you are asking the Prime Minister, not what we will do. Ask him.

MR TAYEBWA: Mr Prime Minister, can you explain what has gone wrong that you are not supplying computers to those schools and yet, you have made computer studying compulsory? 

6.11
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is true that government is committed to a programme of ensuring that all government secondary schools get computer laboratories. At the moment, the numbers of government secondary schools that have received computer laboratories are 950 out of 1,032. It is only about nine per cent of the schools that have not received computer laboratories and the plan of government is to get these remaining schools and they are very few nine per cent receive computer laboratories by the end of this financial year. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.12
MS ANNE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I feel very sad that I am yet going to ask a question, which if handled, I should not have been asking again; that is the question on re-demarcation of the border.

I would like to know from the Prime Minister, what is the process of re-demarcating international boundaries?

Secondly, how far has Government of Uganda gone with the process of remarking the border between South Sudan and Uganda?

Thirdly, which is the lead ministry in re-demarcating the boundary? This is because when you go to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, they have information to give. When we attended the PRDP meeting in Mbale, I raised the same question and the Minister of State of Internal Affairs told us that he met with his counterpart in South Sudan and he said already the lists of surveyors from South Sudan had been sent to Uganda to the Ministry of Lands.  However, when I went to the Ministry of Lands, the minister told me that he is not aware of such a list. Where are we, which is the lead ministry and for how long should we wait? 
Thank you.

6.14
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My sister is raising a very important point; all of us are aware of the confusion that has reigned along the border areas between South Sudan and Uganda. 

The Government of South Sudan and Uganda represented by their respective presidents agreed that there should be proper demarcation of the border areas. The joint permanent commission between the two countries has reviewed the matter and has decided to involve the African Union to ensure the credibility and acceptability of the results of the border re-demarcation. Work is expected to start soon involving the African Union. All of are concerned and we would like this matter resolved as quickly as possible.

As to the line ministry, a number of ministries are involved. However, for purposes of coordination with African Union; Ministry of Foreign Affairs is the lead agency. At a technical level Ministry of Lands is the lead agency. The key point is that we are handling it as a government matter not as a ministerial matter.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Atiku, hon. Wamanga, hon. Joy Ongom, hon. Namayanja, hon. Mhahimba. Those who asked last week, I have your list. If you know you asked last week, sit down. Let me get others who have not yet asked.
   
6.16
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Prime Minister is aware that on 14 June 1981, soldiers of Uganda National Liberation Army (UNLA) attacked Ombaci Mission in Arua District, which was a camp for thousands of people who had escaped from the heavy fighting in West Nile; over 100 people were massacred and their property looted. Since that time, no efforts have been made to reconcile the communities that suffered this circumstance.

The question to the Prime Minister is in regard to the 200 survivors and victims of this 1981 massacre, whether the government has any plans for these people because there is despair brewing among the survivors and victims. 

Thank you.

6.17
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, Uganda has been characterised with very unfortunate incidents like the one my brother is talking about. Government has attempted working with the communities concerned and sometimes, with the international community to redress some of the excesses. 

From the question, it is clear that government may not have done enough or anything significant on the victims concerned. Government would be more than happy to get additional information so that we can work together to see what is possible to redress as far as the victims of Ombaci are concerned.

6.18
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, are you aware that the performance in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs missions abroad has fallen below average? This is because of many people who have been recruited in the service illegally without going through the Public Service Commission - that is the scandal in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 

The minister, chancellor, first secretary, second secretary and even third secretary are just picked from outside and sent to missions and because of this, the performance is below average and these diplomats have embarrassed this country.

Are you further aware that the Committee of Foreign Affairs recommended that 40 per cent of the head of missions be career diplomats, but that to date, we have only one career ambassador? What are you doing in changing the situation?

6.19
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): I am not aware of any illegal recruitment at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. There may have been different routes of recruitment but I am not aware of any illegal recruitments.

Secondly, I do not agree with my honourable colleague when he says that the performance in our missions has fallen below standards. The contrary is obviously the case and this is very well illustrated by Uganda’s outstanding performance in a number of missions outside, conferences and the climax was the election of one of us, Ndugu Sam Kutesa, as the President of the UN General Assembly. We just heard from the Rt Hon. Speaker about her interaction with him in New York. This is all evidence of good diplomatic activity and success by a country. 

I think that the honourable member is wondering who is behind the news, and it is clear to me that the member is lagging behind on the news of the excellent performance of Uganda’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

6.20
MS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): We are all aware of the UPE policy that requires every child of school going age to be at school.  

Madam Speaker, we realise that some schools are far away from the children and some classes are so congested that they cannot accommodate these children and for that reason, some districts have approved community schools.  

However, it has taken too long for this government to approve or code these community schools. I appreciate the government for coding the senior secondary schools although still quite a number have been left out. 

I now would like to ask the Prime Minister when these community schools will be coded. The communities are overwhelmed. They cannot pay teachers and cannot afford some of the facilities that are needed for the school and yet the children have to be in school.  I thank you.

6.21
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Let me take this opportunity to salute the communities that have addressed the issue of making sure that even those children that are far away from schools are able to study. This is very commendable work that government salutes.

Secondly, on the question of coding, this is dependent on the availability of resources especially money for teachers’ salaries and as more resources become available, more schools will be coded.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, just go straight to the question because when you preamble, you take time.

6.22
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, whenever we are approaching elections, government recruits crime preventers who are given a task. As they execute this task, they face a number of challenges including death. Under what law are these crime preventers protected and how are their families compensated in case of death?

6.23
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): It is not correct to say that whenever elections are coming, crime preventers are recruited. Crime preventers have just recently started as a volunteer team, working with the Police in order to prevent and reduce crime. I must say that they are doing very credible work. These crime preventers are protected like all of us the other Ugandans.

However, if there is need for additional provisions, we will be more than happy to examine that but they are doing very commendable work.

6.24
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (LWEMIYAGA County, Ssembabule): It was recently published that seven Ugandans are hiding US$ 250 billion in the Swiss Bank. Is the Prime Minister aware that seven Ugandans are taking away the hard currency from the economy and keeping it away in the Swiss Bank? What has the Prime Minister done about this? Can the Prime Minister also tell this Parliament who these seven Ugandans are?

Has the government taken effort to prosecute these persons like France, Belgium and some other countries did when it came to light that their nationals were hiding away such huge quantities of money in the Swiss Bank? Have they even paid taxes? 

Lastly, does the Prime Minister know that this taking away of money drains the resources of this country and expose the shilling to the lowest level as compared to the United States Dollar?

6.26
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): I read in the media about what hon. Theodore Ssekikubo is talking about. I am very interested in getting additional and credible information from my brother, hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, so that this haemorrhage of resources from Uganda, if true, can be investigated.

However, the validity of that needs to be established and government will do whatever it can to work with anybody with information for it to pursue this matter. But I do not have any confirmation about this press report.

6.27
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): I am aware that the Prime Minister knows it just as I do, that some time back government schools and universities used to have uniform tuition. Today, government has built schools and universities but why is it that government has not harmonised tuition in these schools? What I am talking about is true because I still see government-aided schools extorting or charging prohibitive fees that stop some of our good students from going to these schools. I thank you.

6.28
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Ndugu Mbahimba is raising a legitimate point. Government schools should essentially be paying similar fees and it is true there are some discrepancies. 

I will ask the Minister for Education and Sports to give us, at an appropriate time, an explanation and the steps being taken to ensure there is harmonisation of fees paid in government-aided secondary schools.

6.29
MR DENNIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Aleptong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, may I know from you when government intends to table, before Parliament for debate and passing, the compendium of pending loans for rural electrification such that districts like Aleptong and others that have been mapped, surveyed and integrated into the national database of rural electrification get electricity as soon as possible? Thank you. (Applause)

6.30
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, hon. Hamson Obua is raising a point and he has spoken for many. All of us want to have more electricity extended to our communities, constituencies and the whole country. 

Government is taking extra steps to ensure any pending loans are processed quickly not only for power by the way, but for other infrastructural and other important tasks, to ensure there is no delay of loans in the ministries, Cabinet and Parliament. So, more expeditious processing of loans, including power loans, will be the order of the day.

6.31
MS FLORENCE NEBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. During the maiden speech by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, one of the issues he raised was that he was going to focus on effective service delivery. It is now four months since you assumed office. What I am interested in knowing is what effective measures or policies have the Prime Minister put in place to ensure effective service delivery? This is important to know because we have noticed, time and again, that there are gaps and weaknesses in most of the sectors under his docket. Thank you.

6.32
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, the statement and the commitment made then was valid then and now. We are all committed in government, from the President to the civilians in our villages, who are taking responsibility on implementation. We have intensified monitoring and evaluation of issues and projects. 

This week, we had a two-day government retreat to see and identify any possible bottlenecks in the implementation of government programmes. Government is also in the process of establishing a delivery unit to ensure critical projects are expeditiously pursued. So, I have no doubt, Madam Speaker, that the momentum of government in implementation of programmes has reached a higher level.

6.34
MS LOWILA OKATEYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. May I know from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister why requests for support from some areas affected by disasters are never considered? 

Last year in Pader District, in a number of sub counties, crops planted during the first half of the year were all burnt by drought. Again those planted during the second half of the year were all destroyed by floods. Submissions were made following the guidelines given by the Ministry of Relief and Disaster Preparedness, but my people have not been supported up to now. Very soon, now that they have to depend on what they would have produced last year, some people will start dying in Pader. May I know why my people are not being supported?

6.35
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, I am rather surprised by that question because government has been actively responding to the concerns of the citizens. However, I will ask my colleague, the hon. Hilary Onek, who is in charge of this sector, to work closely with our sister to ensure government supports the people who are apparently in that desperate situation.

6.36
MR YOROKAMU KATWIREMU (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware of a story in the press recently, about government building secondary schools in sub counties which previously did not have government secondary schools. The list of 500 schools was published in which districts and the specific sub counties to benefit were indicated. Could you confirm that that is so? And if that is so, why are the sub counties of Sheema South, Kasana and Bugarama not included?

6.37
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, it is a well-known government policy to ensure that every sub county has a government secondary school. So far, all the sub counties in the country except 274 do not have government secondary schools. It is the commitment of government to ensure this number is reduced as quickly as possible so that the policy of a government secondary school in every sub county can be achieved.

6.38
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, aware that this Parliament passed the Political Party and Organisations Act, when is the government going to start funding the political parties in this country for us to have a well-levelled play field?

6.39
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): This is a very important subject matter; Government has been intending to do so. So far, it has not, but I am very happy to say, that in this coming financial year, government will finance political parties.

6.40
MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what landslide mitigation measures is government taking in respect to the survey report presented by Gen. Moses Ali, showing a very deep cut on Mt Elgon slopes, especially in the sub counties of Masaba, Bugitimwa and the Zesui and so fearing about a possible landslide in this coming rains? 

6.41
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, this is a very important point because the lives of our people are at stake. Government has bought land and my colleagues especially the Members of Parliament from the area and I, visited that land. Arrangements are being made by the Office of the Prime Minister to transfer the people from the danger zone to the land that has been bought by government to resettle them.

6.42
Ms PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when government is completing its plan of establishing one technical school, a health centre and one secondary school in every sub-county? In my district, we have sub-counties which are lacking these services.

Secondly, what plan does government have for civil servants who have served for very many years in some districts but have become problematic like the police, the RDCs, the DISOs and so forth?
6.43

THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, I have made some comments about secondary schools in an earlier question. It is also true that government intends to have health centre IIIs in sub-counties. Good progress is being made because of the policy of promoting health centre IIs in some areas to health centre IIIs.

Vocational schools, which is another important policy of government is also gradually being implemented in that direction. 

However, on the question of problematic government officers, there are clear machineries of administration and checking of discipline in case there is need.

Suffice to say that especially at the level of political leaders, I would recommend that you interact with RDCs and discuss some of the issues. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, the only point I am making is that honourable members of Parliament – as leaders of the people – should be able to engage anybody including RDCs. If they fail, the Minister for the Presidency is available to lend a hand in sorting out some of those issues.

6.45
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable Prime Minister, last year government made the pronouncement, through the Ministry of Education and Sports, about stopping paying USE Capitation Grant in the privately-owned schools. And now some parents are wondering whether to take their children to the privately-owned schools under USE programme or not. 

I would like you to clarify to Ugandans the fates of children that have joined USE schools that are private? Will they be included in the forthcoming headcount, which is soon coming or not? Thank you.

6.46
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, because of limited resources, government decided to give priority to government-aided secondary schools. Therefore, if more resources become available, support to other institutions which had already started private schools will be extended. Otherwise, at the moment because of limited resources, the focus has been to support government-aided secondary schools.

6.47
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask Rt Hon. Prime Minister to give assurance to Ugandans. We have had staged programmes giving money to the elderly in 14 districts as a pilot government programme. But this pilot programme is ending in June. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like you to assure the House and the nation at large the plans you have for the rollout of this programme because I understand we need counter-funding of Shs 33 billion. Have you found the money so that our people can be well settled to continue appreciating government?

6.48
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, government is fully aware that this programme, to assist the elderly, has been a successful programme in a number of districts. It is the intention of government to continue with this programme and roll it out. Of course the critical point will be the amount of money available. Nevertheless, government supports the programme and government has intentions to roll it out.

6.49
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to know whether you are aware that when they are constructing roads in flat areas, the money they consider for a kilometre is the same money they consider for the construction of a kilometer of a road in places like Kanungu, which is a mountainous area. Do you have any plans to put that into consideration and see how to help us? This is important because you find that in those areas, when it rains the road is eroded away immediately.

Secondly, we have realised that since UNRA came in, the work they do is not good compared to the money they get. The money the districts used to spend per kilometre is three times less than the money UNRA uses on a kilometre. When you are making these government agencies are you aiming at saving for the nation? Is your interest to make sure that at least you give the good services, which are not questionable? What is the problem? Are you ready to work on this so that we are happy about it? Thank you very much.

6.50
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, on the point raised by hon. Elizabeth Karungi, it is true that government is aware that difficult terrain necessarily costs more in road construction. It may be mountainous or swampy and this is often taken into account. 

It is also true that government has found road construction under local administrations more cost-effective than under UNRA. (Applause) Government is, therefore, seeing and examining ways and means of producing good work for our roads at the minimum cost possible.

6.51
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in one of your Premier Question Time, I raised a concern on behalf of Bunyoro Kingdom and Bugungu in particular, about the insensitivity of the Ministry of Works and Government only fixing the Kaisotonya Refinery Road without any other community roads, which are very important in Bunyoro and more so the one that serves your deputy, the Rt Hon. Henry Muganwa Kajura and myself from Buliisa where the oil is coming from, which also would be the alternative route to West Nile; the only route to Congo and which has the old water connections with Masindi Port and Namasagali. 

Rt Hon.  Prime Minister, you promised - in the follow-up meetings with UNRA and the Minister of Works - that in the next three months and at least before the contractor leaves Hoima, where they finished work way back in December, we would see work being done on Wanseko Road. 

Indeed, the President came to Masindi -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, now you are really going into a very long narrative. What is the question that you would like the Prime Minister to answer?

MR MUKITALE: Prime Minister, the concern in Bunyoro is that the contractor has parked equipment for three months. He did a good job on the refinery section road. No work is beginning on the important roads to Buliisa, Bugungu, Butiaba, Wanseko where the oil is coming from to the refinery.

6.53
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, hon. Stephen Mukitale is raising an important point. It is true that the contractor is waiting - Government is in contact with the contractor to see what additional work could be done. 

A number of roads are going to be done. As you know, in the Albertine Graven, no key road will be left undone because these are critically needed in order to ensure efficient extraction, processing and transmission of oil from there.

6.54
MS SARAH NYIRABASHITSI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, through you, I would like to ask the Prime Minister of the plans government has concerning the rampant cases of cancer especially in the children who are not HIV positive. I do not know what plans government has especially for the parents and the population to know how they should guard themselves against this disease. Thank you.

6.55
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, cancer does not discriminate in terms of age in general. It is true sometimes we have spikes depending on areas you may be living in or diseases. But Government, through the Uganda Cancer Institute, is extending services of cancer treatment to all regions of Uganda. This should improve early diagnosis and treatment. Kisoro will not be left out in this national programme.

6.56
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Mr Prime Minister, I am sure you are aware that so many Ugandans out there can hardly sing the first stanza of the National Anthem, let alone the whole anthem, which reflects a poor sense of nationalism and patriotism. 

What measures do you have in place, to ensure Ugandans can know their National Anthem so as to foster a stronger sense of national pride, unity and patriotism? What plans do you have to sensitise them generally on their human rights and obligations to both one another and the state? 

Thank you.

6.57
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, more Ugandans are actually singing the National Anthem and even the East African Anthem. More will be done and more should be done, especially through educational institutions and other organised groups. Therefore, the importance of the National Anthem is very clear. 

On the question of human rights and other related issues, I think the training of our young stars in civics - Madam Speaker, civics is covered under Social Studies, which I believe my brother, the hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, should be fully aware of. (Laughter) Therefore, if it is helping people and the hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, we may have to benefit from some of those classes.

6.58
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Can the Prime Minister explain to the Ugandans why Kenya Airways refused to fly our President to Kenya to attend a very important East African Community meeting?

Secondly, when will Air Uganda be back into the aviation market?

6.59
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, I do not have any authoritative information that Kenya Airways refused to do business with President Yoweri Museveni.

Secondly, the question of Uganda Airlines; this is a matter that is under consideration by the Ministry of Works and Transport, and when they are ready, we will see what they will produce.

7.00
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, whenever there are any infernos in this country, police promptly say they have started their work of investigation, but they do not reveal the reports. The same applies to the fires that gutted premises on Spire Road in Jinja and Crest Foam about two weeks ago. 

May I know of the government’s preparedness to deal with high risky establishments like industrial areas, which border schools?

7.01
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, the issue of accidents and lives is a responsibility for all of us to be vigilant to ensure that we take the necessary precautions to prevent those problems.
 
With regards to reports, the investigative agency, the police, should produce appropriate reports, after the investigations, for the consumption of the public and for dealing with the cases concerned.

7.02
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia-Bugwe County South, Busia): Mr Prime Minister, Busia District has been developed to the level of having a resident chief magistrate. For the last two years, we have not had a chief magistrate deployed in Busia and the one who has been coming to Busia from Tororo has also been transferred. This has caused a lot of backlog of cases in Busia including denying people justice. May I know what plans you have to deploy a judicial officer in Busia?

7.03
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, there are a number of stations like Busia that are not yet staffed because of inadequate manpower, both in judiciary and in other sectors. However, the Ministry of Public Service is doing whatever it can to work with the line ministries to ensure that vacant positions established are filled.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have exhausted the one hour, but I have noted the following members who wanted to ask questions:

    1. Hon. Kenneth Lubogo
    2. Hon. Amodoi Imalingat
    3. Hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro
    4. Hon. Mugara Bahinduka
    5. Hon.Lilly Akello
    6. Hon. Boaz Kafuda
    7. Hon. Anthony Okello
    8. Hon. Harriet Ntabazi
    9. Hon. Xavier Kyooma
    10. Hon. Betty Aol
    11. Hon. Flavia Kabahenda 
    12. The LOP and
    13. Hon. Joshua Anywarach.

Therefore, on Wednesday, we shall start with those people before we get to other members. Honourable members, I want to thank you very much for the work done. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 7.05 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 19 March 2015 at 2.00 p.m.)
