PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - THIRD MEETINGTHURSDAY , 23 MARCH 2023PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA7719Thursday, 23 March 2023As we commemorate this first anniversary, let us strive to emulate the principles he stood for. We, who had the benefit of working with him - I, as the Government Chief Whip and Member of Parliament and then, the Rt Hon. Speaker, as his deputy - he always encouraged us to read. And all of you, honourable colleagues for whom he was Speaker, he always encouraged us to read and prepare for the House. He urged respect among ourselves and he espoused a belief in whatever he was doing; that there is no disagreement too big to be resolved as long as we listened to each other. He always emphasised that the moment you give listening a chance, you will always find solutions and a middle ground. And I usually share with you, colleagues, that we, who are trained in negotiation; there is what we call ZOPA - ZOPA means “Zone of Possible Agreement”. You have two divergent views; this side and the other side are in “red” - meaning that you are in areas of boiling blood, but you are coming towards green, which is a very important centre point of agreement. Therefore, the moment you listen, you end up working towards coming to the green side - coming from your red side towards the green side, which is where you can only get to compromise. It is something he always urged us to do. It is something he always wanted each one of us to do and he wanted the truth because the late Rt Hon. Oulanyah never believed that you can reach a compromise by hiding the truth. No, say the truth, confront it, and then come to a middle point. IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 20TH SITTING - THIRD MEETINGParliament met at 2.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, I welcome you to today’s sitting. It is a special setting to commemorate the first anniversary of the passing on of our leader – who was our Speaker, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah L’Okori. As you may recall, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah passed on, on 20 March 2022, in Seattle, USA. Colleagues, during the motion to pay tribute to the late on Tuesday, 5 April 2022, it was resolved by this very House that we set aside 23 March 2023, which was actually his birthday, to commemorate his passing. Therefore, we are fulfilling a parliamentary resolution that was passed. We started the day with special prayers, which were attended by, among others, the Rt Hon. Speaker, Anita Annet Among, who is also with us here, –(Applause)- myself, the family of the late, and most of you, honourable members and staff of Parliament, who turned up in large numbers to commemorate this day. PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA7720MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION [The Deputy Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRThat was a very important attribute and I am glad many of you, honourable members, have been able to bring out issues in a truthful manner and not trying to hide them. If we carry on this even to our constituencies - because we have situations and in some cases, the Speaker and I receive many reports. Sometimes, we may not agree, be it in committees - but if you could see the style we have been using; it is a style of reconciling positions, especially after having diverging committee reports - minority reports. We call you, we meet in between and we try to come to a common position, which we would be able to share with the country. And we mainly got that aspect from the late Rt Hon. Oulanyah; it is something he told us we must do. To the children who are here with us and the family members, we know it has been a challenging period. However, we thank God who has kept you strong and protected you. I take this opportunity to thank you, honourable colleagues, for the role you have played in ensuring that at least, the children of the late and the people he was looking after continue living a decent life. You did this through many aspects whereby;i)  You contributed over Shs 500 million to the Jacob Oulanyah Foundation. We have been assured by the Chief Justice, Hon. Mao and the family that that money is doing a good job.ii)  By amending the law, where we allowed his family to benefit from the pension he was supposed to be getting. We are going to ensure that we follow that to the letter. Above all, most of you have visited the family, and have continued speaking to them. And I want to take this opportunity to thank the Rt Hon. Speaker, who has remained more of a mother to the family, and this was a confession from the children when we were in church. We cannot take that for granted. Personally, I want to confess that I have not visited. Whenever I meet Andrew, Didi and the rest, I think I have done a good job, but we need to do more by keeping on checking on the family and supporting them. Colleagues, we have also received sad news of the passing of His Royal Highness, Philip Wanyama Asuban Nahama, the Omwenengo Wa Bugwe Cultural Institution, who passed on, on 2 March 2023 in India. Burial will take place on 25 March 2023 in Busumba Village, Dabani Subcounty, Busia District. I request that we stand and observe a minute of silence in his honour.(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next item - Is it related to the passing on of the cultural leader? Okay, I will just allow that; otherwise, colleagues, it is very clear that when it is a special sitting, we never allow such things as point of procedure. But this has also been very important for the people of Busia and the community; so, let me allow Hon. Macho who might give us useful information.2.15MR GEOFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): Mr Speaker, on behalf of the people of Samia Bugwe, Busia District, and all the people living in Busia, I would like to bring special thanks, first of all, to your office for having allowed to give the Omwenengo of Samia Bugwe recognition to be honoured by this august House. This is a true demonstration that this Parliament recognises cultural institutions in this country and this fits well into one of the Government priorities of making sure that it uses cultural leaders to mobilise masses towards poverty eradication. Mr Speaker, the Omwenengo of Samia Bugwe, His Highness Wanyama passed away when the kingdom still had some needs and requests from the Government.It is my prayer that the ministry gives all the privileges that it promised to the kingdom so 7721THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 MARCH 2023that the new king, His Highness Hamala, can carry on his duties of mobilising people for poverty eradication, promotion of education and also to make sure that we, the people of Busia, observe and make use of the Government programmes.All in all, I thank you, Mr Speaker and the Rt Hon. Speaker, for all the efforts that have been made to recognise our cultural leader. May his soul rest in internal peace.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Government Chief Whip, please, take note and pass on the information to the gender minister so that these issues raised by Hon. Macho can be considered, so that they do not come back to the Floor.Honourable colleagues, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of law students from Cavendish University. They have come to observe the proceedings of this House. I request them to stand up (Applause). Thank you. You are always welcome; this is your Parliament.Honourable colleagues, I think the family of the late Jacob Oulanyah is also here. Let me request them to stand and we welcome them. (Applause) Hon. Andrew, please, stand up. (Laughter). MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO COMMEMORATE THE FIRST ANNIVERSARY OF THE PASSING OF THE LATE RT HON. JACOB  L’OKORI OULANYAH, THE FORMER SPEAKER OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDATHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I received communication from the Prime Minister that she was still held up and she assigned the Government Chief Whip to lead in this very noble task. So, I request the Government Chief Whip to take the Floor. However, before he does that, to our Muslim brothers and sisters, Ramadan Kareem. (Applause)2.19THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Denis Obua): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. This motion, for clarity, is moved under Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. “WHEREAS the 20th day of March 2023 marks the first anniversary of the untimely demise of the late Rt Hon. Dr Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah, the former Speaker of the 11th Parliament of the Republic of Uganda; RECALLING that the late Rt Hon. Dr Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah made his mark in the service of his country with devotion and that his dedicated leadership greatly contributed to Parliament’ s strengthening of an adherence to the rule of law and parliamentary practices through persistent call for quality debate, political tolerance and promotion of cohesion amongst the different shades of opinion; ACKNOWLEDGING the late Rt Hon. Dr Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah’ s contribution to the peace process in northern Uganda through offering political leadership and monitoring of the post-conflict recovery process, and during the aftermath of the Lord’ s Resistance Army insurgency, according vulnerable citizens access to the justice system; AWARE that the late Rt Hon. Dr Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah’ s legacy of transforming his community from a subsistence to money economy through initiatives such as the multi-billion shillings Dano Pa Dano Foundation and several similar impactful start-up capital to micro businesses projects in Omoro District still live on even after his demise;APPRECIATING that the late Rt Hon. Dr Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah was a firm proponent of the right to education for all children and, indeed, sponsored over 200 children to access education at primary, secondary, tertiary and university levels as a means by which responsible citizens of this country would be groomed;7722MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION [Mr Mpuuga] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRRECOGNISING the need to honour the legacy of the late Rt Hon. Dr Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah as an inspiration to the present and future generations to emulate his distinguished national service as a leader, legislator, legal practitioner, champion for fairness and education for all, a father and a role model to many Ugandans; Now, therefore, be it resolved by this Parliament that;(1) Parliament commemorates the first anniversary of the demise of the late Rt Hon. Dr Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah and takes cognisance of the excellent and patriotic service he rendered to the people of Uganda, the Parliament of Uganda and the Acholi Community.(2)  Parliament declares and institutes the 20th day of March as an annual national parliamentary commemoration day for the legacy of the late Rt Hon. Dr Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah in honour of the numerous contributions he rendered in service of the Parliament and the people of Uganda.”Mr Speaker, I beg to Move. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_) It is seconded by Hon. Ssewungu, Hon. Ssemujju, Hon. Kisa, Hon. Jonathan Odur, Hon. Kahonda, Hon. Peace Mutuuzo, Hon. Jenipher Namuyangu, Hon. Omara, Hon. Muruli Mukasa, Hon. Andrew Ojok Oulanyah, Hon. John Musila – and the whole House.Government Chief Whip, can you speak to your motion?MR OBUA: Rt Hon. Speaker, we are here to commemorate the first anniversary of the passing on of the late Rt Hon. Dr Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah, which, we all know occurred on 20 March 2022, making him Uganda’s shortest-serving Speaker.Mr Speaker, talking about the late Rt Hon. Dr Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah is a precious and singular honour. We all knew him as an extraordinary man, a statesman and a patriot. The late Rt Hon. Dr Oulanyah made his mark globally, continentally, regionally, nationally and locally by committing himself to greater and challenging tasks. The late Speaker answered the highest of calls: serving Uganda as a distinguished legislator. He appealed for adherence to parliamentary rules and quality debate. In his own words, he stated: “Honourable colleagues, we should learn to sharpen our arguments rather than our voices. With tolerance and mutual respect, we should agree that no view will be surprised. All views will be received with tolerance and given fair treatment based on known facts and reason.” He would move to say, “Honourable members, we can do things better.”Mr Speaker, the late Rt Hon. Dr Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah was instrumental, as already stated, in the pacification of northern Uganda through the peace process and post-conflict recovery, by offering strategic and patriotic leadership. His participation in the peace process cannot be forgotten, including looking for leadership and the LRA as a movement in the jungles of Garamba. This has positioned northern Uganda on the trajectory for socio-economic transformation through the able leadership of His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, and embracing Government affirmative action programmes like the northern Uganda Social Action Fund, the Peace, Recovery and Development Plan and currently, the Parish Development Model. The former Speaker initiated various projects in northern Uganda, but to Omoro County, in particular, his community will remember him for the interventions that were in line with the NRM manifesto on wealth creation and increasing household incomes. 7723THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 MARCH 2023The late Rt Hon. Dr Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah started the Dano Pa Dano Foundation, which has empowered communities within and without Omoro by supporting their income-generating activities and mind-set change. The late still challenges the 11th Parliament. Upon being sworn in as the Speaker, he had this to say, “Honourable members, the next five years of Parliament should not be like the last five years. There are things that we must change. We have to restore public confidence in this institution.”Before I conclude, permit me, in a very special way, to salute the top three leaders of Parliament - the Rt Hon. Speaker, the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker and the honourable Clerk to Parliament for emulating two traits of the late Rt Hon. Dr Jacob Oulanyah: the principle of timekeeping. To the late, 2.00 p.m. was 2.00 p.m. To the current leadership of Parliament, 2.00 p.m. is 2.00 p.m. I need to salute you for that. (Applause)I also want to salute you for upholding one of the philosophies that the late believed in and that is the philosophy of Ubuntu - “I am because we are.” All three of you practise the Ubuntu philosophy.Salutations To Parliament for all the support that you rendered and continue to render to the family of the late Speaker. We salute you for the contribution you made towards the Foundation. On a personal note, as I conclude, permit me to salute the late for one, lecturing me while I was a student at the Law Development Centre and two, supervising me while doing clerkship at Lira Chief Magistrate Court. Forever, I will be grateful to him.On behalf of Government and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business in Parliament, I beg to submit and to respectfully move. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chief whip. We also really share those traits with you. They cannot be just for the three of us. At least, we would not preside over an empty House. Honourable Government Chief Whip, the Leader of the Opposition and all of you, honourable colleagues, I thank you for always coming and keeping time. Before coming here, I always look at the television screen to know whether I am going to an empty House or if there are Members. If there was an empty House, I would not come just here with the Clerk. Also for unity; you have stood with each other. The challenge is we are unique because of the numbers of this House. In a Parliament where people are 100 or 200, they could know each other. However, most of you have endeavoured to know each other. I appreciate you for that. Honourable colleagues, in the VIP gallery, although I had already introduced them, I did not read their names. We have the family of the late. They include:1. Harold Adiyo Oulanyah aka Didi– son to the late2. Okori Denis – RDC Napak and nephew to the late3. Adong Harriet – sister4. Mr Kinyera George – nephew. Thank you for coming, as we pay tribute. (Applause)Rt Hon. Prime Minister, thank you for coming. I know where you have been, but your Chief Whip has done a thorough job and the Leader of the Opposition, for secondment.2.33MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU  (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a statement seconding a motion for the resolution of Parliament to commemorate the life of the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, former Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda, by the Leader of the Opposition, Hon. Mathias Mpuuga.“Mr Speaker, I join the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and honourable colleagues in commemorating the first anniversary of the passing of the late 7724MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION [Mr Ssewungu]Rt Hon. Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah - the former Speaker of Parliament.We remember the passing of an honourable gentleman, caring family head and national leader. On a personal note, I join so many who saw a true friend in Jacob. As Parliament, we lost an iconic Speaker with the ability to see a debate in the House with sobriety, maturity and mastery of the Rules of Procedure. Remembering the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah’ s thoughts and ideas continue to give strength to many of us in leadership. We draw inspiration from his vision and values and resolve to imbibe his ideals in our lives. We remember him for his orderliness, timeliness, impeccable humility and his unique unifying nature, which placed him in a special part of people’ s hearts.Further to note, on his last day as the Deputy Speaker in the 10th Parliament, the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah set a good example when, with humility, he handed over all instruments of power to the accounting officer of Parliament and left the building as a backbench Member of Parliament.As we celebrate and applaud his great character and lessons learnt, let us not be selective and pick what seems convenient to us. We ought to emulate every good thing we saw in this great legislator.As we commemorate the death of an advocate for justice and equity, I wish to remind you that upon his death, this distinguished leader in the spirit of fairness, left behind a matter he passionately intended to provide leadership over - rule 25(2)(1) that regards the processing of a statement by Shadow Cabinet ministers. He wished to amend this rule so that the statement laid by a shadow minister becomes rather impactful and not just a ritual, and he referred it to the Committee on Rules, Privileges, and Discipline. To date, more than a year later, the matter is still outstanding. I take this opportunity to urge the committee and the leadership of Parliament to complete what the late Speaker started. Mr Speaker, at the special sitting, where Parliament passed a resolution paying tribute to the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, I beseeched the Government to improve our healthcare system and serve the common person. To date, the system is still a trap to both the practitioners and the patients. No serious step has been taken towards progressive realisation. I further indicated that we would initiate a Presidential succession law. However, we realised that we need constitutional reforms that will comprehensively address the governance challenges our country is entangled in. On our part, we have moved significant steps regarding this task. We shall lay our views to the public at the earliest. As I conclude, I would like to challenge my colleague, the Leader of Government Business to be faithful to the promises the Government made to the people of Omoro when the late died. May his soul continue resting in eternal peace.” I beg to move. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Ssewungu. MR SSEWUNGU:  Thank you, Mr Speaker - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Honourable member, after reading your boss’ statement, you cannot add anything. However, I will allow you later, if you have your own views, in your substantive capacity as a Member of Parliament. Honourable colleagues, before I open up debate, I am going to allow the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to make an announcement to this House. We shall handle the rest of the issues later.7725THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 MARCH 20232.38THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GEN-DER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOP-MENT (GENDER AND CULTURE) (Ms Peace Mutuuzo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. Honourable colleagues, I wish to announce the death of His Royal High-ness, Philip Wanyama Hasibante Nahama, Om-wen’engo wa Bugwe Busia. I also wish to state that the Government is going to accord him an official burial – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I have allowed the minister to speak. MS MUTUUZO: Thank you for your protection, Mr Speaker. I also wish to state that the Government has accorded him an official burial, which will be held on Saturday. I would also like to inform the House that within the course of next week, we shall bring an official motion to pay tribute to the deceased king. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I announced the death, but not the official burial component because that could only come from the Executive. Therefore, it was very important for it to go on record that we have an official burial. The Prime Minister will work with our office. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I need your attention. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you will work with our office - can I have discipline in the House? Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you will link up with our office so that we can have the date when we can pay tribute to the fallen king. Thank you. Honourable colleagues, before I open up the debate, I think it is only fair that I allow Hon. Andrew Ojok Oulanyah to speak, if there is anything he wants to say to the country. Would you like to speak last, Hon. Ojok? Let me open the debate. I will start with Hon. Ssemujju. Honourable colleagues, try to be fair to others in terms of time. If you fail, then I will come in to control the time.2.41MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The late Jacob Oulanyah was a very good debater and did a lot of research.Yesterday, a colleague here complained that some people speak and others do not. Parliament had a special sitting here to discuss the sale of Uganda Commercial Bank. For four hours, only four people spoke that day - I was a journalist here. The late Hon. Jacob Oulanyah spoke for two hours. He was joined by Hon. Mao, the late Eria Kategaya and Odonga-Otto and the day was done.  In fact, my complaint these days is that Parliament sometimes turns into a talk show; everybody wants to speak, even one who has nothing to say.Mr Speaker, therefore, in remembering the late Jacob Oulanyah - the Speaker said those things are not working today –(Interruption) MS ABER: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. Members, whatever we speak in this House goes on the record of this Parliament. I would like to know if Hon. Ssemujju is in order to really pronounce everybody in this House to speak what he thinks is not relevant. It is very courteous to have the right - we respect him as a senior legislator, but I think the policy of this House is that we respect each other and everyone’s opinion. Is he, therefore, in order to mention on the Floor - I also request that his statement is expunged from the Hansard. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, Rule 84 of our Rules of Procedure is very clear on the language we use. Let us use language that is courteous to each other. Honourable members, people are not here on their own volition; they were voted. Whether someone is performing well or not, the people to assess them are their voters. That is why we give people freedom to speak and not judge each other. We do not judge each other here; we debate. We have a contestation of ideas. 7726MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION [The Deputy Speaker]Therefore, Hon. Ssemujju, I think that was unkind to your honourable colleagues.MR SSEMUJJU: I am sorry, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. MR SSEMUJJU: I was only comparing the past Parliament and the present. I have given you an example, bitter as it is, that for four hours, we had only four speakers. These days, you can have 50. I am not the presiding officer, but I am just telling you that these things used to happen.Mr Speaker, there are two things I want to say, as we remember the late Jacob Oulanyah. The first, I have said, is debate and research. During that debate on UCB - these days, things do not happen. I do not know how I will put it without offending people, but if someone had information that was superior, Members of Parliament used to yield their time and allow fewer people to speak. I remember when we had two days here of debating the oil sector, Hon. Katuntu and others who led the debate almost spoke for a whole day and others spoke the following day. Therefore, MPs should not get offended when you have a colleague who has done research and you want to benefit from him.Mr Speaker, I have two things to say before I sit. The first is the death of Oulanyah. We were told here by the Minister of Health that part of the reason he could not receive the kind of treatment that he was supposed to receive was because of the harassment he had been subjected to by the NRM Government, when he was a Makerere University Guild Speaker, and that affected his life.I want to caution this Government to stop harassing leaders and Ugandans. Later on, the body parts or part – Dr Chris Baryomunsi can help; I do not remember the specific word the Minister of Health used - I may want to strongly defend my life when you have taken it the way you took the one of Oulanyah. That was in the speech of the Minister of Health here. Related to that, at the burial, the father of Hon. Oulanyah said that his son had been killed. There were attempts to make some arrests. Can we be briefed today whether that matter has also been resolved?Finally, Hon. Jacob Oulanyah joined the Seventh Parliament under the Uganda People’s Congress (UPC) and died as an NRM member. The point I want to make, especially to the NRM leaders - because if I look around, many of you are new. People who used to sit where the Prime Minister is seated - the late Eriya  Kategaya and Amanya Mushega - you can love NRM, but I do not think your love would be equal to those who shed blood in Luweero. You need to do the right thing when you are a leader here because today you are, and tomorrow, you are not.I see people think that the NRM is some sort of faith. The things you are supposed to do here as Parliament, including political reforms and constitutional amendments – Why is the Prime Minister agitated? Why don’t you return the mabaati? (Laughter) Do not be agitated. (Member rose_)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, we are paying tribute to our colleague. Please, Rt Hon. Prime Minister – Colleagues, can we listen to each other? We are debating and paying tribute to our colleague. I have decided to leave Hon. Ssemujju to speak so that – When paying tribute to a colleague, maybe there are things, which are deep inside, and you want a colleague to bring them out. Honourable Member, now it seems you have started going beyond. Please, conclude.MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I, therefore, thank this Parliament for setting a special day to remember the late Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. He died very early in his career as a Speaker, having suffered the five years he spoke about there. I was one of those who were looking forward to a Parliament led by him. We will –(Member rose_)7727THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 MARCH 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, if a colleague is looking forward to something, what is wrong with that? I am going to allow you to come and explain. You are going to have a chance to explain because this is a debate and not a statement. MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I thank Parliament because there are many “points of order” for different interests; I do not want to spoil the day. Thank you, for putting aside this day, to remember the late Hon. Jacob Oulanyah who always wanted the truth to be said even if it is very painful. You can actually look tough because the truth has been said, but he always wanted it said.He was a –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought you had concluded.MR SSEMUJJU: Yes, I am concluding. He liked reconciliation. Mr Speaker, when he was the Deputy Speaker, he brought here a policeman to drag me out of Parliament. But later on, he reached out to me and we had a conversation. He said, “Now, we can move forward.” There are leaders here – Let me not say in this Parliament, but there are leaders here whose levels of vengeance are too high; you can even see it when they are walking - (Interjection) - I said “leaders”.However, I want to thank the late Hon. Oulanyah; even when you had trouble with him, he took it upon himself to reach out to you so that you resolved that matter. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think we shall end up making a resolution that the Prime Minister should reach out to Hon. Ssemujju and issues get resolved. (Laughter) Colleagues, as you know, the late believed in working out; being healthy and doing exercise. So, Members, we have a Personal Health Management Programme for Parliament on Monday, 27 March 2023. We shall have a fitness session at the South Wing Parking starting at 5.00 p.m. It will be led by our fitness team, which includes some of our colleagues. Before I allow Hon. Nabukeera, I had not seen him, but I had wanted to start with the chairman, Acholi Parliamentary Group, Hon. Anthony Akol.2.52MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Mr Speaker, allow me to thank you, in a special way, for this great day.Also, allow me to thank you for the book that you published as Parliament, at the time when Hon. Jacob died, and it contained 250 quotes from the great lawyer and politician. I would like to request Members to get this book. If you want to have answers about life - whether it is about politics, about humanity and human rights, you will really get it in that book. I always quote a book by Robin Sharma, “Who Will Cry When You Die?” The book says, when you are born, you always cry when others are laughing. On the day when you are dead and buried - you should live your life in such a way that people will cry when you smile. I think Hon. Jacob is smiling at us because we have known how good he has been in this world. Let me take a few quotes from that book that was published by this Parliament. One of the quotes is; “Our love for one another is a command from God and that love must not keep a record of wrongs.” If anything, it will answer most of the things we have been talking about here. It will answer the issue that my colleague, Hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju, was raising - that you have to reconcile after any conflict. You do not need to keep records of the wrongs that somebody has done to you and that is something that matters in our life a lot. Another quote from the same book: “If someone is thirsty, they will need water and it will not be blue or yellow or red water.” It 7728MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION [Mr Akol]tells you that irrespective of the parties that we belong to, our blood is red – if anything, we are all “UPC”. We are not NRM, we are not NUP, we are not FDC; we are all “UPC, everywhere” - our blood is red. (Laughter) That is the point he raised in that very important quote.The last quote I will mention is, “The rivers, lakes and mountains that separate us are not deeper than the blood that connects us, human beings.” Mr Speaker, if we are today commemorating the life of this great man, who served humanity and gave diligent service to this country, I would like to thank the leadership of this Parliament for having really given this opportunity to Members to remember this great man. Above all, I have been reading the Hansard of that day and it almost took me two days to complete it. I read all that Members were talking about on that great day of the 5th of April last year. It shows that the life of this great man touched the lives of all of us. That calls for all of us to try and emulate, in our own living, how we are touching the lives of others. If you put that into practice, then you will emulate one of the things that I read from the quote. You will be good neighbours to each other. Mr Speaker -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude, honourable colleague.MR AKOL: Very importantly, on that day, we had many resolutions. I would like to request that as Parliament, we extract that debate and put those resolutions into practice. As leaders from Acholi subregion, we are very happy about what Parliament has done. We are happy with all the Members of Parliament for having accorded him this day. Above all, we thank you for the support you have given to the family. I also know that there are other promises that are not yet fulfilled and I would like to use this opportunity to request that they be implemented. Thank you very much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleague. Resolutions of this House are always extracted and communicated to the relevant authorities – and we did that. What is needed is a follow-up. I am sure there is very strong goodwill from the Government to ensure that those resolutions are implemented. Honourable colleagues, in the gallery - on a selfish note - we have leaders from Mitooma. (Laughter) We have LC5 councillors and LC3 chairpersons from the whole of Mitooma District. We also have the LC3 speakers, the Chief Administrative Officer, Mr Edith Turyasasirwa, and the RDC. They are led by the RDC, Mr Kibuuka Amooti and the Chairman LC5, Mr Benon Karyeija. I also have the District Speaker, Mr Moses Tumwekwase, and his deputy – who is my Greenford – Mr Mucunguzi. They are undergoing training – we are trying to see how best they can be equipped in managing the local government. They are represented by Hon. Juliet Bashiisha, Hon. Kahonda Dononzio, Hon. Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire and Hon. Thomas Tayebwa. (Laughter) Please, join me in welcoming my people. (Applause) Thank you. Now, I am going to set three minutes because I tried to see whether we could be lenient to each other, but if we continue like this, very few people will speak yet many of us want to speak. Let us move with the MPs I had picked.2.59MS HANIFA NABUKEERA (NUP, Woman Representative, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to join my honourable colleagues in commemorating the late Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. I was a student of the late Hon. Jacob Oulanyah at LDC. I am lucky to have got a chance today. 7729THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 MARCH 2023That time, I did not get a chance to talk about this. He was a brilliant man, a legal brain, a noble man and educative, but at the same time, he could tell you what you were and he spoke his mind. I remember a little scenario when we were still at LDC. He asked me a question and I nodded. He asked: “Are you a monitor Lizard?” (Laughter) I was in fear because he had a lot of energy and we had just come into the lecture. I freaked out and did not even answer. After the lecture, he said, “Come out. I wanted you to be confident. Even when you have a wrong answer, just be confident and say it as it is.” Ever since then, I have tried to be confident. When we came here, I met and reminded him – by that time he wanted votes for the Speakership. I told him it was my turn. I asked him: “Do you remember when you asked whether I was a monitor lizard?” He said: “You still remember it up to this time!” I said: “Yes.” He got Shs 500,000 and said: “Forgive me. Now, I need your vote.”  (Laughter) He was that kind of person and I had to stand up and share this story with you such that you know the person we are talking about. That is all I wanted to say. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I just want to clarify that he did not buy a vote. (Laughter)MS NABUKEERA: No, he did not buy a vote. He was apologising so that we could start afresh. I want to thank you, Mr Speaker, for this day that you have accorded him. We hope that it runs, like you have said, every 23rd of March such that we keep remembering our gallant and noble, brilliant man. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Nabukeera, when you said it was your chance to pay back, I saw Hon. Ssemujju turning. I think he does not know where you had put your vote. (Laughter) If he did not, he has known today. (Laughter) Moreover, he said he was a very good man. So, you voted a good man.There are honourable colleagues I had already picked. Please, you have just come and you are telling me: “This side.” You were here and now you switched to this side. I will pick you when you go back that side. ( Laughter)3.02MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I am debating in favour and support of this motion in two dimensions: in the first dimension, I want to remember the late Rt Hon. Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah, as the Ugandan promise or Ugandan hope. When he ascended the Office of the Speaker, there were a lot of expectations from Ugandans, given that the age at which he came to office appeared to be the right one to provide unity and leadership at a time when we were looking at transition. When his death was announced, many Ugandans, even those who do not pay attention to politics, were hurt. To this day, they still feel that he deserved to live longer. He was somebody with a very humble social life. For many of us who were with him here in Parliament and outside, when you interacted with him especially when it was time for entertainment, I do not think many of us could actually beat him when it came to dancing. He was that humble and down to earth. He was quite intelligent, well-read and I think he was very hungry to learn more and more that he read so widely. He read very widely to build capacity to be able to provide leadership in this House. The late was also very assertive. Whenever a debate came up here and you stood up to speak, he would test whether you were actually ready to speak. He would test you and shake you and if you were not ready, you would sit down. 7730MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONHowever, all he was testing was: do you really need to speak on this matter or not? If you were not well prepared, you would actually go back.I must also salute his courage. The late was one of the most courageous Ugandans. We remember what he said in Kololo when we were commemorating the anti-corruption day. Not many Ugandans can actually challenge anyone who is not corrupt to stand up when you know the President is there. However, he did it and the whole Kololo fell silent. That courage was above him. Lastly, he had mastered how the Government is run. For many of us who were here, every time you approached him in his office, he would pick his phone and call the minister and he would allow you to speak to the minister. If you were satisfied, you would not come to the Floor here. If you were not, he would allow you to come here. He had experience in how the Government is run. I think we have a big leaf to pick from there. The second dimension is what Madam Speaker had promised us – and I want to remind -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude.MR ODUR: The second dimension is “The Uganda We Want” debate. I think that, as the Speaker had guided, we should be able to speak about that. Mr Speaker, allow me to just outline that:1. The late, wanted a responsive government that would respond to the service needs of the citizens. 2. He wanted a people-centred Parliament that would debate issues that touch on the people. 3. He wanted a country where the rule of law is observed. 4. He wanted equitable resource allocation during budgetary periods; he would take personal care to ensure that the entire country is budgeted for.This is where I would like to invite our presiding officers, as we undertake the budget, to look at Uganda fully. Let us look at the country and all the constituencies so that they are provided for in this budget. We should be our brother’s keeper; let us all be our brother’s keeper. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Jonathan. Hon. Milton, then Hon. Omara.3.06MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. To those that missed today’s morning service in memory of the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, I want to just inform them that he was equated to Moses in the Bible, who had the assignment to deliver the 11th Parliament to the Promised Land.According to the sermon by Hon. Abed Bwanika, who was the day’s preacher, he did refer to the leadership of this Parliament as Joshua’s. The Rt Hon. Among and the Rt Hon. Tayebwa, thank you for being dependable friends and accepting to take on this mantle to the letter. This was as per Hon. Abed Bwanika’s sermon this morning, and we feel you are delivering us to the Promised Land. Stand firm, we will be by your side and support you. In memory of the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, he was the patron and a founding member of the Parliamentary Forum on Population, Food Security and Development in the Seventh Parliament. It was through this forum that we managed to engage the government with a programme to support Members of Parliament with seeds to take to their voters. I want to appeal to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Government that in memory of the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, let us revive this programme to support Members of Parliament with maize seeds and other farm implements because voters lack what to plant. The rains are on, but there is nothing to plant.[Mr Odur]7731THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 MARCH 2023Mr Speaker, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was the patron of the Parliamentary Forum on Children, and when inaugurating this forum in the 11th Parliament in Munyonyo, he challenged Members of Parliament to come up with a legislative agenda for this purpose. Mr Speaker, we thank you for accepting to launch it; we were happy when you personally attended and launched the legislative agenda, which highlights gaps affecting children and legislation that need amendment to address issues to do with children. This country will always be happy and remember the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. Mr Speaker, as I conclude, we thank you so much, again, for standing with the family and for offering a special session in memory of the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. Those of us who were close to him are really proud and have a sense of belonging when we recognise our fallen hero. I thank you. May his soul rest in eternal peace.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, we share this together because on the 5th of April, you passed a resolution that on his birthday, which is today, we should save it as a day for commemorating his legacy. So, I want to thank you for being here in big numbers to ensure that, indeed, we will achieve that. Colleagues, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have members of the local leadership of Omoro District. They include the NRM party leadership of Omoro District. Please, stand up for recognition. They include local government councillors and other district leaders and technical staff from Omoro District. They have come to observe the proceedings as we pay tribute to their great son, the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 3.10MR PAUL OMARA (Independent, Otuke County, Otuke): Mr Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity. I rise to support the motion to commemorate the first anniversary of the first year of the passing of the late Rt Hon. Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah. I got to know the late Oulanyah at Makerere University. He was ahead of us and later on, we elected him as the Speaker of the University Guild. And you could notice quickly that he was a political giant, who later made progress to become a statesman. Mr Speaker, in a political contest, there is normally the winning side and the loser. I remember when he decided to run for Speaker of the House, he called me. I was elected as an independent Member of Parliament and, indeed, he ordered me to join the NRM team at Kyankwanzi. I had never been to the yellow house, and I thank God that I went because during that moment, I got to know many of my colleagues in the 11th Parliament. However, as we all recall, that election was quite tumultuous. And later, when he became Speaker, I learned something from him; that he worked for the unity of this House. Even our colleagues who are on the other side, he accommodated them, and he treated them as one team. So, it is something that we should all learn from the late Rt Hon. Speaker Jacob Oulanyah. As Hon. Jonathan Odur has said, before he passed on, he was very passionate about us having a debate on the Uganda we want. And I think we should have this debate so that we can progress our democracy and social development and transformation so that we all have points of convergence in terms of where we would want our country to go. Mr Speaker, when the late Speaker was elected, as the NRM Vice Chairperson for the North, he brought unity in that region. As you are aware, we have had long-term insurgencies in the Lango and Acholi subregion, we have had wars in West Nile and a divided team. We all agreed that he was our leader. So, he was able to unite our people and I think those initiatives have remained with us up to today. One of the things that he taught us as well is culture. He was very rich –(Member timed out.) 7732MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, on the issue of the debate for the Uganda we want, we expounded on this with the late. You see, it is not a matter of just coming and having a day of debating the Uganda we want; everything we do in this House on a daily basis should be for the Uganda we want. From the laws we pass, the resolutions we make, the budgeting process and how we - you know, I do not think we do anything here for the Uganda we do not want –(Laughter)– Everything we are doing here - it does not have to be one single day. When you come here and debate, you talk of the Uganda we want. In whatever we do on this Floor of Parliament, let our minds know that we are doing it for the Uganda we want. If you are doing it for the Uganda you do not want, please –(Laughter)  However, as the leadership of the House, we shall consult with the Government side and the Opposition side and we see how best we can resolve this. I allowed Hon. John Musila. There are colleagues I had picked at first who were in, first. So, it was Hon. John Musila, then Hon. Namuyangu, and then Hon. Lillian Aber, Hon. Judith Achan and Hon. Peace Mutuuzo, before Dr Baryomunsi. I will ensure, today, I give each one of you a chance. We shall sit here and ensure each one of you gets a chance.3.14MR JOHN MUSILA (Independent, Bubulo East County, Namisindwa): Respect, Mr Speaker. I will struggle not to call you Madam because we are now used to “Madam Speaker.” But Mr Speaker, I hope I will not go to that extent. I wish to bring memories; they may not be fond memories, but the late was my O.B. I am happy to learn that I have another O.B; possibly, he was behind us in Makerere. The Bagisu say that a chick that will grow into a big cock is spotted while still young; we saw that in the late.  Today, I sit in the same Parliament with our son we saw growing. Hon. Andrew Ojok Oulanyah, there are people in this House who were with your father and the people of Omoro. We knew him, we knew he would come up and his start was very good. Whoever was in Makerere at the time can vividly remember on that black Monday - I wish the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs was here because he caused us a problem. I had been his campaign manager at the time for his guild presidency, and we suffered the brunt.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Whose campaign manager?MR MUSILA: Hon. Mao. On that black Monday, when we came to Freedom Square to call off the strike, together with the late Oulanyah, the late Ouma, another boy and myself, two people were shot. One was Okema and the late Oulanyah got a bullet wound. I survived and now, the Rasta is here talking today. I was a coward –(Interjection)–  rightly said, and cowards live longer. (Laughter) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude, honourable. MR MUSILA: Mr Speaker, the late Oulanyah thought I was the biological brother to his late wife, Dorothy, because we resembled a lot. True, we are all Bagisu - and today, I am here for the Bagisu, to show that we stand together with the family and the people of Omoro. Lastly, like John Elton eulogised Princess Diana, Andrew and the people for Omoro, John Elton said, “He is gone, but gone with the wind”. May he Rest in Peace. He has been promoted to glory, as the rastas say. Thank you.3.19THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (BUNYORO AFFAIRS) (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. 7733THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 MARCH 2023Indeed, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was a statesman. He was a mentor to a number of us. I remember in the last term when I served as Minister of State for Local Government, we had many issues including the election of LC1s and LCIIs and the creation of administrative units. On this Floor, you hardly have a debate without local government issues coming up. So, he would pick up a phone and call me and say, “My sister, are you aware this is coming on the Floor today. Just to prepare”. I looked at him as a kind person and someone who really cared. Most importantly, he was a very humble man. I walked to his office to invite him to my constituency, but I was not sure he would accept. I went with my letter, but I did not put that date. When I got to his office, he asked me: “Have you put it in writing?” I said, “Yes”. He just called his secretary to bring a calendar and he put a date there and then. He indeed came to Kibuku, and kept time. Keeping time was not only in the Parliament here, but wherever he visited. I dared him and said 10 o’clock and by 10.00 a.m., he was in Tirinyi yet my people had not yet come. But he patiently sat and waited for them. He had a big heart. He gave my people dollars. Many of them were seeing dollars for the first time. They talked about it for almost a year. He was an orator. He spoke very well about me. I am here because he was part of the project. More importantly, he did not believe in rumors. During election of the Speaker, somebody accused me before the President that I did not support Hon. Oulanyah. Hon. Oulanyah picked a phone, called me and said, “But you know my sister, I knew in your House, I was counting on two votes - (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, conclude. MS NAMUYANGU: A minute. “…Your vote and your husband’s vote” – (Interjections)  – My husband is Dr Byakatonda, the Workers MP. I told him, “Yes. For you, I will toe the party line and now that you are the party candidate, I am going to support you”. He just laughed it off. Indeed, I voted him. We shall miss him, but Mr Speaker, allow me to thank the people of Omoro for appreciating and supporting our brother, and further appreciating him by voting his dear son. (Applause) May God bless you. 3.23MS LILLIAN ABER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to begin on a note that in case I have done something good to you, Members, I am inviting you to start appreciating me tomorrow. Why am I saying this? Many of us speak good things when people are dead. You never have time to encourage and thank people for the good things they have done. Let us learn that –(Interjections)- I said “some people”.The man we are talking about today was an inspiration to many people. He believed in functionality of systems in this country. He embraced and wanted to see every system function without favor or any kind of influence, to the extent that even if you went to the late Speaker’s office, he would not make a decision to support you because he knew you, or because you came from Acholi or you are tall or short. He would do the right thing based on what was supposed to be done. That was a trait that I admired. I really want to operate like him.On corruption - yesterday, I played his audio. We need to ask ourselves questions. The late Oulanyah is gone, but the question is: “Are we corrupt or not? Is it the Uganda we want or not? Mr Speaker, I am very happy that today, we are standing here in this House when we have passed the Anti-homosexuality Bill, which was going to affect our culture. The late believed in cultural norms. Of course, having come from a culture which had all varieties of dances and the richest culture in this world, and in this country - that is, the Acholi culture - he embraced and admired it. 7734MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONMy appeal is that Omoro District should remain to be supported. Whether the late Oulanyah is alive or not, his son is here - and I thank this House for standing firm. You went on the ground and supported him and gave him all the –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, on Sunday, we are supposed to be in Omoro commemorating with the family and the people of Omoro. I hope we shall go in big numbers [Member rose_] not on special motions where we are paying tribute. However, if there is a matter for order – if you see anything disorderly in the House, let me know. Before I allowed you, I had picked Hon. Kahonda. Nevertheless, speak first, and then he comes on before Hon. Peace Mutuuzo.3.25MS JUDITH ACHAN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in commemorating our fallen brother, the late Rt Hon. Speaker. He was a patron of the Anglican Chaplaincy here. The Rt Hon. Speaker then, Jacob Oulanyah, cautioned against religions and tribes that divide people; he emphasised unity. I remember when we went to his place after elections - before even forming our leadership of the Acholi Parliamentary Group, the Speaker advised me, in particular; he said, “My sister, when you go there, make friendship. Do not be in a cocoon; try to make new relationships with other people from other regions.” I witnessed this during his campaign when he was contesting to be on the Central Executive Committee in the NRM Party. He had overwhelming support from Western Uganda, West Nile, Eastern and Central - all over the country. It made our work - by then as his agents - very easy because we did not do much campaigning. He related very well with the entire country. I want to pick it from there, that wherever we are and in whatever things we do, we should remember that word from him - “Unity, unity, unity” all the time. I beg to submit.3.28MR DONONZIO MUGABE (NRM, Ruhinda South County, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I remember the late Dr Jacob Oulanyah when he met me at the South Wing reception and held my hand to his office. He asked how far I had gone with my issues - That is when I had court issues. He encouraged me to be courageous and never to fear anything, and never to fight back.The late Rt Hon. Speaker advised that human beings may fail to resolve their issues, but God shall always be there to provide a permanent solution. I am happy to note that with his guidance - and when we had issues here of splitting the constituencies, he called me a day after and said, “Do you remember what I told you? God has provided a permanent solution.” I am here to testify that with his guidance, we are happily serving; we are living and celebrating together.Mr Speaker, I remember when you said that the late Rt Hon. Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah said that there is no bigger problem that cannot be resolved, during the campaigns, I was the chairman of his opponent. After elections, he called me and said, “Congratulations.” I also told him, “Congratulations.” That was it. We had a good time until the time of his demise. I remember he told me, when giving me his words of wisdom, to be courageous and never to share personal problems with the public. As Members of the 10th Parliament, when he was indisposed, we were looking for him, but he was quiet there. It was very unfortunate that at the time of his demise, I was also indisposed; I did not even bury him because I had serious issues with my health. But I remember his words; that only share your personal problems with your confidants. May his soul rest in peace.[Ms Aber]7735THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 MARCH 20233.31THE MINISTER OFSTATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Peace Mutuuzo) (NRM, Woman Representative, Bunyangabo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. As we pick memories of the late Jacob Oulanyah, the former Speaker of Parliament, I want to acknowledge his support to the Ministry of Gender. There is not a single function we held and missed him in his bow tie and white shirt. He was not only academically intelligent, but also a very smart man – in his walk, works and ways.Most importantly, he had a soft spot for the vulnerable persons. I once walked to his office to inform him that his district had the highest prevalence of teenage pregnancy. He immediately requested us to hold a function there, which he would use for advocacy for a girl-child to return to school.He did not stop at that. He enrolled a number of children – pregnant girls and those who had just been delivered, on his personal funding – back to school. After his death, some of them have started dropping out, but they were really a big number.On many occasions, he would call us and say, “Have you also still faced the cut?” because every time there were financial constraints, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development’s budget was cut first. He would ask whether the knife had caught up with us and certainly, it would have.Somehow, he would make phone calls to other ministries if they could support some of the events and functions in different local governments. He made our work much easier; so, we really miss him.However, we thank you that during your tenure and that of the Speaker, you have done a lot, first of all, to keep him in our minds and also to follow his traits. One of them is keeping time; the second is keeping the ministers informed. If there is an issue, we are alerted and informed in time. That helps us to prepare and that is what governance does.I thank you very much for taking it up from him. May God rest his soul in eternal peace.3.34THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also add my voice to thank you for organising this debate and also the Prime Minister for the motion. I stand to support it. Like other people have spoken, those who were in Makerere in the early 90s, Jacob was our Speaker. Actually, he was my neighbour in Mitchell Hall, together with Hon. Mao. When we participated in that strike, I think what caused him problems was that when the rally was organised, being Speaker, he wore the Makerere gown -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sseggona is saying you look like a Lumumbist. He is very uncomfortable. (Laughter) DR BARYOMUNSI:  No, I am a Mitchell “rat”. When we gathered for the students’ assembly, being the Guild Speaker, he was wearing the students red gown; so, he could easily be marked. That is why he had a confrontation with the police and had his pancreas injured – because Hon. Ssemujju was asking which organ it was; it was the pancreas. Again, I worked with him closely when I was a Parliamentary Commissioner and he was the Deputy Speaker. We did many things. We continued to work very closely because by the time he died, he was serving as the NRM Vice-Chairperson for Northern Uganda as I also served in a similar position for Western Uganda. Those positions made us sit on the Central Executive Committee of the NRM. He always steered debate in meetings with a lot of charisma and eloquence, as we all know. Although he was our Speaker and fellow Member of Parliament, some of us were very close to him and we can speak about him until the cows come home. Nonetheless, we want to continue conveying our condolences to the 7736MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION [Dr Baryomunsi]family, the people of Omoro, the people of northern Uganda and, indeed, Ugandans and humanity because his influence and impact went beyond this country. Hon. Ssemujju raised the issue of the cause of death. We explained it in fair details at that time, but I just want to repeat that by the time we buried him, the cause of death question had been settled; he died of cancer. Mr Speaker, I, together with Hon. Kiwanda, had the opportunity to visit Jacob at his house before he was flown to the US. We visited him on behalf of the NRM party. We had a discussion. He had –(Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, just conclude so that we do not go back. I have many Members that want to contribute.DR BARYOMUNSI: Okay, he had undergone an operation, but he had visible signs of advanced cancer and also features of chemotherapy. I remember telling Hon. Kiwanda that Jacob had cancer – because our eyes are medical eyes; we can see what many of you cannot see -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, what is Hon. Sseggona suffering from? (Laughter)DR BARYOMUNSI:  We usually do not discuss people’s illnesses in the public. So, I will tell him in confidence, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)The late Jacob, like we said – and the Minister of Health explained very eloquently then – died of cancer. The reason he was flown to the US was to benefit from the advanced technology there. Unfortunately, he could not make it. Lastly, there are many lessons we learn from the late Jacob - punctuality, eloquence, smartness, intellectual strength, being there for others and many others. We greatly miss him though we continue to pray that he rests in peace. I am sure, as a believer, that he is up there in Heaven and I am sure he is happy with the way we have continued the work, as the 11th Parliament, under your leadership and Madam Speaker’s. I thank you very much.3.39 MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise to support the motion for commemorating the death of the late Rt Hon. Speaker. I knew the late from Makerere University; we met in Lumumba Hall. I was not in Lumumba, but it was during the campaigns. The late was supporting Hon. Mao and I was supporting the late Noble Mayombo.You know how we used to behave as students. There was some bit of a scuffle. He was accompanied by a gentleman, I think from Nkrumah Hall, who used to call himself “Okwangability”  – I do not know where he disappeared to –(Interjection) – it is very unfortunate. After that scuffle, the next day, the late and that gentleman, “Okwangability”  came to my hall, Livingston Hall, and we reconciled. Since then, the late became my friend. They have talked about the fact that he loved a middle ground. He never wanted any side to say that it had defeated the other. That is why he looked for me in my hall. This is what we should emulate from people like him. Secondly, he believed in education. He said his background was not a good one and that if it had not been for education, he would not have succeeded in –(Member timed out.) 3.41MS FAITH NAKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also support the motion. When I joined this Parliament, as an amateur politician, in Jacob Oulanyah, I looked at a mentor. When he died, it was a shocker; it was difficult to take 7737THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 MARCH 2023it in. However, Mr Speaker, it is good that you and the Rt Hon. Anita Among have continued to comfort us. You did not abandon the dreams of the late Jacob Oulanyah. You picked them up and walked along with them because we have seen them unfolding. Allow me to enumerate one - he had work in progress on the petition for early childhood care by teachers. And with your support and leadership, the Committee on Education and Sports is processing that petition. I wish to thank you very much. There are many things you have picked along, which we have seen unfolding. That comforts us. The other dream he had, which I wish we could pursue until we achieve it someday, is to see that our district local governments, at some point, receive enough money for their roads. It will grow to a billion shillings – in his dream. I know we may not achieve it in a year, but we will achieve it sometime in the future. His dream was also to see every farmer in Uganda having the comfort of transporting his goods to the nearby market with ease. It is my hope that we achieve that dream as long as we are alive. I know that through your able leadership and that of the Rt Hon. Anita Among, we will achieve all these things. You have already proved it through the –(Member timed out.)  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, Hon. Nakut has raised a very important point, which the late Jacob talked about. We carried on, as a House, and that is the issue of ensuring that at least each district receives Shs 1 billion for rural roads. (Applause) Now, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this is something we should work on together because the Members of Parliament are suffering. I have my councillors and chairman LC5 here. For the roads under the local government, I am being accused – I am the one put on videos that the roads are not done, yet they are under the local government. The councillors are the ones recording videos to say that the Member of Parliament has not worked on such and such a road, yet the roads are for the local government where I am not serving, but it is because we have not given them money. If we gave money to our districts, we would make it easier for ourselves. (Applause) We would not be making it easy for the district. I hope, starting with this budget, as we agreed - Chairperson of the Budget Committee and Chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, you are looking at that. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, would you want to say something about that?3.44THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Mr Speaker, as we mourn the gallant son of Uganda and look forward to what we want Uganda to be, the Government of Uganda has done something. I felt like I needed to inform you that as we talk, 75 per cent of the budgeted money for roads has been sent to the districts -(Interjections)-  let me conclude, colleagues. The President of the Republic of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni Tibuhaburwa, who has just started his first term as Tibuhaburwa –(Laughter)– Mr Speaker, protect me. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, go on.MS NABBANJA: Has given a directive and I wish I would be given a chance –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister, please go, on.MS NABBANJA: I wish I would be given chance - but he has given a directive that I must fast-track that wish, bearing in mind that we ought to have money, as a country, to put in the budget - and I know the Parliament of Uganda is charged with the responsibility of appropriation. 7738MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION [Ms Nabbanja]And after getting money, it is our wish that we support our districts. There are those big districts, which are already getting Shs 1 billion and above. For example, Wakiso is getting more than Shs 1 billion, yet Kakumiro is getting Shs 300 million, unfortunately, because we are not as big as Wakiso. A district like Kabale – those big districts that you know that have a bigger kilometre road coverage, are getting some good amount of money. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I request that Members of Parliament pick interest in the already available resources so that they are put to good use. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. No, clarification is only allowed when a member is still on the Floor. Now, we do not have anyone on the Floor. Let us go back to our issue. We shall have enough time to discuss budget-related issues. I am still on this side; I am coming to that side. Do not mind. I picked Dr Bukenya.3.49DR MICHAEL BUKENYA (NRM, Bukuya County, Kassanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join colleagues in supporting the motion to pay tribute to the late Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. In 2017, I had problems in my constituency, but it concerned the whole nation; there are problems in the gold mines. I first went to his office with a petition and then he sat me down and asked what I wanted. After listening, he told me to draft a motion with my colleague, Hon. Nsamba. When we finished the motion, he invited us to his home. He was a mentor and a teacher. We went to his home in Kansanga, took a cup of tea, and we edited the motion. He gave us a lot of advice, which we still use and practise today. He put the motion on the Order Paper the next day and he told me to keep calm and wait. We debated the motion for two hours, which he participated in making, anyway, by editing out what would have caused us problems. In the end, the Government allowed artisanal miners to be licensed. So, I learnt a lot of things from him as well from his mentoring. I have seen the way I caught your eye, which shows that you are a good mentee too. (Applause) I am sure when I come back with the issues that have come up in the mines, you are going to give me –(Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 3.50MS ACAN JOYCE (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sorry, colleagues, there is something I have observed. Members of Parliament who finish speaking walk out. It is very unfortunate; we have a resolution to pass, who is going to pass it if you all walk out? I am going to start noting down, colleagues - if your role is just to come and catch the attention of the media and then go away, if I do not pick you next time, you know that is the reason. I am going to be marking you. Let Hon. Joyce Acan’s time start counting now because I used some of her time.MS ACAN: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to pay tribute to the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. Indeed, he was a true statesman. He was a man full of inspiration; he was a man willing to nurture us, the new Members of Parliament. He was a man who was ready to listen to all of us and who would crack jokes with most of us. I remember one time, as five Members of Parliament representing People with Disabilities, approached him in his office. However, as we arrived, we found him at the doorstep walking out. He then said: “Oh, these beautiful people here, what do you want?” He told his personal assistant thus: “These people who are talking scientifically - if I do not meet them, they will cause me problems.”7739THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 MARCH 2023We went to his office; he sat us down before we presented to him a number of issues. We told him how we were having difficulties in accessing the conference hall. We told him about the problem of accessing the Chamber here and we told him that we lacked offices, which is still the case up to this day.  He listened to each of us and promised to work on the issues that we raised. If the former Rt Hon. Speaker, Oulanyah, was alive, we would not be struggling to access the Chamber today and we would not be struggling to access the conference hall. I believe that the current Speaker will show us mercy and provide us with office space plus working on the ramp to aid our access to this place. We also hope that she will ensure guardrails are put in place to help us access the Conference Hall. May his soul rest in peace.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think these are very critical issues. I have not had a meeting with the honourable colleagues with disabilities, but these are very valid issues, which we have to look into. They do not need to be even attributed to anyone, they are direct and we are not even complying with the law. You understand that we are in an old building, where those standards were not made. I hereby direct the Clerk to ensure a ramp for Members of Parliament with disabilities to get access to the Chamber is constructed – yes, to do whatever is possible. I need this to be communicated to the Clerk; let him do whatever is possible. On the issue of your offices, it is an issue we are going to discuss with the whips because as you know, it is the whips who should allocate them. Unfortunately, I was the Government Chief Whip and I might have done a bad job at that time. Now, it is my chance to direct the one who replaced me to do a better job. We are going to work with him to ensure you get your offices. I thought that issue had been resolved because I had directed the Sergeant-at-Arms.However, thank you for bringing this to the Floor. We shall ensure this is resolved. 3.55MS ANNET KATUSIIME (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to talk about the late Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. I had the pleasure of meeting him one-on-one –(Interjections)–  allow me to talk about his humility and empathy with relevant examples. I made an appointment, which was granted -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, colleagues should not disturb you. We are fighting homosexuality yet you are complaining of the statement “one-on-one”. (Laughter) It was about a colleague talking to a fellow colleague.MS KATUSIIME: Mr Speaker, I seek your protection. Anyhow, as I was saying, I made an appointment, which was granted. I waited in the room -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You waited in the lobby.MS KATUSIIME: Yes. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In Parliament, we have lobbies, not rooms. (Laughter)MS KATUSIIME: After 10 minutes, I was called to enter his office. As soon as I entered his office - he was already very sick. He left his seat, came to me and apologised for delaying me. I was immensely humbled. Thereafter, he again left his seat and sat with me -(Interjections)- I will tell you colleagues, why he did that. I had a health problem; I was already limping. So, he made me sit near him to critically talk to me.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are protected. (Laughter)MS KATUSIIME: You have taken my time, Mr Speaker. Allow me to complete this because it is a therapy he left me with.7740MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are protected, so, proceed.MS KATUSIIME: Let me unveil the problem I had. I had arthritis and it was in its final stages. He guided me and accorded me support. As I talk, I have no pain since that time. He left me with a therapy. Those suffering from arthritis, come to me, I am now a consultant. (Laughter) Thank you.3.58MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to join the House in paying tribute to the late Hon. Jacob Oulanyah.I met Hon. Jacob in the 10th Parliament. We worked with him tirelessly to have a better country. I want to thank God for the time he gave to the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah and the time He gave us to stay and work with him.The Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was there in times of trouble. When you had problems and institutions had problems, he was available. I want to cite an example: when the Church of Uganda was constructing Church House on Kampala Road, they had serious problems with Equity Bank. The bank wanted to take over that structure because they had lent money to Church of Uganda, but Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was seen going to Namirembe with Shs 100 million, together with his colleagues, to support the church to recover their building. That was Jacob Oulanyah!I would like to also mention that the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah fought corruption, as Hon. Odur Jonathan stated clearly. To me, he left unfinished business with this Parliament - I learned a number of lessons. The unfinished business is about our people who do procurement of projects in this country. You find a bridge, which would cost Shs 2 billion, going at Shs 3 billion – (Member timed out.)4.00MR ISAAC OTIMGIW (NRM, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank this House enormously for honouring the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah’s day, which was a resolution passed by this Parliament last year. We do appreciate our Speaker of Parliament and the Office of the Speaker, for ensuring this has happened today.I met the late Jacob Oulanyah in his office in Naguru. I went to his office when he was running for the Speakership. He told me one thing that made me vote him. He told me, “As a new Member of Parliament, whether you like it or not, you need me to be the Speaker in that House so I can mentor you” and what he said was absolutely right. He had immense knowledge in legislation in this House and he carried that knowledge over the years. It was very sad we never actually shared more time after that. We never managed to get the knowledge we had expected to learn from him. The last time we spent time together was when he recovered from the first phase of the illness. Under his mentorship, as the Vice-Chairperson of the NRM northern region, we visited West Nile where he wanted to thank the NRM leadership for voting His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. Little did we know that, that was his goodbye to the people of West Nile. Today, we feel we have lost a very important person and wherever he was, the little –(Member timed out.)4.02MR RICHARD ANYWAR (NRM, Agago West County, Agago):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity on this important day when we commemorate the life of the late Jacob Oulanyah.The late Jacob was a peace-loving person. The late was committed to peace even during his last days. I was privileged to be among the few people he called in his last days. He was committed to peace building and he believed that unity keeps us together and stronger. The late Jacob was an outstanding leader. He was a source of inspiration to many people. He mentored very many young people. He taught them the fundamentals of life and he believed 7741THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 MARCH 2023in equal opportunity for everyone. In his own words, he said, “In this life, we are running a race and we give the button whenever our time comes.” He has passed on that to us. May his soul rest in peace.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues,  I will be doing another round. When you see me leaving an area before picking you, please, take heart.4.03MS SARAH KAYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Namisindwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join Members in supporting the motion. I served with the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah in the Ninth Parliament and I learned two things from him.The Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was a man of humility and he knew how to apply it when it was necessary. But if you came on the wrong side, he also knew how to respond back. His two characters would be applied whenever it was necessary. Mr Speaker, while chairing the House as Deputy Speaker, I remember he told us, when we had just come that every time you rise on the Floor of Parliament or in any meeting to say something, ask yourself: “Is what I am going to say relevant? Will it create an impact? Or am I just getting up to say something. Keeping quiet or not speaking sense will leave people not understanding who you are - other than you getting up and you speak nonsense, and everyone will go out knowing that is who you are.” The late Jacob Oulanyah, when seated in that Chair, used to tell us: “For every motion or Bill that is brought on the Floor of Parliament, there are MPs with authority; they have knowledge about it. If you know you have little knowledge about whatever is being presented on the Floor, sit down and learn.” (Member timed out.)4.05MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. About the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, like my colleagues have said, I also knew him during the Makerere University times. I will be very quick about that time - when the Members were speaking, I remembered the good campaigns between Hon. Mao and the late Mayombo. I think that was unprecedented; very good campaigns. That is when I interacted with Hon. Oulanyah because when we were in Lumumba, they came to campaign. They were telling us; “If you do not want to support Mao, do not go and listen to him because you will be converted.” They were equally brilliant. Mr Speaker, his work was not in vain, although he was wounded at the time. I remember before midnight, the Inspector General of Police was relieved of his duties because of the blood that this man had shed. Mr Speaker, coming to Parliament, we missed him in the Eighth Parliament - because I was not here but we met him in the Ninth Parliament. Many words have been said about him and they are true. He was a principled man, though not rigid. Actually, today, people take being principled as being rigid. He would change, but change on principle. I implore Members that when you feel there is something you have learnt, do not be rigid and say, “I will keep on the other side because this is my thinking.” The other thing is about humility. Colleagues, in this country, many of us lack humility. We have been seeing it even on the Frontbench, and everywhere. When someone reaches certain levels, they think they have reached the end of the world. I think –(Member timed out.)4.08MS JULIET BASHIISHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I also wish to add my voice to support this motion –(Interjection)– Mr Speaker, I beg for protection from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yet she is the one supposed to give you protection. (Laughter) Okay, please go on.7742MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONMS BASHIISHA: Mr Speaker, I want to speak as a senior orphan –(Interjection)– yes, I am a senior orphan and I thank the top management of this Parliament for providing a shoulder for my fellow orphans to lean on. As an orphan, I know what it means because when you are crying for something, maybe your parents can provide and so, you will know that there is somewhere you can run to. I thank you very much for that. (Applause) And to my colleagues - I attended one of the vigils in Muyenga and I saw the orphans crying - the orphans the late Rt Hon. Jacob was looking after. And it is not by surprise that the orphans he left are being looked after. So, we should prepare our exit by doing what is right so that when we are long gone, we are also being helped.Mr Speaker, I am a student who believes in the saying that “The dead are not dead.” You may find that he is watching us even now. And he is even happy that the son - our colleague, Hon. Andrew Oulanyah - is trying his best to look after the constituency and represent him. He, maybe, is also happy that the Speaker and your team are doing what he expected you to do. However, I have an appeal to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and the team, that there is a gap that still exists. He may not be happy that he is not yet replaced as a member of CEC for northern Uganda. So, I request that those who are in the position should at least try and make sure that the people of northern Uganda are also represented in CEC. Thank you very much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.4.11MR SANON BWIIRE (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. The late Rt Hon. Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah, was my friend. I came to know him last term even before I came to Parliament, because I was on the executive of the Local Government Association of all the district speakers.He was our patron and he used to give us a full day, lecturing and mentoring, as well as informing us on the legislative agenda and system of this country. When I came to Parliament, I was placed at the front to look for his vote from Busoga. After the elections, I spent about a week without calling him. This prompted him to call me to his office. I asked him, “What is it, Sir, that you want me to do again? I am ready for another assignment.” He told me: “Now go back and hide all the weapons, place them in a very good place because we should now preach reconciliation and peace in Parliament.” Then he also told me: “In the coming week, I want you to come to my office so that I introduce you to a very important person.” So, I was hopeful; wondering who this person was - was it the President or who? But I knew the President could not come to his office. However, he later introduced me to the Chaplain of this Parliament -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But now, honourable, we are paying tribute to the late Hon. Oulanyah who believed in rules. You have gone on with the microphone without my permission. MR BWIIRE: Mr Speaker, I beg that you allow me finish this small sentence.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude. MR BWIIRE: Mr Speaker, from that time - I really want to thank you and the Speaker of Parliament, for remembering this day, because we resolved here but I thought it had been forgotten. So, I want to thank you for that.Secondly, I would like to thank the people of Omoro, for electing my brother, Hon. Andrew Oulanyah, to extend the legacy of the late. (Applause), I salute you, the people of Omoro. This man may not fit well into his late father’s shoes, but be patient with him. I am very sure by the time he serves his third term, he will be already there to fulfil all the desires of the late. (Laughter)  May his soul rest in eternal peace.7743THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 MARCH 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. But Hon. Sanon, I also hereby direct you to bring back the weapons to Parliament because you hid them, and I do not know where they are; they might be used against someone. (Laughter) 4.14DR JAMES NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, thank you for allowing this moment. I have served this nation for quite some time, and I am confident to say – and I am absolutely sure, as a matter of fact, that the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was one of the finest public officers this country has had. So, it is right that we remember him. He was a personal friend. He was a man whose distinct qualities stood him way above many of the public officers this country has had. It was a big loss! I remember one time he visited my constituency to help me raise funds. He had promised to come again. However, when that time came, he was no more. Mr Speaker, one day, he called me to his office and wanted me to move a motion concerning the Uganda we want to see – he invited me. He, uniquely, was concerned about the quality that this nation should have. He was upset on many occasions, when he would recall the conduct of some of our colleagues in this House. For instance, Mr Speaker, he was disturbed by the practice we continue to see where a Member of Parliament holding the Floor –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, switch it on and conclude. DR BUTURO: The Member holding the Floor should ordinarily address the Speaker – and this is in conformity with the Commonwealth practice. The Member holding the Floor should address the Speaker, not the speaker and honourable members. That is not the accepted practice and he was disturbed by it. He had promised to talk to Members about it.Mr Speaker, finally, I suggest that in honour of this man, who was distinctly in his own class, we should go back and remind ourselves about the standard practices when it comes to our general conduct in this House. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. What Hon. Dr Buturo raises – I mean, these are the issues you are praising the late Speaker for. However, when we try to apply them on you, the corridors become hot. (Laughter) Members run out, but I think that slowly by slowly - there are some Members, for example, that I have attached to senior colleagues for mentorship, after observing their weaknesses. Unfortunately, they go there once and disappear – because I follow up.Then, I have honourable colleagues – you come to my office that you have issues and I say: “Honourable member, I can call the minister and we resolve this issue”, but the Member will say, “No, my constituents won’t see me.” (Laughter) Isn’t that what the late Rt Hon. Oulanyah was talking about?When you stand up to speak and I ask “under which rule” you call me a dictator. When you stand up on a point of procedure, you should mention the rule – not me telling you the rule – because for any reason, it must be anchored on the rules. So, honourable colleagues, as a way of paying tribute, the best way is for us to reflect on how we conduct ourselves. Even us, as presiding officers, make mistakes, but go back and reflect on how we conduct ourselves. We consult very senior colleagues. Some of you are not in this position but you might even be better than us in terms of knowing these things.So, for all of us, the moment you know you are not complete as an individual – in terms of development – that is the beginning of your development and becoming a better legislator. The moment you start thinking you are at the apex and that you can stand up and cause commotion twice because you think that the Speaker, because he loves peace, will give you a chance - there are some of you I give 7744MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION [The Deputy Speaker]the chance for the sake of peace –(Laughter)– yes, I have to admit. It is not for the sake of you being the best legislators. (Laughter) It happens and it is a tactic – I say, “I better give him a chance to speak and we have peace and continue.” Otherwise, I would have to adjourn or suspend the House. So, let us reflect and try to be better legislators. Whenever you are presenting on the Floor, ask yourself: “If my son, in future, is to read this Hansard, what will he say? By the way, do you read your Hansard? You need to go back and read what you have presented on a topic. Sometimes you look at it and say, “Can I have a chance of going back to the Floor to correct…” (Laughter) Anyhow, that is what the late wanted us to focus on. So, thank you, Hon. Dr Buturo, for bringing out these issues. Let us have Hon. Amos Okot and then I will pick the Member for Kanungu, Hon. Mbwatekamwa and Hon. Amos Okot here, but for the sake of peace, I will pick Hon. Mwijukye. (Laughter) 4.20MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago North County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am the Secretary General, Acholi Parliamentary Group, and I am going to speak about the good pieces of advice the late Jacob gave us. The late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was our patron and each moment we met or called him, the late Jacob Oulanyah told us, “You are now the people’s representatives. You must exercise tolerance in whatever you are going to do.”Jacob advised us to be consistent and that if there were issues that were not being attended to, we should not waver. The Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah always advised us to stand by one another and to support each other. However, he rebuked us not to be spies in whatever we would do. He told us, “You are here as NRM or people from another party, but do not allow yourself to work as a spy against each other.” He also rebuked us not to be rumormongers.And we are carrying forward all those words of wisdom, to date. The late Jacob told us, “There are very many pledges in this country and some of these pledges may not be fulfilled. Do not kill yourself over these matters because you are representing people about…” –(Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude, honourable colleague.MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you so much. Again, he always emphasised two areas, which are key problems in Acholi. One of them is the conflict in Apaa, and the other is about the warriors that always come from our neighbors, through Karamoja subregion, and are, until today, stealing our property and killing our people. He told us: “Some of these things started before you were born. Now, you are a leader. Stand firm and represent your people.” We will always miss him. We want to thank the people of Uganda who have been with us throughout this time. We thank Parliament. We thank the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, who are leading this House. We also thank the people of Acholi, who have been standing strong and together, as we honour the late Jacob, our hero in the leadership context. Mr Speaker, thank you for giving me this time. God bless you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Kanungu. 4.23MS PATIENCE KINSHABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity to stand with Parliament to commemorate the passing of the late Rt Hon. Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah.Some of us got to meet him briefly, but his legacy will live with us for the rest of our lives. 7745THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 MARCH 2023When I got elected – before we went to Kyankwanzi – he called me and asked if I could support him, but I never got the chance to meet him. I got to meet the late Jacob when I was already in Kyankwanzi. However, after listening to different Members, I chose to support him. I got an opportunity to become a secretary-general in his campaigns and I worked very tirelessly to make sure he got elected. In Western Uganda, very many blows and stones were thrown at me, but I did not care. I supported him until the last minute. I am very proud that I supported Hon. Jacob Oulanyah up to his death. Before he went back the last time, we saw him, Hon. Nakut, Hon. Enosi and I went to his office. We asked if we could take him for lunch because we saw that he was getting weak and weaker each day. He told us, “My friends, I cannot swallow or eat.” We said, “We’ll take you to a good hotel and you will have some soup.” He said, “No, I cannot eat.” We said, “Give us some money then and we go and eat. We wanted to pay for you.” He looked at us and said, “You people, I don’t have money.” We said, “But there is some money in some office.” He gave us some money to go and eat. (Laughter) After that, he called and said, “Patience, I want you to” –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let us conclude. I hope you know that under the declaration to the IGG, all sources of income have to be captured. (Laughter)MS NKUNDA:  Mr Speaker, the money he gave us was very little, for just a plate of food. Nothing more than Shs 50,000. After that day, he called and asked me to bring him a man called Martin. I brought him the next day to his office and we prayed with him. He said, “I don’t know if I will be here for a long time.” I want to say that I am proud that we supported him until he became Speaker before he died. May his soul rest in peace. Thank you.4.26THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Ruth Aceng): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion and to say a few things about the late Rt Hon. Speaker with whom I had the opportunity to study and so, to know well during the days when we were at school. I want to thank this Parliament for giving me the opportunity to look after him and in a special way, the family and the people of Omoro, who gave me the opportunity to look after him. Mr Speaker, I also thank you for the opportunity you gave me to go to visit him during his last days, just to hold his hand and pray with him before he breathed his last. The Rt Hon. Oulanyah was a good friend. He called me “Aceng” not “Honourable” or “Minister.” For us, back home, when somebody calls you by your surname, it means they deeply love and care for you. That is the relationship I had with him. The Rt Hon. Oulanyah supported the health sector in very many ways. As people in the health sector, we have a weakness; we do not know how to explain things in a language that people can understand. Many times, when I would be going out, I would call him and say, “But Rt Hon. Oulanyah, why don’t you come with me and explain to the people?” He took off time to explain issues of family planning, women’s health and malaria to the people. At the end of every – (Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you need my permission to continue with the microphone, please.DR ACENG: I ask for your permission.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude.DR ACENG: Thank you. He would ask me, “Did I do what you wanted me to do?” I would say, “Yes.” I will miss him!Now let me give a little information to the people of Omoro. I know they are here. There are many projects that he had started. There 7746MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION [Dr Aceng]are many projects that I went to do with him in Omoro and he talked about them. I know Hon. Andrew Oulanyah here has the responsibility to see that they come to an end. We shall work on them together when this Parliament gives me money. Thank you.4.29MR MBWATEKAMWA  GAFFA (Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, but you need to protect me from Hon. Asuman. As we commemorate the late Jacob Oulanyah’s life, I will remember him as a man who was very remorseful. Unlike our ministers who are not - remember recently one who refused even to say, “Sorry?” The late was very apologetic. There was a scenario when I invited him to a fundraising function, and he had accepted to attend only to let me down at the last minute when even protocol had arrived. Of course, at that function, I was very much embarrassed. When I came back, he called me to his office and said, “Hon. Mbwatekamwa, I’m sorry. I did not intend to embarrass you, but I was misled. I received information that you had invited rebels to attend the function.”I said, “Rt Hon. Speaker, I did not know that in this Parliament, you are even leading rebels.” The people he was referring to as rebels were the likes of Hon. Nsamba, Hon. Nambeshe and Hon. Tinkansiimire. They said that he should not come because the NRM never wanted him to be part of us. He pulled up his pledge of Shs 5 million and gave it to me to take to the church. I will live to remember him as a very good man who could accept his mistake. Lastly, I will always remember Jacob because in the 10th Parliament, it was me – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I am going to be strict. We do two minutes in order to give others a chance - for the sake of peace.MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the sake of peace. I will always remember him as a bowtie man. When I came to the 10th Parliament, it was him, Hon. Tusiime and I who used to wear bowties. No wonder I can now see people trying to emulate him. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The situation has improved. (Laughter)4.32MR LINOS NGOMPEK  (NRM, Kibanda North County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, some of you are insisting, “Me first.” Where are you going? It means you want to speak and go out. Therefore, if I see you trying to lobby me to pick you first, you will be last. (Laughter)MR NGOMPEK : Thank you, Mr Speaker. Jacob loved the vulnerable community. That is why at the time of his passing, he had very many children in school that he was sponsoring. I am glad Parliament, through Members, contributed Shs 1,000,000 each towards his Foundation to ensure those children who he was supporting continue with their education. Last year, we passed a resolution that annually, we would be commemorating our late Speaker through a public memorial lecture. I do not know how far we have gone with that, but I implore you to come up with that programme so that we also celebrate his life with the general public in order for the public to also appreciate his good deeds. Finally, I would like to thank the people of Bukedea and those of Mitooma for sending the two of you to Parliament. You have ably filled the void and we are not missing anything. You are guiding us well, especially the new Members like us and we are really proud of the people who sent you. Thank you. Jah bless! (Applause) 7747THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 MARCH 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For the sake of peace, I am going to pick Hon. Basalirwa. Honourable colleagues, for clarification purposes, we passed a resolution that we commemorate and this is part of the commemoration. You never know, next year, it might be in another way. What is important is having a commemoration on his birthday.4.35MS PHIONA NYAMUTORO (NRM, Female Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There are 1,001 things I would say about the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. As colleagues have rightly stated, mentorship was his game. As a Youth Member of Parliament, and my colleagues, the regional Youth Members of Parliament, we always looked forward to having interactions with him. He called on us just to interact with young minds and debate. We were always thrilled to sip from his cup of wisdom. The Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was a man like no other. I must thank him today, as a young Member of Parliament, for instilling hope in us for leadership using his calm demeanour and that smack of a smile you could tell was from his heart.It was very easy to distinguish a leader who was no populist, but cared about the demands and wellbeing of Ugandans in this country. He charged us with the responsibility of instilling hope in the young generation. I do not think that is something we can overlook for the young population. The Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was a very humble man as many colleagues have stated, but also with a very high sense of fashion. He would always tell us whenever we would go to meet him, “Whenever stepping out as a leader, look presidential, if not exquisite”, an assignment that the 11th Parliament has understood very well. (Applause) The late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, as I conclude, simply understood leadership as being a servant. What a man! I must say, we still continue to admire him even in death – (Interjections) - Mr Speaker, I beg to conclude. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude. MS NYAMUTORO: We still continue to admire him even in death. As the 11th Parliament, the best way we can pay tribute to him is by taking our leadership roles more seriously. I thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, let us strictly use two minutes each. 4.37MS BARODA KAYANGA (Independent, Kamuli Municipality, Kamuli): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to talk about the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. There are one or two things to remember about the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. One day, he told his personal assistant to call me. I went to Naguru to his office and I saw him. He told me, “Give me your number.” I told him, “Rt Honourable, but you used it to call me.” He said, “No, it is my PA.” He then said, “Let me have your number.” When I gave him my number, he said, “You are using your late mother’s number” and I said, “Yes.” He then said, “I wish when I leave this earth, my son or my daughter can use my number.” I feel so hurt that whenever I call that number, it is off. The last time I saw him, he came to a Duah of my late mother. He said, “Right now, I am in Kamuli. I have come with a new door of peace.” I really miss the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. I thought I would not be able to talk about him, but I thank God that I have been able to. May his soul rest in eternal.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, we continue to thank God for his life, but also for the life of your mother, who was our colleague here in the 10th Parliament. She was a darling to many of us, in the 10th Parliament, like you are a darling to most of the colleagues. 7748MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION4.39MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke East County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank you for this opportunity. I remember when his body lay here, I stood for several hours and pulled my muscles, but I did not catch your eye; so, I want to thank you for that.  Mr Speaker, what I want to tell you - and what I remember very well about the late is that two months before he got sick, he went to northern Uganda. He went to West Nile, Acholi and Lango to put our boat together to reconcile everybody. He said he wanted forgiveness and everybody should work together. That is one thing I remember. I also remember when he spoke these two languages - they are very staunch. When he spoke in parables, as a Langi, you would need somebody else to translate. He really spoke very well. I appeal to the Government that when a resolution is passed in this House - and it should be fulfilled – that Government should continue with the project he began. Let the Government have him remembered by the building - and not on the day we are commemorating or celebrating his life. When I was inducted as a World Olympian for life in 2021, this same Parliament passed a resolution to build a theatre in my health centre, but up to now - I think they are waiting for me to die and then they praise me. Mr Speaker, let this be put right. If someone passes on, that person should be praised forever. He or she should be remembered for what he or she has done. This is what I appeal to you, Members of Parliament - I thank you for that. May God bless you all! Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, I hope you have taken note. 4.41MR MICHAEL KAKEMBO (NUP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for allowing me to join honourable colleagues in supporting this motion, as we commemorate the life of the late Jacob Oulanyah; a very great man of this country. He was such a great man who held no grudge against any person, no matter the intent or the damage of the person. He would let bygones be bygones. I remember when he stood for speakership, he called me because he wanted my support. I stubbornly told him in his face that I was not going to support him because I thought he would not win. And when he defeated me, I got scared of him, but when I went to his office, he reminded me and assured me that – “Michael, let bygones be bygones. We are here for a mission; a mission beyond our political parties, but a mission for Uganda. Let us go and fight to make Uganda a better country. Forget your political party. In Parliament, we are discussing Uganda, first.” I was very surprised that he could say that to me. He was a man who wished to see others succeed in their goals. When you went to his office, he would labour to teach you. If you went with a question that is –(Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We agreed on two minutes, honourable colleagues. Let us conclude. I will use Hon. Kakembo as a good example because he is a gentleman. I know he will not quarrel. Let us learn from Hon. Kakembo. 4.43MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also promise to be a gentleman. I have three issues. One, the late Oulanyah had a lot of passion for legal aid for which I moved a Bill. The Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs has already prepared the report.Mr Speaker, I want to ask through your Chair, that this Legal Aid Bill is passed into law in his honour. He loved supporting the indigent person. Secondly, the last matter that he decided on while in that seat and very importantly, was the 7749THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 MARCH 2023issue of processing Bills at the end of the term of Parliament. I remember the last word that I had with him was on how we saved work, which was about to collapse because the term of office had collapsed and he gave a ruling. I want to urge you, Mr Speaker, to help us to quicken all the Bills, which are in the pipeline so that by the time we close, no Bill(s) is caught up. Another matter was about NUSAF IV; he was passionate about it - an affirmative action for the Greater North because the people of the Greater North are really yearning for that equality; we are doing it badly. The silence of Government on NUSAF IV has become very loud and Government needs to speak on it. Finally, he was a man of fun; he loved to have fun. For instance, when we celebrated Christmas days, he loved Lingala. I loved it when he, Hon. Lyandro Komakech, Hon. Okupa together and I, would take to the floor to dance. He had that kind of cap; I do not know how they call it -(Interjection)–  yes, that one - (Interjection)-  he was the best. Colleagues, take time and listen to this because all the presentations you have been making were about issues that were formal, but I am talking about his other life. Whenever we passed the Budget and we went to the gardens to have fun, was when you would see the real Jacob, the man from Omoro; a man of sense and peace, at the same time. He would express himself by his face, but not uttering words on the microphone when he was in the Chair. He came to the seat when we were at the tent because he was demanding for something to be expunged from the record of Parliament. So, I realised that records that go to the Hansard are very important. He was keen; he came and sat until the Speaker said, “We are going to expunge what you want to be expunged from this.” Therefore, whatever goes on record is very important. I request, through you, Mr Speaker, that sometimes, we make mistakes and beg that you be merciful to us not to utter words that go to the Hansard and hurt us later. May his soul rest in peace. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk was that two minutes? MR AOGON: I think so.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, Hon. Aogon has made two critical points, which come back to us as the leadership of the House: the first was on the Legal Aid Bill. If the report is ready, we are going to give it space. We want all these Bills cleared.The second is on the issue of business, which lapses - you remember the ruling he made was because of the period. Otherwise, rule 235(4) says that business has to be reinstated within the first 14 sittings of the First Session. Now, that means if you were a mover of the Bill and you are still interested in it, come and move a motion on the Floor reinstating the Bill and that Bill shall be freshly referred to the committee; the committee, which was handling it that time - that maybe left it in the middle - is the committee which may be newly constituted though with new Members. We have cured that. It is a matter of: if you were moving a Private Member’s Bill or a Government Bill and you were still interested in it at the lapse of Parliament, ensure within the first 14 sittings, you are at the door of the Speaker to be allowed to move a motion to reinstate that Bill. So, it is catered for properly, honourable Member. Honourable colleagues, when we were starting, one of the first Members of Parliament in here was Hon. Emmanuel Ongiertho - the second name sounds like a botanical name. Please, I picked this side and I am coming back to that side. However, on this side, one of the first people was Hon. Emmanuel Ongiertho, Member of Parliament, Jonam County. Even Hon. Allan Mayanja was in very early and he is our DP Whip7750MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION4.49MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, you will remember that on the burial day, the Archbishop (Rtd) Luke Orombi mentioned that the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was a universal person. He said that there was one Member of Parliament from the Opposition, who upon announcement of his death, cried and I was the one. I cried for two reasons: the first is we, the Jonam people, have been struggling about our land in Nwoya District. As I speak, unfortunately, they have been chased away though they are still struggling.I cried because at one point, the late Rt Hon. Jacob helped us get in touch with one of the persons who was owning large chunks of land and we had a discussion in his office. We thought that there would be hope for us to follow up and eventually, the Jonam people would go back to their land. That is one reason I cried.Secondly, Hon. Aogon mentioned something about NUSAF IV . He told us, when we went to him as Executive Members of the Greater North Parliamentary Forum, that he had to meet with the President three times because the Government’s orientation was now –(Member timed out.)  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude.MR ONGIERTHO: The Government was looking more at the Parish Development Model and wanted to put NUSAF IV aside. So, he had to meet with the President four times to convince the President to allow NUSAF IV to go alongside the Parish Development Model. Now, my request is: let Government honour what the President had agreed on with the late Hon. Jacob Oulanyah so that NUSAF IV comes back. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, by the time I left the Office of the Government Chief Whip, we had already more or less concluded NUSAF IV at Cabinet level. Government Chief Whip, on Tuesday, we need the Minister of Northern Uganda to bring a statement on NUSAF IV - where we have reached. This is a project for which people’s representatives are being put on pressure yet I know that Government has already done a big job around it. So, let us update the Members of Parliament so that we all get to know when it will be rolled out. Oh, Fr Charles Onen, you are here. (Laughter) Fr Charles Onen used to pray. 4.52REV . FR CHARLES ONEN (Independent, Laroo-Pece Division, Gulu City): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the fallen Speaker. The inside of today is the outset of tomorrow. What this Parliament is doing today and what you, the presiding officer, are doing today, is what shall be done tomorrow because we need to remember and to appreciate the good things and achievements of one another. This is an act of love, which Parliament is giving to the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. The late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah one time invited me to his residence and he told me, “Father, you have been in the church and you need some special induction so that you change the language of the church and begin speaking like a politician.” I recall he gave me something in a glass and that thing altered my mood. (Laughter) I do not remember how I left his residence and, up to this point, I do not know the name of the substance that was in that glass. He was a humorous person and a generous man. I still recall and I believe that Jacob Oulanyah was one of the best English speakers among the legislators from northern Uganda. He was a teacher of English and was always emphasising on the quality of debate. 7751THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 MARCH 2023We pray for a peaceful repose of his soul and also pray that we keep remembering each other. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, your confession is on the Floor. (Laughter)4.54MS JOAN ALOBO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join the rest of my honourable colleagues to pay tribute to our late Speaker. I would describe him as an environmentalist. His love for nature and the environment was so high. He went to Kasese after the floods, and emphasised the need for tree planting and the protection of the environment. He was also an inspiration to the young people and legislators in this House. He would give everyone an opportunity to speak, even when one had not gone to his office to request –(Applause)– just like you have given me this opportunity today. Even when you made a mistake, he would keep encouraging and giving you time to express yourself. I learned a lot of things, especially when it comes to the environment. When I got in contact with him about the famine in Teso, he asked me one thing: “Why don’t you capitalise on encouraging people to plant trees instead of cutting them down?” It gave me an opportunity to go back to the constituency and encourage our people to plant 10 trees on the day they get married, and that if they give birth, ensure that they plant a tree to remember their child’s birthday. I would love to thank him for that. One of the last words – and the last time I spoke to him, he told me three things: Hon. Alobo – (Member timed out.)4.57MS JULIET KAKANDE (NUP, Woman Representative, Masaka City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. To me, this is a great opportunity because when we joined Parliament, as a woman in my early 40s, he was a man I admired. It was unfortunate that he passed on when I had not caught his eye. (Laughter) As we commemorate him, Hon. Dr Baryomunsi has made us remember the cause of his death. If you happen to visit the Uganda Cancer Institute, you will notice that Ugandans are suffering. Much as the late passed on, everybody can admit that he received the desired medication, but which is not a chance to each and every Ugandan. Ugandans at the Uganda Cancer Institute are suffering to the extent that they sleep outside and miss their doses because they do not possess the chance of being catered for by institutions, as was done for the late Oulanyah. Mr Speaker, up to now, Ugandans are not informed about the major causes of cancer, yet we would have been observing the preventive measures such that people’s lives can be saved. I think this is the time we should fulfil what we signed in the Abuja Declaration: to have up to 15 per cent of our budget allocated to the health sector. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Kakande, do not lose hope. You will catch my eye. (Laughter) 4.59MR HILLARY KIYAGA (NUP, Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Permit me to speak about the late in the artistic way. The late Jacob Oulanyah loved the art and creative industry. In that regard, the vulnerable sector was catered for by the late when he presided over the House while it passed the Copyright and Neighbouring Rights Act, 2006. I had a chance to visit his office to consult on how we could rectify and have this law amended so that it could fit the modern times. He gave me a go ahead. 7752MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONIt is a pity that when I was granted leave to work on the Private Member’s Amendment, the Government got appetite, grabbed the Bill and, up to now, they have not presented it. So, as we talk about Jacob Oulanyah and as the minister for culture and performing arts, I want to thank -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Shadow minister.MR KIYAGA: It is because we do not have the arts minister that side . (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you are the shadow minister. This is for the Hansard, honourable colleague.MR KIYAGA: Okay, as the shadow minister for arts and culture, Mr Speaker, I thank the late for spearheading the copyright law of 2006 and I appeal to the Government to hurriedly work on the amendments such that the arts and creative industry is boosted and the artists are protected for the earn from their respect – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, please, you will allow me - you see, when you are managing this House, very many factors come into play. Allow me to give the chance to honourable colleagues from Acholi subregion because I know back home - 5.01MR GEOFREY OKELLO (DP, Nwoya East County, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On Monday this week, when I heard the brother of Jacob speak, heard his son speak; and when I heard his daughter speak, I thought, as our tradition says, he is survived. Mr Speaker, this is a great day because the House looks more composed than on any other day – including in the gallery. This is important to this nation. Mr Speaker, the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was a solid man. He was so solid that he appreciated diversity and appreciated our culture. When it was time to dance, he danced. When it was time to joke, he joked. However, when it was time to work, he really worked.Mr Speaker, his demise – I have learned from my colleagues here – was not only a personal loss to me, but a personal loss to many people, including to my honourable colleagues seated here. I want us to take his belief into our personal development – his belief was that there is always room for improvement. I thank you.5.003MS MARTIN MAPENDUZI (Independent, Bardege-Layibi Division, Gulu City): Mr Speaker, I join my colleagues in thanking you. Let me also very sincerely thank you and the Rt Hon. Anita Among for providing firm leadership at the time when this Parliament was attacked by darkness as a result of our brother’s passing. Mr Speaker, you demonstrated that even when a colleague or someone dies, the people left behind should provide the support needed to the bereaved family, and make sure those who remain behind receive comfort and support; and you did exactly that.Mr Speaker, it would be important for the rest of the people in other institutions, whether ministers or in the local government - we have been moving around the country and we are always faced with very disturbing cases of people who die in offices or leave their jobs and nobody cares. There are cases where widows and orphans struggle for decades trying to chase for the benefits of their dear ones. The example you have given should be taken and the Government needs to take it seriously so that when the people who serve Government die, their families are taken care of. I appreciate you for that. Secondly, Mr Speaker, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah invited me to his office and he said, [Mr Kiyaga]7753THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 MARCH 2023“Hon. Mapenduzi, I have this petition that was given by the Civil Society Organisation -” THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude, chairman. MR MAPENDUZI:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. “...and I know your commitment. I want you to study it and if you find it fit, then come up with a motion.” Indeed, I moved a motion on the Floor of Parliament for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to sign and ratify the Treaty on the prohibition of nuclear weapons. Hon. Jacob assigned the committee to do its work and report back to Parliament. I am sure Rt Hon. Jacob is seated in Heaven wondering why the motion moved by Hon. Mapenduzi has never been brought back to the Floor of Parliament. Mr Speaker, it would be prudent to compel this committee to report back to the House so that this battle is concluded. Thank you very much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I remember we handled it in a wide manner. We had very many international treaties, which had not been ratified and we said that the Minister for Foreign Affairs should come on the Floor and present all the international treaties for the bodies we belong to because ministers go and append their signatures on many treaties. However, they are not brought here for ratification, yet they have very serious ramifications on our international status. We have been to some of these international conferences and they ask: “Uganda, your ministers assented to it here, how come you have not ratified it?” The same applies to issues of subscription. Therefore, the Committee on Foreign Affairs - was it the one that was assigned? Yes? Before we go into processing ministerial statements - you know, in April and May, we usually focus on the budget - Committee on Foreign Affairs, let us ensure that we work on this so that we know our obligations internationally. The chairperson, Hon. Norah Bigirwa, is here. Hon. Norah, I am giving you two weeks to bring a report on this issue. You do not need to respond. Hon. Gilbert Olanya.5.07MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to appreciate Parliament for this very important day in which we commemorate our gallant son. In Acholi, the name Oulanyah is given to great people - (Laughter) - to people who are serious and it is associated with very important people, especially if you were given that name 40 years ago.Mr Speaker, our brother Jacob Oulanyah was a uniting factor. I remember when he was voted the NRM Vice-Chairperson for northern Uganda, the way he mobilised for the NRM especially - You know, in history, the NRM had not gotten the number of votes they got in that election and they acquired many Members of Parliament in the last election. He had serious mobilisation skills and we were so scared that we were going to be swept away. I pray to the NRM Members of Parliament to carry the legacy higher. If they do not work hard, we may sweep them off next time.Finally, Mr Speaker, I pray that Parliament and Government allows the family of the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah to meet the President, when they need to. A case in point: the last time we were in Gulu barracks, I witnessed how the father of the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was struggling to meet the President. We were unhappy by the way his father was blocked. I pray that when the family has something important to discuss with the President, they should be given the opportunity. I remember His Excellency promised that he would be in touch with the family and take care of them. Therefore, let them be given chance and an opportunity. We pray for his soul to rest in peace. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Gilbert, you seem to know what is going on in the NRM more than even State House. (Laughter) 7754MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONFor the people who were at church, the family appreciated the President and the NRM party. We have Hon. Andrew Ojok Oulanyah here; he can tell us if the family has any issues.  However, issues of appointments with the President are not issues that we can resolve here. Can we resolve that the President should always meet Hon. Oulanyah’s family whenever they need to? We cannot. What if they do not have any reason for meeting with him? I had allowed Hon. Mwijukye for the sake of peace. [Ms Lucy Akello: “No, it was Lucy Akello.”] Oh, Hon. Lucy Akello first, then Hon. Mwijukye, for the sake of peace.5.11MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to thank my colleagues for remembering our brother, father, and Speaker. I will summarise this with two things that come to my mind. Of all the pictures of the late Speaker, I loved one in particular and I still love it. In that picture, he is holding a calabash with his neck bent and his eyes closed. That speaks volumes to me on how he loved and cherished culture. As an Acholi girl, that picture makes me proud. Secondly, the late Hon. Oulanyah was a man of the people. He stood for the vulnerable people. Somebody said - I think it was Hon. Sarah - that when it was time for work, you would see the other side of Hon. Oulanyah; the tough side. I saw that side at the time of the Nodding Syndrome when the Acholi children in the North were suffering and there was no help. That time, I saw how he fought hard until Government came and did something. How I wish this fight continues - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude.MR LUCY AKELLO: How I wish Government comes up and continues with this fight so that we save the lives of many children who are suffering, and also help to complete his house.Finally, to my brother, Hon. Andrew, I am super proud of you. You have a very bright future. I remember when you stood here and made your maiden speech. You made me proud and I have no doubt whatsoever that after four terms, you will be better than the late Hon. Oulanyah. May God bless you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Mwijukye. 5.13MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for recognising that I am very peaceful. There are two categories of peaceful people the Rt Hon. Speaker was referring to; there are those they will pick up to create peace when there is chaos, and I am one of them. I stand to support the motion and to give testimony about the humility and truthfulness of the late Jacob Oulanyah. Finally, on behalf of the people of Buhweju, I wish that the late continues to rest in peace. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I remember when we were running around doing everything; Hon. Wokorach did a very good job on the ground. He was one of our main contacts. 5.14MR SIMON PETER WOKORACH (NRM, Aswa County, Gulu): Mr Speaker, I would like to begin by thanking you, in a special way. When we had prayers at All Saints Church in Kampala, you led a team of Members of Parliament and you spoke on behalf of Parliament. Mr Speaker, you have said rightly that when the body of Jacob Oulanyah was about to go to Omoro, you were the first, as our principal, to be on ground and put everything right. We did not have the opportunity to say, “thank you.” Today, I want to use this platform to say a big thank you to you for loving the family and taking lead in the preparations during the send-off. [The Deputy Speaker]7755THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 MARCH 2023We appreciate that some of us are in this Parliament because of the good work that Jacob Oulanyah did in our constituencies. I am one of them and there are many others in the Acholi subregion. Like my brother, Hon. Gilbert Olanya said, when he became the NRM Chairperson for Northern region representing Members of Parliament at CEC, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah would leave his constituency and sleep in people’s constituencies, mobilise for them and ensured that they made it. I remember he came to his constituency last when it was only two days to elections. Mr Speaker, I am one of those who have never believed that Jacob Oulanyah is gone. At times, I sit and think he is doing some Government assignment elsewhere and will come back one day to sit in that Chair. However, a year down the road, he is no longer with us. We pray that the legacy he has left and the mentorship that he did - We are very proud of him. I would like to thank, in the most sincere way, the people of Omoro District and especially his constituency. When we were deployed under instructions to ensure that my brother, Hon. Andrew Ojok Oulanyah replaces his dad, we went and did the assignment. It was very simple for everybody who was deployed there. The people of Omoro said, “We want to reward Jacob Oulanyah with his son.”I am very proud that the people of Omoro, watching us from home and here, listened to the cry of Parliament. May God continue to guide the family, especially my brother here. We will stand with him to ensure that he makes his dad proud. We are here as his product. Thank you.5.17MR AMOS KANKUNDA  (NRM, Rwampa-ra County, Rwampara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to associate myself with the comments that many colleagues have made. When I met the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah phys-ically for the first time, it was during cam -paigns. I remember he made a comment and said, “Young man, you have come to the 11th Parliament, but I want to say, you are smart.” To me, it was a good comment. He added, “I hope you never let me down,” and I hope I have not. The scripture in 2 Timothy 4:7 refers to a person and I think that person is the late. He fought a good fight; he completed the race and kept the faith. I remember his meekness that most of us have alluded to. He was the kind of person that one would wish to associate with. The saying, “If the mountain won’t come to Mohammed, then Mohammed must go to the mountain” fits him. He would come down to even the lowest in terms of experience, like some of us. I would like to say that among others, he taught me three things: be slow to speak, slow to anger –(Member timed out.)5.20MR TOM AZA  (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are here to pay posthumous tribute to the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. I remember one of his acts in Parliament and in West Nile when there was a lot of bickering among the NRM fraternity; members were fighting each other, quarrelling and so on. When he came as the NRM Vice-Chairperson for Northern Region and as a CEC member, he was able to reconcile the people of West Nile. As a result, the President got over 75 per cent of the votes from West Nile. I want to quote him on that. He said, “The NRM is a family. We may have disagreements, but those should not make the party collapse. If we do not act in the interest of the party, we are going to supply the Opposition with many of our seats.” Secondly, he was a lover and an ardent supporter of sports. For some time, he was a member of the Parliamentary Football Club. He and Hon. Odongo-Otto were goalkeepers in the Seventh and Eighth Parliament. He participated actively. I want to quote what he said about sports. He said: “The task at hand is talent identification, which should go all the way to the grassroots and ensure sports people covered in obscurity are uplifted to the benefit of the country.” 7756MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONHe was a Pan Africanist, a patriot and a nationalist. I also remember him for moving with a fleet – (Member timed out.)5.22MS CHRISTINE APOLOT  (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to appreciate Government, the leadership of this Parliament and honourable colleagues for the love exhibited to the family of the late Jacob Oulanyah. The Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was a man of action and friendly to everyone. One time when I was in his office, there were people who never supported him so they went as a team to apologise. He got up and said, “Don’t do that. Politics is a game. Let us remain friends.” He was a man of the people. When we were attending the Children’s Forum, as Hon. Milton said earlier, he said, “Honourable members, stop lamenting. Come up with laws. I do not want to hear people talk about issues that are not happening. We are the ones to make things happen.”Finally, one time while campaigning for CEC positions, the late Oulanyah did not take things for granted. He made it a point and physically came to Kumi to campaign. Kumi and Teso massively voted for the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. When I was still the LC V chairperson, I told him about an old man - one of the founders of Kumi Town - who had passed on. He said, “I will spare a few minutes and reach there.” The late Speaker surprised everyone at the burial when he physically appeared to share with the mourners. Mr Speaker, we have lost a friend, but we thank you because you are now the father, and the Rt Hon. Speaker is the mother. We are comfortable that we are a family. May his soul rest in peace. 5.24MS MARGARET AYEBARE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for according me the opportunity to also say one or two words about the late Jacob Oulanyah. I thank you for keeping Oulanyah alive. When I had just come to Parliament, new as I was, you would look at this giant - the late Jacob Oulanyah - and think, “Will I ever come near him or say something on the Floor of Parliament?” I have shared this with some people that the day I looked at Oulanyah and his humility and stopped being afraid of him was when General Katumba Wamala got issues. We were in that tent out there and he told us that he would rush to the hospital and come back and tell us whatever was happening. He came back with all the humility to address us, new as we were. Secondly, also on his humility, you would meet him and as you were trying to bow to honour him, you would find him also bowing. May his soul rest in eternal peace.5.25DR GEORGE BHOKA (NRM, Obongi County, Obongi): Mr Speaker, I join the rest of my colleagues to celebrate the life of a fallen hero. Fifteen years ago, I got to know the Rt Hon. Oulanyah and the family when we worked together with his wife at UNICEF, Uganda.When Oulanyah came to mobilise votes for the NRM in West Nile, I told him that I was contesting for the Obongi Constituency. He told me, “Dr Bhoka, I want to meet you,” and he gave me 45 minutes. Those 45 minutes made me come to Parliament. I remember him for that. A year ago, when paying tribute to our fallen former Speaker, we pledged that we would improve advanced cancer diagnostic and treatment services for Ugandans. I would like to find out from the Ministry of Health and Government the actions taken to progressively realise that. [Mr Aza]7757THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 MARCH 2023This morning, I was at the Uganda Cancer Institute and I had an opportunity to interact with the management there. We promised to put a centre of excellence for cancer treatment in this country, but the project has stalled. We promised to buy a PET scan machine and that motion was moved by Hon. Cecilia. To date, that machine has not been delivered. We do not have reagents, medicines and staff. As we –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Doctor, conclude.DR BHOKA: As we reflect on the life of the late Jacob Oulanyah, I pray that as Government and Parliament, especially at this time when we are processing the budget for Financial Year 2023/2024, we appropriate resources for the Uganda Cancer Institute. I submit. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, we are expecting a statement from the Minister of Health. I think it was out of an issue raised by Dr Rutahigwa, Member of Parliament for Rukungiri Municipality, at that time. They were supposed to give us a statement on the status of the Uganda Cancer Institute and the cost of treatment. This is because we were told that in order for someone to be attended to, they need a lot of money. Please, Government Chief Whip, follow that up so that we ensure that we bring that statement. 5.28MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I recall the day we lost the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. As the Government Chief Whip then, you stood with the family, you were there doing the mobilisation and I thank you for that. I also thank the Rt Hon. Speaker for the support that the family received. The late Speaker asked us to remain consistent. If you had an issue that you wanted to put across, he advised that you remain consistent with your issue. I recall when our Tororo issues were highly heated up here in the House, he told me, “Stand firm. If the boundaries between West Budama and Tororo County are the ones you are talking about, they will remain so.” Government offered us an opportunity to travel to the UK, to the Commonwealth archives, to pick the maps. When we came back, I reported to him. While we were waiting for the official statement, the maps that were shown to us in Entebbe were the real maps also in the UK. He said, “I have now told you to be patient. You are going to see that district being divided according to the boundaries that were prescribed then.” That is the consistency that we knew the Rt Hon. Jacob for. I would like to also request you, Mr Speaker, that when that opportunity comes, we need to see that issue come to a close. The late Jacob loved sports. When I was preparing a team of young talented Ugandans to go for the showcase games in Spain as part of Festoweb, he supported that team and we travelled to Spain. No wonder after being flown to the US sick, aware that we had also travelled to Spain, he called and spoke to Hon. Kabanda and asked how we were faring. He was sick, but he also wanted to know what was happening to the team that he had supported to represent the country, but also promote talent. I stand with the family, colleagues and all of you who have spoken many good things about the Rt Hon. Speaker. He is watching us. May I now request the good Lord, who is near him, to grant him whatever mercies he needs as he rests in peace. Eyalama Noi. Emuria Kolia . 5.31MS CATHELINE NDAMIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank the Lord that this has happened in front of the voters from Mitooma. They have seen what has happened and they should learn from the people of Omoro. They lost a gallant son and replaced him with Andrew, in whom they have hope to deliver. I wish that the members from Mitooma could emulate what happened and keep Hon. Tayebwa in Parliament and wait for Rubanda Mayonza to also grow up.  7758MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONImmediately after the 2021 elections, we were taken to Kyankwanzi. I had just joined the fraternity of politicians and among the facilitators, there came a fine, smart man and we all looked at him. The ladies said, “Wow!” (Laughter)I want to make it clear that Oulanyah was a “self-contained man”. He began as a teacher. He talked of smartness and we saw him as a smart man. He later became a lecturer, but surprisingly, he ended up as a –(Inaudible) - Mr Speaker, it is since then that I got saved. If you see me walking with the Lord, know that I got it from the late Rt Hon. Speaker. I am sure some of us have survived this political journey because of Jacob Oulanyah. May his soul rest in eternal peace.5.33MR JONATHAN EBWALU (Independent, Soroti West Division, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. Hon. Oulanyah is dead, but one thing that reminds me about Hon. Ou-lanyah is the high level of calmness and intelli -gence that you possess. Sometimes, it reminds me of Hon. Oulanyah. You have disagreed with people in this House, but calmly and in-telligently. I thank you for that, Mr Speaker. (Applause)Secondly, I want to thank the Office of the Speaker and this Parliament. There is no law that requires that we pay tribute to the late Rt Hon. Oulanyah every year, but you have done this because of the goodness of the late Rt Hon. Oulanyah. The late Rt Hon. Oulanyah loved women very much. The one thing that I have done and am doing it now – he said that women are very faithful voters. When they tell you that they will vote for you, they do it. I have tried that and it is working. I have galvanised the support of the women in the constituency and it is working. (Laughter) Finally, I appeal to the Government, through you, Mr Speaker – When we went to bury the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, a number of pledges were made. Some have been fulfilled and some are yet to be fulfilled. I request your office to remind the Government to fulfil all the pledges that we made on that day. I remember very well that President Museveni came here to mourn the late Papa Cuthbert Obwangor, the former minister in Obote’s Government. He promised –(Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude.MR EBWALU: He promised to renovate his house in Katakwi. I want to tell you, with a lot of pain, that up to now, nothing has been done, yet the President promised this when he came here to mourn the former minister. When my uncle, the late Peter Otai, died, Government was represented by the Rt Hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda. Government made commitments to renovate his house and to ensure that they evict people who had encroached on his land. I want to inform Parliament that nothing has been done to-date. I think this is not a good thing. If we are not able to do something, we should not make commitments. May the soul of my brother, the late Rt Hon. Oulanyah, rest in eternal peace.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, you told us that women are faithful to you, but you did not tell us whether you are faithful to them. (Laughter)MR EBWALU: No, for the record of Parliament, I am very faithful to one woman called Josephine Awori. However, I love women very much. I thank you. (Laughter)5.37MR ALLAN MAYANJA (NUP, Nakaseke Central County, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I stand to support the motion because the late advocated for human rights and the rule of law worldwide. [Ms Ndamire]7759THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 MARCH 2023I joined the Committee on Human Rights because the late inspired me. Unfortunately, what the late advocated for is not what is prevailing in our country. Sincerely speaking, people are being abducted in our country. There are enforced disappearances of Ugandans. Specifically, in Nakaseke Central, four people, including my driver, were abducted at 2.00 a.m. It is coming to two months and those people are nowhere to be seen. We have done everything and reported everywhere, but the Government has failed to account for these disappearances in our country. It is very sad and I am sure the late is not pleased with what is going on in our country, specifically about human rights.Secondly, about Lubowa Hospital, the late would not have died from the USA if we had Lubowa Hospital with facilitation because Parliament allocated funds –(Member timed out.)5.39MR RONALD BALIMWEZO (NUP, Nakawa Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take the opportunity to appreciate you for setting aside this day to celebrate the life of the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah.The late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was a very frank person. Actually, he made sure that we, particularly the new Members of Parliament, were mentored so that we could have good quality debates in Parliament. He had begun that work effectively.He loved people with disabilities. We shall always miss him. I want to stress the point of ensuring that our hospitals are given medicine. He died of multiple organ failure and we have several silent diseases that are killing people, including diabetes, but we are looking on. I wish this Parliament can come out and effectively support our hospitals to particularly handle these silent diseases that are killing our people.I thank you for according him this day so that we can celebrate him because of what he did for Ugandans.5.40MR MEDARD LUBEGA SSEGGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you, first of all, for giving me this opportunity to speak about a friend I knew and also for Parliament recognising the contributions of Hon. Jacob. I actually find difficulty referring to him as “Right Honourable” because of our personal relationship. We fondly referred to him – as you remember in this House – as “OJ”. In that team, whenever somebody mentioned the name “OJ”, we knew him as our team leader. There was no single time when he missed your call and never returned it – whether as Deputy Speaker or as Speaker. I first came into contact with OJ when I was a young university student and he was handling the case of Candida Lakony – for those of you who remember that infamous case, which involved our military mishandling a woman. I admired him for his brain. When I became a lawyer, we used to meet often when he ran a law firm called Oulanyah, Mao & Onoria Company Advocates. He lost his parliamentary seat and was very common in the courts of law where we interfaced. I am sure, by that time, people like Hon. Asuman Basalirwa had not started practicing law; he was young. (Laughter) When we came to Parliament – [Mr Basalirwa: “Order.”] - He is my vice-chairman – just a reminder. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, Jacob taught us humility. When we met here, he recognised one thing –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude, honourable member.MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: Whenever you did something outstanding, he did not only 7760MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONcommend you - I remember by that time, Hon. Norbert Mao and I had not fled from DP and he was my President. The late would call Hon. Mao and tell him, “You have an outstanding MP”. That was Jacob. Because of time, let me say one thing: Recently, a friend sent me a WhatsApp caption about a man who went to a cemetery and he called all the deceased and said, “Who of you was a Member of Parliament?” There was none. “Who of you was a bus driver?” There was none. The conclusion of this seemingly errant or random man was that at the end of the day, the only person that is great is God. Jacob was a great man yet very humble. Let us be humble and fair to one another. The stories that my brother Allan Mayanja has mentioned should teach us. Why do all that when at the end of the day, it is all vanity? Jacob, rest in peace. We still love you.5.44MR ANDREW OJOK OULANYAH (NRM, Omoro County, Omoro): Mr Speaker, fellow colleagues, I stand in a privileged position today to speak both as a son and as a Member of Parliament. I will try to focus on the bit of being his Member of Parliament, posthumously. It is a big honour and challenge. There was a story of a young man, about nine years old, who dragged his brother for over 10 kilometres. When he reached a point, they asked him, your brother is dead, isn’t he heavy? He said, no, he is my brother and he is not heavy for me. That is the weight of the legacy that he has left behind. Regardless of the journey that we are walking, the legacy will never be heavy for us because the job has to be done. This legacy is not cast upon the son or the MP; it is cast upon all the people whose lives he touched. I believe we all have a duty and a responsibility. The way you have spoken, indeed, he touched your lives. He spoke so passionately about Ubuntu; he did not only speak about it, he lived it. “I am because you are”. As leaders, we are challenged to sacrifice, to lead the people by example. I should not guide you and then, become a thief instead. I should not guide you the other way round. It is important that we live what we preach. He spoke much about a people-centred Parliament. He spoke about restoring public confidence in this institution, but he also spoke hard and passionately about an authoritative Hansard. I want to thank the current leadership because they have done their best. We know that this was an act of God. You took up this position at a time when there was a lot of promise, as Hon. Jonathan mentioned; the Ugandan hope. People had so much hope that he would come back alive and steer Parliament in that direction, but I am happy, from our interactions, that he had been taking you and the Rt Hon. Anita Among through the whole process so there was a seamless transition. That is our hope; that the transitions that will come in the future will be smooth and bloodless. He spoke of purposeful living as well. He always said that there are only two important days in your life; the day you are born and the day you discover why you were born. He lived a very purposeful life. That is why, for example, when he would be in hospital, we would take care of him, but he would still dress up and come and chair Parliament and none of you knew that he was sick. He loved this House. He loved you all passionately and he had a vision that you would all get re-elected. That could only be through your participation in the House and through those community projects that you are doing. That is why he kept going to all your constituencies. He wanted all of you to get re-elected.I thank you for carrying on that mantle because I have seen that every time there is a function, when the Rt Hon. Anita Among and yourself, Rt Hon. Tayebwa, are not there, you send a representative. That is the comradeship that we are talking about; the spirit of Ubuntu. You cannot talk about Ubuntu without talking about family because family is everything. Whatever [Mr Sseggona]7761THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 MARCH 2023we are doing here could be temporary, but you will still go back to your families. There was a time he called me at about 6.00 p.m. I had already left home and he asked me, Andrew - due to Parliamentary procedure, I cannot say “Ole” as they say in the Luo language. He said, “Why don’t you call me?” I said, “I know your schedule. I know when you are in the House and when in the constituency. I know wherever you are.” He then said, “So, you know when not to call? Call, I will find the missed call”. He loved his family very much and if they could share their stories, you would hear from Aunt Harriet who is in the gallery. She still sheds tears up to now because they were so close. To-date, she is still mourning, but we are all mourning as a house. From today’s scripture of Joshua 1:7-8, we are told to be strong and courageous. As legislators, there is no higher call than that because you are going to step on peoples’ toes, but you have to be bold and courageous and stand your ground. I want to appreciate the House for this recent enactment that took courage. It took boldness and I want to applaud the House under this leadership for that. I would not be fair if I did not give thanks for all the support that I have got; for all the support that the family has got, and for all the support along the way. Allow me to thank the Executive that has been with us from the start. I cannot thank them enough. (Applause)I also thank Parliament, the leadership and all the Members here. When he passed on, you gave us hope. You came to the constituency, you campaigned with us and you rallied support for your comrade’s son and we do not take that for granted. Not just that, you also contributed money for education because he loved education. He believed that through education, we could get somewhere as Northern Uganda, which has been at war for over 20 years. Education is the only key at the moment because the land is there, but to use it, you need to have skills. That is why he loved education. I want to appreciate you all for the support that you gave us. You have given hope to the next generation of leaders. I want to appreciate the Judiciary because the Judiciary, through the Chief Justice, has stood with us. He is the current Chair of the Education Trust Fund that you all contributed handsomely to. I want to thank you all for that. Omoro District is represented here. I would not be doing them justice if I did not thank them. However, I also want to voice a few concerns on what he stood for. He stood for five things: education, economic empowerment, health, infrastructure development and agriculture. All those issues are cross-cutting in Uganda. They are not issues of just Omoro and I believe that if we addressed them in terms of funding and priority, we could bring meaningful change to the country. I thank you all for this moment. We are honoured as a family. We are honoured as Omoro District and as Omoro County; we are deeply humbled because most times when a person dies, that is the end of the chapter. You have sacrificed your own legacies to sustain another person’s legacy. I want to thank you for that humility. You have shown a tremendous sign of humility. All in all, we have a duty to this country and we are duty-bound to make sure Parliament is people-centred and authoritative; that the mother who is carrying jerrycans can be catered for in our legislation. I want to thank you. For God and my country.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, there is someone I could call part of the family because at the time Jacob fell sick, this is the person who alerted us; the person who went there. Otherwise, he would have died in the House. He alerted us and managed to go in and put everything in place. In a special way, I will give him two minutes because he came late. Therefore, due to that special relationship, I will allow Hon. Peter Ogwang two minutes.7762MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION5.53THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Mr Speaker, I would like to begin by apologising to Parliament for coming late. It is not my norm, but because of the other duties -I would like to begin by, first of all, thanking the leadership of Parliament for honouring the family of the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah L’Okori. I would also like to thank the people of Omoro for entrusting my brother, Hon. Andrew Oulanyah, to be the Member of Parliament who replaced his late dad. I think we need to clap for them. (Applause) Mr Speaker, if I am to speak about my personal friend, I might take the whole day because I came to know Hon. Oulanyah in the Ninth Parliament when we were in a bus heading to State House, Entebbe, for the parliamentary caucus elections. Hon. Oulanyah carried his own posters. During the caucus meeting in Entebbe, Hon. Oulanyah singlehandedly carried his own posters and started distributing them. Some of you are here, colleagues - Hon. Oulanyah did one thing for himself and it was what defined him. The statements and oratory speech the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah L’Okori presented was what made him the Deputy Speaker of the Ninth Parliament. (Applause) What am I trying to say here today? The person we are talking about was God-given, chosen and knew what he wanted at a certain time. Many people have talked about who Oulanyah was, but I am crying for my friend. I want, on behalf of his friends, to say one thing: where Hon. Oulanyah hurt you, forgive him. I want this to go on the Hansard. At the time we needed to liberate this Parliament, I campaigned for Hon. Oulanyah. I am happy you know it and I am proud of it. (Applause) I am happy my friend never let me down. I am happy our friend never let us down. The fundamental question to you and me is: what will it be when you are no more? Hon. Oulanyah was not corrupt. That is the Speaker we knew. Hon. Mwijukye is here and we were in the Parliamentary Commission. Hon. Oulanyah never misused the institution called Parliament for personal gain. Hon. Oulanyah died a poor man, even when he was in a privileged position. The fundamental question to all of us is: are we living this kind of life, especially during this trying moment? As Members have all said, Hon. Oulanyah was a God-fearing person. I want to say to us here that in whatever we do, we must put God first. It is true and you correctly said it - My friend called me and I did not know he was sick. It was a Friday and he told me, “Come to my house at 10 o’clock.” Unfortunately, I came late by an hour. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, honourable.MR OGWANG: Mr Speaker, when I entered his bedroom - Every time I met my friend, it was not in his bedroom. I met him in the sitting room. When I reached his house, they told me he wanted to meet me in his bedroom.I was ushered in - and I want to thank Hon. Andrew - I found Andrew with his dad. Hon. Andrew ushered me to his father’s bedroom. I asked my friend, “What are you doing here?” What hit me most was seeing my friend failing to get out of his bed. I shed tears and I said, “What has happened to you?” Mr Speaker, some people told me not to tell anyone about his sickness. I said, “No. I cannot see my friend die in his house and not disclose.” I remember I called the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, Hon. Anita Among. I asked her, “Are you aware Jacob is sick, in his house?” She told me, “No, come to my home.” I drove to Nakasero and I went back with her. It is the Rt Hon. Anita Among who called Hon. Norbert Mao and the Chief Justice. We sat and asked Hon. Jacob, “Why are you dying in the house?” 7763THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 MARCH 2023Mr Speaker, I can speak and continue to speak, but as a friend, I know what Hon. Oulanyah did to me. He supported me. He came to Ngariam not once, not twice. That was Hon. Oulanyah. As long as he identified something in you, he would stand with you. Hon. Oulanyah was a friend in bad or good times. I do not know who we are today. As I conclude, I want to say the following: one, I am a member of the Executive and I am happy I sit in Cabinet. For the record, I request that my President helps the family of Hon. Oulanyah to complete the project he started in Omoro. (Applause) Two, the family - Hon. Andrew is here. I know we are friends at such times, but when we are no more, we are good at these speeches. Hon. Andrew, I will never let you down and you know it. I was in Omoro and I asked Andrew, “How is Atim?” Do you know the words my friend told me when he was leaving his bedroom? “Call Atim”. He did not want to leave his room. I do not know where Atim is -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am told Atim is in the gallery. Atim, can you stand up and wave to us? She is up there. MR OGWANG: Atim, how are you?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is our beautiful and very intelligent lady.MR OGWANG: Allow me quote the following words of Hon. Oulanyah. He said, “My daughter, I am going to the hospital. God forbid, if I do not come back well, please, take care of yourself.” I cannot forget those words because he spoke when I was walking with him. As I wind up, I want to say that the late Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was a nationalist. I want to thank Parliament and the Rt Hon. Anita Among for one thing: we were in the Parliamentary Commission, but I have never seen such leadership as I see today. We want to ask you not to let us down because I know what Hon. Oulanyah went through while here. With those many words, may the soul of my good friend rest in eternal peace. Thank you. I say all this for God and my country. (Applause) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, all this is part of the healing process. I know he has spoken for many of us because not everyone is going to get the chance. We have been here since 2.00 p.m., unless I say we sleep here -I am sorry for colleagues who have not been able to speak. We shall continue commemorating this day every year. Hon. Leader of the Opposition, conclude. I had already given the justification that you will make concluding remarks.6.02MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Mr Speaker, it is not very easy to say something when someone like Hon. Peter Ogwang has given details about his friend. Mr Speaker, if you look at the mood today, this is the first time I am seeing the lobby very quiet since we began. It is not the usual way Members speak from behind, and you send the Sergeant-At-Arms to tell us to keep quiet. Even in the parking outside, everybody is quiet. This shows that the late was a friend to everyone. Secondly, Mr Speaker, I remember when you were the Government Chief Whip. I used to raise a lot of procedural matters asking for the whereabouts of the late Speaker when he was sick. By then, as a Member of Parliament, I was interested in two things: knowing where he was so that we could visit and see him, and as a Member who was nurtured by the Speaker. By then, you could see that definitely the then Deputy Speaker had her own challenges in managing us. I remember some of us did not support the Speaker because of our reservations and he knew them. He called me personally and we talked, but whatever Members have said here is right about the late Rt Hon. Speaker.7764MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONThere were two challenges: that chair you are seated in is not easy. You are handling Members of Parliament from different categories; the Opposition, teachers, lawyers, engineers and everybody, but you compress them into that seat. We had a serious issue with POMA when the late Speaker was managing that Bill. The Prime Minister was the Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi. The Government Chief Whip can attest to this. It was not an easy thing. However, the Speaker then – Rt Hon. Oulanyah - gave us room. There were battles; the Leader of the Opposition going to the back to meet the Prime Minister until we sailed through with this Bill very successfully without anybody boxing another. The second one was when we lost Hon. Nebanda. That was difficult. I saw the brains of the late Rt Hon. Oulanyah. I think in history, that was the only time a body of a Member was brought here twice. They sent the body back - Members from all sides were fighting to know the cause of death of the Member. The Speaker was seated there, I saw tempers flare. The way the Speaker compressed them was not easy. All these were big records.Hon. Andrew, you should note that your father was my friend. There is even a slogan - and Hon. Hamson Obua and Hon. Ogwang will tell you - “Hon. Ssewungu, sit down, the Speaker is speaking.” Mr Speaker, the way both of you are managing us – we are not easy to manage. (Laughter) I remember one thing; he used to see my rosary and whenever he flew out of the country, he would bring me Catholic memorabilia. To you, the son of the late Speaker, whenever you go out of this country or along Christ the King Church, buy something Catholic for me and bring it because that is what your father used to do for me. (Laughter)One time, he brought me a Catholic instrument that is supposed to be worn by priests and I still have it. Whenever I wear it, I get very serious questions from the priest: “Ssewungu, when did you become a priest? That badge is only worn by priests.” I had to go back to the Speaker and say, “Mr Speaker, this badge you bought for me is not mine; it is only for priests, but I will never hand it over to the priests who are supposed to put it on. I will keep it to myself.”Honourable members –(Interjection)– and I think I will not become one because time has run out. Let me conclude by saying this: we want to thank you, the Deputy Speaker and the Speaker of Parliament. This practice you have brought is very key. This is the first time we had a Speaker of Parliament dying while serving as Speaker, and this commemoration is key for all of us. We pray that we maintain it. I was against his son winning that parliamentary seat because we are NUP, but when they had a live debate on NBS, I was impressed with the way this young man handled that debate. That is why sometimes I pray that I convince him slowly until I bring him on this side. (Laughter) We all wish ourselves good things from the Speaker – from that side. Mr Speaker, I was given this seat for today, and I have enjoyed being the Leader of the Opposition. Honourable members, I beseech you to emulate what the late Rt Hon. Speaker was fighting for. Kindly learn Parliament. I know you are new Members. Give Parliament time. The Speaker was saying, “We began with a big number, but they have dwindled.” We have to praise those who have kept here. Lastly, I still insist and will continue asking: this Parliament must be in the know concerning its legislators and big people. Where is Gen. Moses Ali? I am going to ask you the same question. We know Gen. Moses Ali very well; whenever he sat there as the Government Chief Whip, we would tussle with him. You know that, Mr Speaker. However, not knowing where such a big person is and at the end of the day, we learn of his death –I used to ring a gentleman called Mr Frank Gashumba. He is a relative although he belongs to your side. He was giving me updates about where the Speaker was. We need to be in the [Mr Ssewungu]7765THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 MARCH 2023know of the whereabouts of our friends. This is in good faith. Even if Gen. Moses Ali is in Adjumani, I can drive and visit him. If he is in Kampala, I can go to his home, but we do not know his whereabouts -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, conclude.MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. May his soul rest in peace, until we meet again.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Gen. Moses Ali is doing very well. I personally spoke to him. In fact, I read in the papers that they are even planning to get for him a new young wife – (Laughter)- Yes, it was in the newspapers; so, you can see. I would urge you, honourable colleagues, to be around. You might catch his eye for those who want.MR OBUA: Mr Speaker, let me start with a disclaimer. When I left home, I decided that in today’s sitting, I will not speak. However, when I reached office, coming to around lunchtime, I was called that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister would not be here and that she had delegated me in writing. I know what happened to my brother, Hon. Peter Ogwang, could have happened to me. Those memories will always be there. Sitting and listening to the humble testimonies from the honourable members, I was comforted. I asked myself, in this posthumous motion, the late Speaker led the Anglican Community in Parliament as the patron. What Bible verse would I dedicate to him, even when he does not live with us? I found the answer in the book of Psalm 112:6 where the Bible says: “Surely, the righteous will never be shaken. They will be remembered forever.”The testimonies, honourable colleagues, that we have made here today about the late Rt Hon. Dr Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah, fondly known in Acholi as “Oulanyah Lanywen”, is affirmation of a righteous man. It is affirmation of a man that we will live to remember forever. I know that in this Parliament, one thing that also brought him and I together was the fact that each and every time I stood, he would refer to me as “Ajuri”. He never called me “Obua” or “Dennis” or “Hamson.”What we share in common is that the late Speaker comes from a village called Ajuri. The constituency I represent is Ajuri County. The second thing in common is that the constituency and district he represented is called Omoro. In Ajuri County where I represent, there is a subcounty called “Omoro”. These are some of the few things that we shared in common.To the family of the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, his foundation was unity of purpose. We want to see you united today, tomorrow and forever. Your dad stood for unity of purpose and we want you to get united for a particular purpose. Your dad believed in team spirit - he believed that together, everyone achieves more. My young brother, Hon. Ojok, as the heir of the family, you need to ensure that there is team spirit. I want to thank you that so far, so good. To the people of Omoro who are here in the gallery and those who are watching, we want to thank you for electing our young brother and the son to the late, Hon. Andrew Ojok Oulanyah. Our humble appeal to you is that Ojok is a young man – In the culture of Acholi, you say “Julu” literally meaning “who must be nurtured or mentored”. Please, keep Andrew as your Member of Parliament. This is our humble appeal. (Applause) If there is something wrong, do not move somewhere and start talking bad about him. Some of us are here to mentor him. The Deputy Speaker is here to mentor him in leadership. The Rt Hon. Speaker is here to mentor him. We are very many here, including the Leader of the Opposition. If you feel that something is wrong, he is a young man; you can call and advise him. This is our humble appeal to you such that the legacy of the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah lives forever. 7766MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONThe people of Mitooma who were here and have left, we want to thank you for the gift of Rt Hon. Tayebwa who has taken on the mantle. (Applause) To the people of Bukedea, we salute you for the gift of the Rt Hon. Anita Among, who has taken on the mantle. (Applause)The people of all constituencies in Uganda represented in this Parliament - because this Parliament is the summary - we thank you for the gift of the people you have given us. Rt Hon. Dr Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah, we know you are watching us, but we pray that you continue resting in perfect peace. May the good Lord bless you and continue to keep your legacy alive as we proceed as the people who are still alive. Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much. This is another debate that has united the House, just like the one we had this week on the Anti-Homosexuality Bill. I believe this is the spirit that we must anchor our debates on and continue to move on. Whether on the Opposition or Government side, we must know that Uganda, the country we all belong to, is bigger than all of us. Today, we are here to render a service and tomorrow, we may not be there. What will you and I be remembered for? That must be the fundamental question. Mr Speaker, thank you very much for guiding and superintending over the House today. I beg to submit, on behalf of Government, and also commit that we will remind the necessary offices and officers to ensure that the different commitments and pledges made are fulfilled; whether in phases or at once, something must be done for them to be fulfilled. I beg to submit. Thank you. (Applause) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Government Chief Whip. Honourable colleagues, I would like to thank you for sitting for this long. I am really sorry for those who have not got an opportunity. I know what it means. I was a backbencher and I know that one day, I can again be a backbencher. I remember when I was a backbencher, whenever you were not picked, you would move around, saying: “Whenever he is chairing, he can never pick me. He hates me.” (Laughter) Sometimes, you bring issues and all that. However, honourable colleagues, it is because of the limitation of time. If I had an opportunity to buy more time from somewhere, I would have picked you. Now, here is some advice from Hon. Oulanyah – from what we have talked about. If you want to be a good legislator, you cannot look at legislation as a part-time job. If you know that you have other work you are doing and then at 1.30 p.m., you pick the Rules of Procedure – which you have never opened – you pick your copy of the Constitution, you pick your iPad and enter this House and wait for procedure when you do not even know under which rule you are standing or wait for points of order – your role is to scan around for who is not properly dressed so that you go on the Hansard as having spoken, I am telling you that you are not going to be a good legislator. I can testify to this because at one time, I was looking at legislation as a part-time job. I know many of us who would say, “No, I am just going for my business”. There is a former Member of Parliament who was even a senior technical officer in Government. He said there is no better job than Parliament. He said you just wake up, move around your home and at 1.00 p.m., you go to Parliament, eat at the canteen and at 2.00 p.m., you sit and at 4.00 p.m., you go back home and find salary – whether you speak or not, you are assured of that salary. He was from Kigezi. If you do that, you can never be a good legislator; you can never be a Jacob. Honourable colleagues, that is why you are facilitated well. That is why there is even a gym so that you can come at 7.00 a.m. and exercise from here, go to the Library, and to committees. [Mr Obua]7767THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 23 MARCH 2023Even in this position, I cannot know how to manage you if I do not read or if I do not watch how other Speakers in the other jurisdictions work, or if I do not go back to correct my mistakes. If you have spoken on the Floor, tomorrow look for that Hansard online and read what you said. Did what you spoke on the Floor have any bearing? Did it, in any way, influence the resolution of the House or is it just on the record that you spoke? You know how there can be a serious programme going on and someone calls to send greetings in the midst of a programme. (Laughter) You can be listening to a very serious programme on radio and someone calls in the midst of the programme to send greetings. (Laughter) Are your submissions on the Floor to send greetings to your constituents or not? You have to read. Honourable colleagues, I request that if we want to be quality debaters - the way Jacob wanted us to be – and if we do not want the public to judge us harshly, we have to be disciplined. The other day, I saw a trending picture and I want to assign the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to look into this - how our colleagues looked on Zoom when we were debating the Anti-Homosexuality Bill. This was a CNN anchor. There were some Members in vests and t-shirts while others were with their children and attending Parliament. I would like to assign the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to look and see if there is any gap and we work it out with our ICT department. Please - and now I give a directive to the ICT department - any Member who comes on Zoom, wearing a t-shirt and playing with children should be off because the public is watching and people are taking screenshots of you on Zoom and it is embarrassing us. I believe each one of us can learn from this experience. There is no bad experience; any experience can be turned into an opportunity. Let us go and learn to read, concentrate and listen because for most of you, sometimes, when someone is speaking, you do not want to listen. How will you know what he has contributed and how will you debate if you cannot listen? I want to thank you for that. To the family of the late Rt Hon. Speaker, Parliament is still with you. You are forever part of the Parliament family. (Applause)Colleagues, the foundation is still on. Those who can contribute anything to the foundation, do not think you gave your Shs 1 million and that foundation will live forever, no. If you can, drop something in that foundation. It is in very good hands; the Speaker is involved, the Chairperson is the Chief Justice, Hon. Mao and the family - It has been able to support the children that the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was supporting. Therefore, I want to urge you to continue supporting the family. On Sunday, in Omoro, we shall commemorate and many activities have been going on. On Saturday, there is motorcross and the Bikers are riding all the way from Kampala to Omoro, and you are represented by our very own Hon. Jimmy Akena, among the riders. Today, the preacher at the service in the morning was our very own Hon. Bwanika. We have a multiplicity of talent in this House. Let us put them on display, it helps us to build unity.To the family, we want to keep praying to God to keep watching over you and healing you, and for Jacob’s soul to continue resting in eternal peace. Colleagues, I put the question that a motion for a resolution of Parliament to commemorate the first anniversary of the passing of the late Rt Hon. Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah, the former Speaker of the 11th Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, be adopted.(Question put and agreed to.)7768MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, colleagues, for passing this very important motion. Clerk, extract the resolution and pass it on to the family and have another one in our corridors for remembrance. I adjourn the House to Tuesday at 2 o’clock. (The House rose at 6.25 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 28 March 2023 at 2.00 p.m.) 