


Tuesday, 26 March 2019

Parliament met at 2.02 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I wish to formally inform you that the Rt Hon. Speaker is out of the country and is receiving treatment. The Speaker had travelled out of the country on official duty and returned on Wednesday, 21 March 2019 but was unwell. She was admitted to Nakasero Hospital and upon the advice of the doctors there, she was transferred for further management to Aga Khan Hospital, Nairobi. She has registered steady improvement and I request all of you to pray for her quick recovery. 

The media has been awash with various theories about the medical condition of the Rt Hon. Speaker, which are not true. I strongly disagree and condemn such irresponsible conduct from the people concerned regarding these divided and untrue publications of information that is not correct.

Honourable members, I also wish to remind you of the Budget cycle to enable us handle the Budget systematically and complete it according to the Public Finance Management Act and our Rules of Procedure. The ministerial policy statements for the Financial Year 2019/2020 should have been received by the 15th of this month. I am informed that many sectors have responded positively in line with the Public Finance Management Act and rule 145(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and submitted their ministerial policy statements.

I urge the ministries, departments and agencies that have not done so to do the needful by the end of today. We will not be receiving any ministerial policy statements beyond today because doing so jeopardises what we should be doing to enable us finish with this matter.

Rule 146 provides that shadow ministers may submit alternative policy statements to Parliament by 29th March. Today, I received a communication from the Leader of the Opposition that arising from the situation where ministerial policy statements from the Government have not been received, many of them to date, will not, therefore, be able to do it within the timeframe they initially would have obeyed, which would have been the 29th March. Therefore, a request came from the Leader of the Opposition that they be given an extension of two weeks – since the delay has also been for about two weeks – to enable them bring their alternative policy statements.

I am, therefore, extending the period for the Leader of the Opposition to submit the alternative policy statements from 29th  March to 9th  April. This, however, should not stop the committees from beginning to deal with the ministerial policy statements that are already in their possession. When the alternative policy statements come, they will be able to incorporate and handle them accordingly. If they delay while waiting for the alternative policies, time will have passed and we do not have time at this moment. I hope this requirement shall be met by the Opposition as well.

Section 13(10) of the Public Finance Management Act requires the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, on behalf of the President, to present to Parliament the proposed annual Budget of the preceding financial year and all plans necessary for the proposed Budget by the 1st of April. I am hoping that the minister is prepared to submit this either before or on 1st of April. 

Rule 148(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament provides that consideration of the ministerial policy statements and the proposed annual budget by each sectoral committee should be completed by 20th of April. I request the Opposition, who will be submitting these alternative policies, to take it into account that the sectoral committees to which these alternative polices will be submitted must report or complete their work not later than 20th of April. You have already requested for 9th April. Therefore, for matters to be considered by the committee, you now know how much time the committee has to look at your alternative policy statements.

Rule 148(2) provides that Parliament is expected to consider the sectoral reports and refer the approved recommendations to the Budget Committee for reconciliation, harmonisation and consolidation by 30th April. Arising from the above, I urge all the sectoral committees to set aside any other work and process the Budget. 

Other than the three select committees, which Parliament recently established namely; the select committee on Apaa, the select committee on land evictions in Hoima and the select committee on compensation of Ugandan traders in South Soudan, I direct that for the time being, the other committees should halt their activities in view of the lack of committee rooms to hold meetings. 

I also extend the same directive to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which has written to me. Chairman, your request falls within the confines of this directive that all other works be stayed. For all Bills that have timelines, the timelines are accordingly extended to take care of this situation.

I request for the cooperation of all chairpersons of standing committees in this regard. They should also halt their work until we finish with the Budget, with the exception of probably the Committee on National Economy, which might have pending businesses that could be urgent in consideration of the budgeting timeframe.

Honourable members, every year, Parliament hosts the Health Week. This year’s activities are to take place from today, 26th to Friday, 29 March 2019 in the South Wing Parking. This year’s theme is, “Wellness is my Choice.” Many activities have been lined up and you are urged to attend and participate. I particularly encourage Members to find time, for your own good, to carry out various health checks that will be provided by the medical practitioners at no cost to you or anybody else except the people giving you the test. 

I wish you a productive and pleasant week. Again, I remind you that Madam Speaker is unwell. Let us continue to hold her in our prayers. Thank you.

I will cause some alterations on the Order Paper to accommodate the Minister of Health to make a statement on the food poisoning situation that happened in Karamoja sub region.

On the issue regarding the legal regime under which the Fisheries Protection Unit of the UPDF operates on the various water bodies in Uganda, I have had a request from the members of the fishing communities, who are not in the House at the moment, that this matter be deferred to next week when they will be here to respond. I see the Member for Bukooli Island County nodding in appreciation of what I have just said.

I do not know whether item No. 7(a) is properly housed because that kind of response should not have come from the Ministry of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance. I thought it should have been the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs or the Minister for Security to handle this matter unless it was directly referred to the Committee on Information, Communication Technology, but which, looking at the substance of this matter, cannot be properly addressed by the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance. So, item 11 is hereby deferred to Thursday of this week.

Honourable members, item II is also deferred to Thursday this week. 	

2.16
MR TONY MUHINDO (FDC, Bukonzo County East, Kasese): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. Rule 145(1) of our Rules of Procedure provides for deadlines upon which Government is expected to lay, on the Table, policy statements. This rule further gives the Opposition a deadline of the 29th for it to lay on the Table alternative policy statements. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, the policy statements that we lay on the Table are not for a simple matter but serious business of this country. So, when we do not conform to deadlines as a Government, it gives a lot of worries to the entire country. I know that we have very serious business to handle but I think we need to take this matter very seriously.

As the Opposition, we were keenly waiting to receive these policy statements so that we utilise our mandated time to provide the alternative policy statements. However, it is a pity that while we were looking at the 29th, as our due date for submission, we are not going to be able to submit because there was a delay.
	
My call to the Government, therefore, is that next time, it should treat these deadlines in our Rules of Procedure as very important so that we ably serve this country with time lines and respect to the business that we do.

I also beg that your Chair gives us a direction on the further handling of such business. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I had previously given my guidance on this matter. I said the two weeks’ time allotted to the Opposition is in error; the two weeks are in error because as an alternative Government, you should be able to generate alternative policy statements alongside the policy statements from the Government, such that it does not become a critic of the Government’s ministerial policy statement but the Opposition’s own policy statement on what the Opposition would have done if they were in the Government. 

That is what it should be so that the Opposition does not seem to be academic where they are seen to be critiquing Government’s policy statements. That does not serve the purpose of an alternative policy statement.

Honourable members, that is my view and I hold it but the rules permit you to have two weeks. I am obliged to obey the rules and your two weeks are given and the extension is granted from 29th to 9th -(Interjections)- the Member will not be allowed to speak because the matter is concluded.
	
2.18
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. Our Rules of Procedure state that a Standing Committee has tenure of office for two and half years.  Rt Hon. Speaker, you might be aware that over 10 members of Parliament have not yet been assigned committees. Therefore, wouldn’t it be right to suspend the rule, which requires not having Members above 30, so that you can assign those Members and when the administration of Parliament sorts out itself, we shall re-organise them. This is to help Members get assigned to particular committees as that process gets concluded.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the suspension of rules is for a temporary purpose but not to amount to an amendment. Therefore, I cannot suspend a binding provision of our rules to create a situation that is lasting or almost permanent; instead we should be amending the rules to accommodate that.

However, as we said, there was another idea that when the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline comes back, some committees would be created so that Members who are not in committees could be fitted in the new committees that will be created. That is anticipatory and I will not engage in it because administratively, these matters are going to be handled. Just give us some time and we shall handle this.

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of traders of Nabukera and Qualicel Arcades Kampala, represented by hon. Muhammad Nsereko and hon. Nabilah Sempala. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Also, in the public gallery, we have students and teachers of Hope Technical Institute, Watoto from Mpigi District, represented by hon. Amelia Kyambadde and hon. Sarah Nakawunde. There are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are all welcome. (Applause)

2.20
MR LAWRENCE AKUGIZIBWE (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance on the outbreak of measles in Kenjojo District, particularly Mwenge North, where five sub counties have been affected. These sub counties are: Kanyegaramire, Kitega, Nyankwanzi, Bufunjo and Kigera, where since January, we have lost 16 children in one of those sub counties.
 
My prayer is that the Ministry of Health quickly comes up with a remedy to this problem and a programme for mass sensitisation on immunisation. Otherwise, there are some churches that stop their faithful from immunising children hence affecting the communities. Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker.

2.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE)(Dr Joyce Moriku): Rt Hon. Speaker, it is true that there is an outbreak of measles including in your own district, Omoro and other districts as well. 

Like we said, there are many factors that lead to the outbreak   of measles including what he said; the cultural and religious background but also the outreach by our health workers has not been very adequate.

Rt Hon. Speaker, we are very much aware of this and my team has been getting the right information in the field. We are putting strategies like mass vaccination and sensitisation in place soon. At an appropriate time, we shall bring comprehensive information.

There was a time it was brought but I think we still need to come up with another summary of action points. I thank you.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. The matter that the honourable member has raised is between life and death. Rt Hon. Speaker, aware that measles has killed a number of children in this country, I thought the honourable minister would be telling Parliament that a team is being constituted to run to the affected areas and do the needful immediately. 

However, for the honourable minister to really say their team is receiving reports; what are you doing with those reports? Therefore, the clarification that I would like to seek from you, honourable minister, is:
One, when will you constitute the team that is going to respond to that emergency?

Two, when are they going to Kyenjojo District so that they can assess the situation and come up with mechanisms of addressing the challenge?

That is what we are expecting from you, honourable minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister?

DR MORIKU: Thank you. I would like to make this clear, Rt Hon. Speaker, that last year, a statement was presented on this Floor because of the outbreak of measles. Following that, an action plan and interventions have been put in place and over this period, we had interventions in those districts which have been affected.

However, there have been other new districts where we got outbreaks. What I am saying is that we will come up with what has been done and what probably remained to be done. Otherwise, interventions are ongoing, only that we need to intensify and involve everybody, including the cultural and religious leaders. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Kampala Central MP, you had a matter.

2.25
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would also like to send sympathy from the people of Kampala Central to the Rt Hon. Speaker and to wish her a quick recovery as a Member of the House. I join her and everyone in prayer to see that she recovers quickly.

Rt Hon. Speaker, clearly, Parliament is where people run to seek remedies. At the moment in the city, we have been engulfed in a power struggle for not only ownership but also payment at Qualicel and Nabukeera Bus Terminals. At the moment, it has become an issue that involves the security of the tenants that occupy those buildings.

Since last week, Rt Hon. Speaker, gangs of people from the purported landlords have been sent to the tenants who are occupying the buildings and many have been maimed; others have been intimidated; others have been beaten as they are told to pay by two different groups. With me here is a demand note from one Charles Muhangi’s Horizon, requiring them to pay rent of this month immediately. It was issued on 25 March 2019.

However, previously, I was here and informed the House that if we do not address the issue of who has to collect rent from these buildings; whether through courts of law or giving redress to these people immediately on who has to give them security as they are doing their business; then not only demonstrations and riots but also bloodshed looms in the city.

Clearly, these people are losing. Like I told you the other day, the new management that was instituted and succeeded the Horizon management after the death of Charles Muhangi demanded five months retrospectively, when they were not in management of this building.

Honourable members, a person averagely pays between five to ten million shillings on these buildings on rent per month. So, if you told this person to pay five months that he had paid to another landlord; that is about Shs 50 million. For our businesses, you ordinarily know these people run on credit. They pay taxes. So, this unpredictability in the business environment affects these traders.

Rt Hon. Speaker, definitely with this business instability in form of demand notes to the traders from - let us say - Horizon, like I have and then Manisur Yanga and Mr Drake Lubega; it leaves the traders with no option but to close their businesses. For two weeks now, power was cut off from the different buildings. Gangs are beating them up and ordering them to pay by force because these rich men can hire gangs who come with sticks. Others come with knives while others have guns and they intimidate these people to pay to their particular landlords.

Now, averagely, every month, there are rent collections of about Shs 3.5 billion from these three buildings. So, each gang that is hired is paid a particular sum or fee from the rent. Every group that comes in hires gangs, intimidates the people, beats them up, they molest women and this is happening in this city –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, what is the urgent matter now that we are resolving? 

MR NSEREKO: The urgent matter, Rt Hon. Speaker, is to seek the indulgence of not only the Attorney-General in guiding this country but also the Minister of Internal Affairs so that they can withdraw the private security operatives and gangs from the gangster society that is taking over the management of these buildings to deployment of the Uganda Police Force as the guarantor of security of these traders. Rt Hon. Speaker, that is my prayer. 

In the meantime, they have been clearly advised to institute third party proceedings so that they can know to whom they should pay rent. Also, in the meantime, their prayer is simple; that let them know who shall guarantee their security and who they can clearly pay rent to; whether it is to court, to Horizon or to their current landlords but not to be intimidated by gangs. [MR NZOGHU: “Point of information, honourable.”]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no; he has all the information. (Laughter)

MR NSEREKO: Secondly, Rt Hon. Speaker, when I was there on Friday, the people of Nabukeera Arcade presented to me a power tariff. Little did I know that money was being extorted from these people in form of payment of power bills –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, please! You see, there is a substantial item on the Order Paper that relates to a statement from the Attorney-General. I thought you were going to deal with the specific security aspect of this which is urgent because all these other ones you are raising would have been contained in the substantive item here; so that we only get a response on the security aspect of it; the intimidation, the beating and the gangs which you state are running around the place disturbing people. 

We could get a response from the Government on that and what they are going to do about it. Then, we will handle the rest of the things in accordance with what the Attorney-general is going to say.

MR NSEREKO: Most obliged, Rt Hon. Speaker. It is my humble prayer and that of those tenants and traders in the city that their security be guaranteed, just like any other taxpayers in this country and that they may go back to their work places knowing that they will not be waylaid by any criminal gangs in order to intimidate them and draw money from them forcefully. Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I have just introduced the traders. They are here actually concerned and in the Gallery. It is a delegation of traders of Nabukeera and Qualicel Arcades. They are here and want to know what their fate is, especially the response that should have come from the Attorney-General and now this new matter about the security situation in the place that has been raised by the Member of Kampala Central.

Can we deal with this issue of security first and then we go to the substantive matter? Where is the minister in charge of security or internal affairs? Can we have a response from the Government on this, please? 

2.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr David Bahati): Rt Hon. Speaker, I also join the House in sending our sympathies to the Rt Hon. Speaker and I wish her a quick recovery. 

We have got this information; we are going to contact the Minister for Internal Affairs right away – (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Rt Hon. Speaker, the issue on the Order Paper, which requires the Government to make a response, arose out of a report of a committee of Parliament and the Speaker guided, after I had raised a procedural matter, that Government should clarify under which law we are proceeding under in the fisheries sector. 

Therefore, is the minister in order to rise on the Floor of Parliament and say that he has just got information and therefore, he will respond?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Jinja Municipality East, you are out of order. (Laughter) We are talking about No.3 (II).

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. On the issue of traders and their security - first and foremost, the traders need to be assured that nothing will happen to them in terms of their security. The Government, the Uganda Police and all the organs of Government are there to protect Ugandans, including the vendors. However, the Minister for Internal Affairs is going to be informed immediately so that we have a meeting with the traders and this issue is resolved immediately. Thank you.

MR NZOGHU: Rt Hon. Speaker, hon. Nsereko raised this matter some two weeks ago and rule 42(6) is very explicit, Rt Hon. Speaker, about the timeframe within which a minister is supposed to respond to a matter that a Member in the House has raised. In the event that a matter has taken more than two weeks - which is well spelt out in our Rules of Procedure that the minister should have responded - and the matter is causing unrest among the business community. 

Is the honourable member in order to abdicate his responsibility as a minister in Government to not have responded to that particular matter so that the business people and taxpayers who are under tension can know what they should do and what Government should be doing? Is he in order to suggest that the two ministers will respond and yet even their time has expired?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Again, honourable member for Busongora North, you are out of order – for the simple reason that we are not discussing 3(II). We are not yet on the issue that the Attorney-General should have responded to. If we get there and there is no response; if somebody gets there and begins to speak the way the minister is speaking, then your order will be sustainable. 

However, this particular matter of the traders’ security has just been raised now – it was not raised two weeks ago. Let us deal with issues as they come. For those that are coming under 3(II), let us wait and see what the responses will be but this particular one concerns the security, which the minister has said they will coordinate with the responsible organs to guarantee the security of these people – because they are here and they are listening. They need to know that nothing bad will happen to them. Can we now go to the Order Paper?

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OF QUALICEL BUILDINGS, BUGANDA BUS PARK AND THE RETROSPECTIVE RENT CHARGES BY THE CURRENT OWNERS OF THE BUSINESS COMPLEX, MR DRAKE LUBEGA AND MR MANSUR MATOVU

MR BAHATI: Rt Hon. Speaker, we are seeking your permission to stay this item and then we call the Attorney-General to come before the sitting ends. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will stay this briefly. Please, get this information to the Attorney-General, his deputy or whoever is available to come and give us a response over this matter to avoid further tension on this particular issue.  

Also, the Minister of Internal Affairs should come and give us information on the security situation in this particular area. We do not want things to escalate. 

MR NSEREKO: Rt Hon. Speaker, as you may realise – not that we have a problem with the Government side or the front bench in particular – but this matter was raised two weeks ago. You would imagine someone has not worked for two weeks and they are running a business. Let us try as much as possible to be empathetic. When we went to speak to them that time, we told them that we would bring the matter to Parliament and Parliament would give them an answer immediately.

We presented their matter and the people remained calm. However, as we speak, in a ministry where we have two ministers – in fact in two different ministries –the one of security and the Attorney-General’s office, we clearly have no answer at the moment. Therefore, these are the demands that the taxpayers always have, Rt Hon. Speaker.  

At what stage and in what matter is Government ready to address their issues? When they are in critical need, there is no Government. When URA knocks at their doors and puts seals on their shops - they do not even allow them to work a single day - but when they want credible answers to their suffering, there is no one to give them an answer – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, can we give the minister time to call these people and then we can have that debate because now we are talking to ourselves again? 

MR NSEREKO: Most obliged, Rt Hon. Speaker; but that is the pain. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. We will stay 3 (II), awaiting the response from the Attorney-General. 

MR BAHATI: Rt Hon. Speaker, I would like to inform you and the House that I have received information from the Attorney-General. He is not feeling well and therefore, he is asking for permission to make a submission on Thursday. The Deputy Attorney-General is also not in the country and I am told that he sent a message to you, Rt Hon. Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, what is the way forward?

MR BAHATI: He is requesting for Thursday to make the statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, we expect this statement to come on Thursday combined with the one on security – but the one on the security of the people who are running up and down has to be today.

MR BAHATI: Yes, we are looking for it. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON FUNDS ALLOCATED TO THE ELECTORAL COMMISSION TO CONDUCT ELECTIONS FOR NEWLY CREATED DISTRICTS

2.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Rt Hon. Speaker and members, about the funds to conduct elections for the newly created districts. We did not budget for this item and we are finding it difficult to raise money to conduct these elections. That is the short statement I have. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought a resolution was passed in 2014 indicating a timeline for each district and the year it would come into force. What has happened? This is something that has been known for all these years. 

MR BAHATI: Rt Hon. Speaker, we are consulting the Attorney-General and other people internally to see whether these elections can take place next financial year when we have properly budgeted for them. However, at the moment, there are no resources to spend on the elections for the new districts.

MR WADRI: Rt Hon. Speaker, thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I need to know on what matter you rise. 

MR WADRI: I am rising on the same issue that the minister is trying to mislead us about.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you giving a statement or seeking clarification? 

MR WADRI: No, I am seeking clarification from the minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, then you should say so such that I am duly guided.

MR WADRI: Rt Hon. Speaker, Government has a high propensity to create administrative units without preparing itself to live up to the legal and Constitutional provisions that once an administrative unit is established, those positions must be filled. If you do not have the money, why do you go ahead to create these administrative units and raise the hope of the people just for political expedience? You are taking us for a ride.

Can you please tell us what will happen if Ugandans out there decide to take you to the Constitutional Court? Who will bear the costs? You are going back to the Attorney-General to seek a legal opinion but it is not a matter that he can waiver. It is constitutional that these elections must take place. You are talking of next year but how about if zealous Ugandans drag you to the Constitutional Court? Every other time, you come here to borrow money on behalf of Government saying that you are mobilising resources. This time round, why didn’t you mobilise resources internally?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He comes to Parliament to request to borrow but not to borrow. 

MR WADRI: Yes, he comes to Parliament to request to borrow. (Laughter) At times the conditions they put are such that even Parliament has no escape route but to approve the request. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, these resolutions were from the Government. The proposal to phase them came from the same Government. You convinced Parliament that you were ready to proceed in this phased manner. In addition, budgets are annual. In 2017, you held some elections. Actually, in 2016, some districts came into force. In 2017 and 2018, others came in. The same happened in 2018. Now it is 2019. What is the problem? It is not about short notice because it is something you proposed in your work plans and it should have been accommodated. 

MR BAHATI: Rt Hon. Speaker, as I said, we do not have the resources at the moment. I think three months is not a long time so that we can budget for this. Probably in future, we have to think about this and make a decision as to whether we should carry out these elections once at the general elections, after the creation of the districts. At the moment, however, there is no money and unfortunately, we cannot print money. We need money to conduct these elections.

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would also like to thank the finance minister. As you have rightly said, districts were put in place and for the ones of financial year 2019/2020, the owners are already aware that they are going to be autonomous. In addition, the mother districts are not ready to budget for the new districts. This is what I would like to bring to the attention of the minister. The mother sub-counties are also not ready to budget for the new sub-counties or town councils. 

Therefore, have you, in your capacity as the minister, written to those mother districts, for example, Kwania in Apac? Have you taken the trouble to write to them and ask them to budget as the original districts? It is because I see in the newspapers that Kwania District is already advertising as a district. What have you done to make them know that you have no budget for them? Thank you.

MR BAHATI: I think there are two issues here, hon. Joy Atim. The first one is the election of the leadership of the new districts. When a district is created and it starts, there is an interim leadership that is put in place. Therefore, the district would be there. However, the chairperson of the district and the Woman Member of Parliament are to be elected.

Honourable colleagues, let us properly and in an orderly manner budget for these districts so that elections take place in the new year when all of us have looked at the Budget. This is because we wrote to the Electoral Commission and said they should go ahead with the elections if their available resources can manage. 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, honourable minister. I need some clarification from you. You are saying that we should wait for three months but when you look through the Budget Framework Paper, there is no indication that the Government intends to conduct these elections. I would like you to clarify whether the Budget you are proposing in the next financial year actually appears in the current Budget Framework Paper so that we are certain that the elections will take place. Thank you. 

MR EMMANUEL SSEMPALA: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I have been in this Parliament for three years and this problem has continuously cropped up. I would like the minister to clarify and tell us the clear objective of creating these administrative centres. This is because I do not see why Government would come here to have us approve these administrative units, provide money to the Electoral Commission to hold elections for their representatives in Parliament and then fail to let them run on the ground. That means that the intention is not actually to deliver services to the people; it is only for ulterior motives. 

This also means that your planning is completely wrong and maybe you should resign. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Rt Hon. Speaker, one of the reasons we have been creating these new administrative units is to take services closer to the people. I can confirm that service delivery to these new districts is going on uninterrupted. What is missing are two things; election of the Member of Parliament and the Chairperson Local Council V and that is what we are asking - if the Electoral Commission cannot manage to conduct elections within the resources that were appropriated by Parliament, then let us wait for three months to pass so we do it in an orderly manner.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, honourable minister. I know you are being as honest as possible and the honourable members would like to trust you on that. However, you have made very many promises on the Floor of Parliament on issues of the health sector, funding for education, increment of wages of Government workers but people have waited in vain.

It has been a long time since we created these districts because the promise was that we start with a few. You are talking about extension of services to the people - the fundamental service that people need in these newly created districts are representation and governance -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The clarification is?

MR NSEREKO: The clarification I am seeking from him is: what service he is exactly talking about if the first services of representation, administration and governance are not being offered? What services have you offered by the creation of these new districts, which you have in effect not even budgeted for? Can you tell this House so that we trust you and give the three months, not falling short of the fact that you have presented supplementary budgets here to cover among others, elections in the new districts?

What assurance can you give this House for us to accept the three months to see elections within 90 days in these newly created districts? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us not drag this too long. The minister has not said that immediately after three months, there will be elections. He has asked us to pass the Budget, which is going to happen in three months but that after that, money will be availed for that purpose.

However, the follow up question that was raised by hon. Odur is that in the Budget Framework Paper, these amounts are not suggested. Are you sure this money is provided in this Budget? That is the question you need to deal with and we close this matter. Do you have any proposals in this coming Budget to deal with these elections?

MR BAHATI: I would like to first answer the Speaker of the -(Ms Kiiza rose_)- former Leader of the Opposition, can I first answer the Speaker? 

In the budget for the Electoral Commission and in the general budget that you will be seeing a few days from now, we are going to provide for the elections in these six new districts so that we handle this issue once and for all. We are all concerned but as I said, services like rural electrification programme in those newly created districts continue to be offered, including education services and other services apart from the election of their new leaders. Thank you.

MS NAMAYANJA: Rt Hon. Speaker is the minister in order, after the President directing loud and clear that no more creation of districts, to come here and tell us that he is implementing that programme?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is a point of order and I have to rule. I am not aware whether these directives have come but all I know is that these particular districts have already been created. It is only the date of their coming into effect that was deferred. Therefore, it is not a matter of creating any new districts or administrative units; they are already created; it is just for them to come into force.

Honourable members, let us handle it this way.  The minister has said that they have written to the Electoral Commission asking them to run the elections within the money they already have but that they have not got a response. Have you? They have not got it and if the Electoral Commission has the money to hold these elections, it should do so.

However, in the event that the Electoral Commission does not have this money, it will be in the Budget that will come on the 01 April 2019. Today being 26 March 2019, in a few days’ time, the budget proposal to this House will have the item to finance elections. I am just trying to summarise what the minister has said so that we see if it can give us a way forward on this matter.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. We are always guided by the Budget Framework Paper because it indicates the sources of funding and how we are going to spend the various amounts. In this case, the minister has not committed that this money is reflected in the Budget Framework Paper, which we are now dealing with.

We have adopted the Budget Framework Paper and already going ahead, within the budgeting cycle, to discuss how we should appropriate what is within that budget. 

I would like to know from the minister, bearing in mind that in the next financial year, we again have another lot of administrative units supposed to be catered for - the districts in question do not appear in the current Budget cycle - where will the minister get the money therefore, that will be supplied for elections in those districts?

Secondly, does he want to tell us that the subsequent cycle of administrative units will be the ones to possibly be frozen for purposes of saving money to fund the districts that have not been catered for now? I am saying this because I know that those districts are not catered for in the coming Budget Framework Paper; I can confirm that.

MR OKOT OGONG: Rt Hon. Speaker, I am coming from the background of our Constitution. It is clearly stated that once a constituency has been created in form of a district, it has to be represented by a woman Member of Parliament, which creates an operational point to the minister. Honourable minister, are you aware that this is a constitutional matter?

Once a position or vacancy has been created by the creation of a district, elections should be carried out within a period of 60 days. Therefore, by those districts coming into effect in 2017, there should have been election of women Members of Parliament representatives within 60 days.

Therefore, Rt Hon. Speaker, may be the minister may not answer but I know the Attorney-General will - those districts became operational in 2017; six of them and by them being effective, it means that they should be represented at the level of woman Member of Parliament because that is in the law - we would like your guidance, Rt Hon. Speaker.

MR BAHATI: Rt Hon. Speaker, the Attorney-General will answer the legal aspect of this question. However, what I would like to inform the House about is that there is a practical challenge of money on the ground. The Constitution says “shall be in 60 days” but we do not have the money to carry out the elections. The Constitution does not say “create the money” -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the Constitution is very clear; it tells you that you create money by appropriation. You make a request to this House and it is appropriated through a budget. That is how the Constitution tells you to raise money.

MR BAHATI: That is what we are doing right now. Lastly, on the issue of the former Leader of the Opposition – (Interruption)

MR OKOT OGONG: Rt Hon. Speaker, the minister is aware that in 1995, Ugandans promulgated a Constitution and promised to be ruled by constitutionalism. Aware that the minister fully believes in the rule of law and constitutionalism, is it in in order for him – a minister in the NRM Government that brought the Constitution – to ignore the command of the Constitution by simply saying that we cannot follow the Constitution because we do not have the money, yet it is the President, who delegates his authority to the minister to create that money so that we rule by the order of our Constitution?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, Article 81(2) says, “Wherever a vacancy occurs in Parliament, the Clerk to Parliament shall notify the Electoral Commission in writing within 10 days after the vacancy has occurred; and a by-election shall be held within 60 days after the Electoral Commission has received notification of the vacancy from the Clerk to Parliament.” 

Is this the provision the Member is referring to? Would this relate to existing members of Parliament? (Laughter) I think this is a matter that we need to be guided upon by the Attorney-General. It is not as straightforward as you seem to suggest. 

If the Electoral Commission does not have this money and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development does not have this money, we need to create this money through the budget. There is no shortcut to it. Let us wait for a response from the Electoral Commission. If they do not have the money, the only alternative we have is to budget and pass the money so that these elections can be carried out properly. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON SUSPECTED FOOD POISON OUTBREAK IN NAPAK AND AMUDAT DISTRICTS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we amended the Order Paper to accommodate this statement because it is one of those urgent matters that we need to listen to.

3.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (DR JOYCE MORIKU): Rt Hon. Speaker, I stand here to give a statement on the suspected food poison outbreak in Napak and Amudat districts in Karamoja sub-region. 

On Tuesday, 12 March 2019, the Ministry of Health received an alert through its surveillance team, which was on ground in Karamoja, about suspected food poisoning and immediately began to investigate. The following day, 13 March 2019, 18 people were hospitalised in Alakas Health Centre in Amudat. All the cases had consumed World Food Programme’s Super Cereal. Super Cereal is a blended food fortified with micronutrients. It is used in nutrition programmes to treat and prevent malnutrition.

Rt Hon. Speaker, 265 people have been affected from 13 to 23 March  with an onset of central nervous systems symptoms (headache, confusion and altered mental state), abdominal discomfort, general body weakness, diarrhoea, vomiting and high fever. The districts, which are affected, are Napak and Amudat. 

As of yesterday 25 March 2019, a total of 265 cases had been reported; 188 are from Napak and 77 are from Amudat. A total of 263 cases have been discharged successfully. However, two people died from the health facility.

While the Super Cereal lot was distributed in over 40 health centres in Karamoja, cases have been reported in three centres only. Seventy seven of the 265 people were admitted in the various health facilities in Amudat District, while 185 were admitted in health facilities in Napak District, including Matany Hospital.

The reports we have indicate that four people have so far died; three in Napak and one in Amudat. Two people died from the health facility and two of them are from the same family; a grandmother and a grandchild. Two people died in the community. May their souls rest in peace; one was male and he passed on in a village in Napak District. The female passed on in Amudat District. All the deaths took place on 19 March 2019.

The Government had an investigation that was carried out immediately in the community to verify the causes of deaths. On 13 March 2019, the Government, together with World Food Programme, collected samples of Super Cereal stocks as well as water from the affected areas. Samples were also collected from human beings, including blood samples, vomitus and urine from the patients and they were sent for analysis at the Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory and the Central Public Health Laboratory. Samples were also sent to Intertek Kenya Ltd, Mombasa and Johannesburg, South Africa.

Rt Hon. Speaker, the Minister for Karamoja Affairs, together with the Ministry of Health officials led by the Director-General of Health Services, Dr Mwebesa, the World Food Programme Country Director and other officials from the Uganda National Bureau of Standards, visited the affected villages in Amudat and Napak districts on 18th March and they spoke with the affected people. They interacted with the health workers as well.

The team found that the problem remains localised in only two of the eight districts of Karamoja sub region.

The investigating teams from the Ministry of Health and World Food Programme (WFP) technologists remain on the ground, carrying out surveillance and epidemiological mapping in order to establish the associated factors and possible causes of this recent illness. As we speak now, we still have teams on the ground in Napak and Amudat districts.

On Friday, 15 March 2019, WFP in collaboration with the Government ordered the immediate suspension of Super Cereal distribution in Karamoja and the refugee hosting districts where it is distributed. This is as a precautionary measure until investigations are concluded. WFP is working with district authorities to retrieve all Super Cereal stocks from health facilities and communities.

An intensive communications campaign is ongoing, advising people not to consume Super Cereal until further notice. Communities have been advised to observe proper hygiene and sanitation through hand-washing with soap and drinking boiled water.

It should be noted that WFP has provided Super Cereal in Uganda for more than l0 years. The current coverage of Super Cereal is at 252 locations in Karamoja, in addition to many sites across the 13 refugee hosting districts. Refugees receive Super Cereal in the general food basket.

Super Cereal is also distributed in many countries and has a robust record of fighting malnutrition and protecting pregnant or lactating mothers against malnutrition during the first 1,000 days of their children’s life. Super Cereal undergoes all the verifications of quality control before being distributed. No previous complaints have been reported about the product in Uganda.

Super Cereal is a key component in WFP's support to the Government's nutrition programmes that aim to prevent stunting or life-threatening malnutrition. WFP will, therefore, replace Super Cereal (CBS+) with Super Cereal Plus (CSB+++) in its nutrition programme in Karamoja.

Rt Hon. Speaker, the goal of the United Nations World Food Programme is saving lives in emergencies and changing lives for millions through sustainable development. WFP supports governments and works in more than 80 countries around the world, feeding people caught in conflict and disasters, and laying the foundations for a better future.

The Government of Uganda and United Nations World Food Programme are investigating whether there is a connection between the recent illness reported in Amudat and Napak districts in Karamoja and Super Cereal, a fortified blended food distributed by WFP for prevention of malnutrition.

A team of experts has been constituted comprising of Ministry Health, Ministry of Karamoja Affairs, World Food Programme, World Health Organisation, Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) and Uganda Police.

The team will ensure that all results of investigations from the Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory; the Central Public Health Laboratory; a laboratory in Mombasa, Kenya and Johannesburg, South Africa, are all put together comprehensively and correlate to clinical history, signs and symptoms and then share with the public.

The Ministry of Health, Ministry of Karamoja Affairs and WFP commit to conclude all investigations and share the laboratory results with the public. We appeal for calm as investigations are going on and request the communities to report any suspected illness to the nearest health facility or call our toll free line 0800100066.

As I conclude, on behalf of the Ministry of Health, I would like to take this opportunity to wish our Speaker, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, a very quick recovery. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, that is a statement from the minister relating to this unfortunate incident that she has reported. It attracts a debate and debate starts now.

3.19
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Rt Hon. Speaker, I thank the minister for the statement. However, I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister on two issues.
One is that; where is the origin of this Super Cereal? Is it made in Uganda, United States of America, United Kingdom, Ivory Coast, or Cape Verde? 

Secondly, the minister indicated that due diligence in terms of testing is normally conducted by Government of Uganda. I strongly believe that where any test is conducted, the results must be in black and white and in this particular case, probably, a certificate could be issued. Is it possible for the ministry to adduce any copy to the effect that this food ration that was taken to Karamoja underwent a test by the Government of the Republic of Uganda? I thank you.

3.20
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. One of the things hon. Obua has talked about is testing –

Rt Hon. Speaker, I worked in Karamoja for a long time and I know the sub region has been under World Food Programme for a long time. For the minister to say it was unhygienic, I have reservations and if it was unhygienic, did the Minister of Health take any precaution to ensure that these people could not continue with their unhygienic character? Otherwise, if that is the issue, it dissolves what you are taking for testing.

Our people are dying but to say that they are dying as a result of unhygienic tendencies, I think is not correct.

UNBS is supposed to check food that comes into the country. I am surprised that they joined the other team towards the end. I would like to know where the balances of the food that had been given to people are. Otherwise, before we continue to give it out to people in those distressed situations, we should know where the store of the remaining food is. Thank you.

3.22
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker, once again. I join colleagues in sympathising with the people of Karamoja that have become the victims of this recent food poisoning. I think it is important that this House interests itself in the situation of Karamoja because year in year out, we have catastrophes affecting that region.

In spite of the fact that we have a special ministry that was created in this Government to look after the people of Karamoja, we still have weaknesses in administration. We still have weaknesses in offering services to the people of Karamoja. We still have adamancy from the side of Government. 

We have lost lives and people have been affected. The minister has not come out clearly to address the remedies they are planning for these people who have fallen victim to this food poisoning. The fact that lives have been lost; what remedy has the ministry or Government put in place to ensure that those who have lost their lives in the course of this are compensated? What remedies are there in place for those who have fallen sick and therefore, withdrawn from offering economic support?

Secondly, we are not going to continue relying on donors to feed Ugandans. My colleague, hon. Obua, raised questions on the source of these super cereals and from which countries. This country is blessed with very good climate and fertile soils. Karamoja itself is blessed with very fertile soils. So, can we as a country and a Government take the bull by the horns because since Obote’s regime, people have been lamenting that we are not going to wait for Karamoja. Even in the NRM regime, we are still lamenting that we cannot wait for Karamoja. They are dying because of eating poisoned food from elsewhere yet we could provide this food locally here.

I would like to hear from Government, concrete steps and responses on how we are going to pull Karamoja from these doldrums of poverty, illiteracy and ignorance. My colleague, hon. Asamo, has spoken about the issue of hygiene. She does not believe it is true. As the Committee on National Economy, we were in Karamoja. At the regional referral hospital; we found pieces of faeces defecated by adults. Now, if people can come and defecate in the compound of the hospital, what happens in their communities? These are facts. 

Therefore, the Government has a responsibility, either to enforce the law to ensure that people live hygienic lifestyles or they get punished. By the time somebody comes to defecate in the hospital compound, how many people’s lives are put at risk? These are facts. Therefore, I expect my colleagues, the honourable members from Karamoja, to come up so that we find lasting solutions to the problems of Karamoja. I thank you. I would like to submit.

3.26
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement that she has brought to the House. I would also like to give information that the Members of Parliament from Karamoja have been following this up. When we were in Kyankwanzi, we managed to have the first meeting with the Minister of Karamoja Affairs when the outbreak started. 

Yesterday, we also had a meeting with the Country Director of World Food Programme (WFP) and a team from Rome at around 4.00 p.m. and we got to know all the issues that have been happening. Just to answer one of the questions that my colleague asked, this food comes from Turkey, Italy and Belgium. 

We would like to urge the public to calm down because we are no longer – as a Member said – depending on aid. That is not what is happening in Karamoja. WFP is only supplementing feeding, giving lactating mothers, pregnant women and the children who are malnourished in the region; which the Government cannot manage at the moment. The issue of faeces is not there. This is where we come from.

Honourable minister, the issue of hygiene is not there. Let us wait for the investigations. We have agreed as Members of Parliament to wait for the investigations that Intertek Testing Services has taken to Johannesburg and Mombasa and then we can make a statement as one message given to the people of Karamoja.

However, my cry or prayer is that the ministry takes up those patients because right now, there is a lot of famine and heat in the region. They should make sure that these people are attended to. They know them by number and they should be given all the medication that they need in the region.

What we got to know from WFP is that all the food has been withdrawn from all the 44 health centres in Karamoja and they are all in stores in the Moroto warehouse. Thank you very much.

3.28
MS STELLA NAMOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her statement. Honourable minister, two days ago, one of the ministers from the Ministry of Health said that the results were out and that chemicals and other micro bacteria were found in the Super Cereals. 

However, in this statement, it has not come out clearly whether the minister at that time withdrew her statement. That left people in confusion. Other statements say that they are still waiting for the results to come out from the various places that the samples have already been taken. 

Honourable minister, it is also not in order for you to speculate that hygiene and sanitation could have been one of the problems. That is speculation. This Super Cereal which was distributed by World Food Programme was the first of its kind. What was distributed before is Super Cereal Plus. This one was from Turkey and that is why we still have question marks. We are still questioning how this food entered the country without being tested and now ended up in Karamoja.

The most unfortunate part of it is that the people of Napak and Amudat became victims of this particular Super Cereal, which is so unfortunate. We lost three people in Napak and one person in Amudat. Others are still nursing the symptoms. The symptoms that were presented were those of mental confusion, diarrhea, vomiting, which do not relate to your statement. Therefore, honourable minister, you need to be clear in your statement.

Most of the people who were affected because of this Super Cereal were adults who were not the intended beneficiaries; not the children and the mothers who were supposed to take these food supplements. Why the adults? It is because of hunger that is biting our people. So, when they get this Super Cereal, it is cooked for the whole household to benefit. That is why the numbers shot up. There was a man who had gone to herd his cattle so when he returned; he found porridge kept for him. He thought it was the normal porridge. He took it, ran mad and died. It did not take long. The moment someone eats this Super Cereal, he or she develops those symptoms. 

We are also grateful to our health centres that were able to come to the rescue of these people. At least they managed to save lives. In Napak, within one day, there were more than 140 patients who ran mad but the staff at Lotome Health Centre managed to rescue the lives of these people. The dead would have been more than three had it not been for these health centres. We thank the staff of those health centres who managed to save lives. 

I call upon Government to supplement the efforts of World Food Programme. World Food Programme is combating malnutrition for lactating and pregnant mothers. However, the rest of the population at large is starving and Government has not come up with a statement on how people are going to be saved from hunger. There are those who are dying right now because of lack of food. 

I have heard reports that some families have refused to return the super cereal because they have nothing to eat, which is so unfortunate. Some people think it is a laughable matter but that is the actual problem; there is a big problem. Therefore, it is erroneous for people to say that the Karamajongs are foolish because they have refused to return the super cereals; they just have nothing to eat.

I, therefore, call upon Government to take up the responsibility of taking care of our people. We are Ugandans. We should not be marginalised to the extent of leaving us to die when you have the responsibility to feed the people. Thank you so much.

3.34
MR TERRENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to be able to share with my colleagues and the rest of the country information on this very important topic.

We went with the Minister for Karamoja Affairs to Napak and Karita. We found a few people left at the health centre; majority were already discharged.

The point of concern is: what is going to happen as a follow up on those who have been discharged? Some chemicals could have been in this food. So, how can we be sure that those who have been discharged will stay healthy? The Minister of Health should provide us with information on what strategy has been set to ensure that there is a pragmatic follow up on those people.

Secondly, it is also important to have feedback because people are anxious to hear about the results. When we read stories in the press – for example, I read a story in the New Vision where Mr Fred Enanga, claiming to be a spokesman for Government and World Food Programme, said that there were some chemicals, which required specialised analysis according to the findings.

It is important for us to know from the Minister of Internal Affairs whether such a statement holds any water. When people hear this, they become very anxious to know what chemical that is. Many keep asking whether it is a true story or not. We would also like to know who exactly we should contact in order to find out what happened. Is it the Minister of Health or the World Health Organisation; many people took samples? 

Finally, Karamoja is always in this mess out of its very unfortunate circumstances in which it was created. Can we know from the Prime Minister, if it is possible that the Karamoja working group - which is responsible for health in Karamoja - meets with the Karamoja Parliamentary Group and officials from the Office of the Prime Minister to design a more sustainable and practical solution to help the Karamajong in food production in a more sustainable manner instead of running these piecemeal programmes. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. In the public gallery this afternoon, we have students and teachers of Amazing Grace Primary School from Wakiso District, represented by hon. Rosemary Sseninde and hon. Robert Kasule. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are welcome.

3.37
MR RAPAHEAL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. Thank you, honourable minister, for your statement and condolences to the families that have lost their dear ones.

From the statement, World Food Programme has taken two steps; they have ordered suspension of supplies of their food stocks and they have also retrieved old stock. If I heard very well, World Food Programme has decided to replace the Super Cereal stock with Super Cereal Plus; I hope I heard that very well. However, as we investigate where the problem is, they have already decided to withdraw one and bring another. What is wrong with the one they are withdrawing? There must be a problem. 

Why should anybody bring poisonous food to Uganda and why is it that there was nobody to test that food from outside the country? Why? It raises a number of questions. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, I would like to understand; have there been any other deaths since that food supply was suspended? Secondly, was it only those four people who died and the 265 who were affected that ate that food or were there other sources? 

Now that the World Food Programme has stopped food supply, what is Government putting in place to supply food to the people who are affected? 

The Government Laboratory is here; it is not in Mombasa and South Africa. We can wait for results from South Africa but we should have preliminary results from a laboratory in Kampala –(Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: Thank you very much, hon. Magyezi, for giving way. Rt Hon. Speaker, we recently interfaced with the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and we talked about testing of foodstuffs that are in our supermarkets. 

About three years ago, there was a complaint about SME Gold - the milk consumed by our children; that there was adulterated milk on the shelves in our supermarkets. It was withdrawn but little did we know that that would instead resurface in food aid; there is a gap here.

Whereas in the ministry of trade we have the Uganda National Bureau of Standards that takes care of the standards of the goods in the shops, what about the foodstuffs and consumables? We are consuming sugar, milk, rice and other foods from other countries. 

Therefore, the information I would like to give my comrade is that in case of food stuffs coming into this country, the Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, while responding to that question here on this Floor of Parliament, clearly said that there is no organisation responsible for testing imported food from source to Uganda.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, honourable colleague. One needs to buy nuts that are ground from any shop, test them and feel the soil in the groundnuts. Therefore, I think hon. Nsereko is right. We are raising two serious questions here: the first one is on the capacity of the agency of Government to ensure that the food stuffs consumed by Ugandans are safe.

Secondly, my colleague from Karamoja articulated the matter well. This issue is not of yesterday. It has been on the table year in and year out. What is the problem? Why can’t we address the problem of food supply and nutrition for our people in Karamoja? Why should it keep coming up year in, year out and we subject them simply to food relief from outside? Thank you.

3.43
MR SAM CHEPTORIS (NRM, Kapchorwa Municipality, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I thank the minister for the report, but my concern is about this food, which is being supplied from abroad. Our country has a lot of food and if you go around the country now, you will find that all the silos are over flooded with food, which is known to be safe, especially the maize that we eat. Before it is tested, it is proved to be healthy. What has happened to the policy of “Buy Uganda; Build Uganda”? Moreover, we know that some of the development partners and agencies normally have quarterly meetings with the Leader of Government Business. Why can’t they convince them to buy food locally for our people? 

I would like to support hon. Esther Anyakun. Right now, our people are in production except during severe conditions during harsh weather. Therefore, I would like to encourage you that food for emergency should be bought locally because we have a lot of food in this country. I do not know why we should risk the lives of our people to import food which could have been stored for over two decades. All these risks – (Interruption)

MR ALERO: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Rt Hon. Speaker, for your information, Karamoja sub region has two Ministers of State: hon. Kizige and hon. John Byabagambi. What is their work? Their work is to monitor, supervise and to make sure the socio-economic and political aspects of the people of Karamoja are alright. Thank you. (Laughter)

MR CHEPTORIS: Thank you for the information. What I wanted to add, Rt Hon. Speaker, is that our people in those seriously affected areas - I am a neighbour to Karamoja and I am aware that food is always brought in to Karamoja. What the Government should look at is giving us ox ploughs, oxen and more seeds. You give us one tonne of seeds to supply a constituency of 560 villages. Why don’t you give us more seeds instead of importing rotten food? We just need food for emergency, in case of disaster. For sustainability, we need input implements like ox ploughs and oxen and seeds so that our people are safe. Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. 

3.46
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister about two things. Firstly, can you tell this House the exact period the results will come out? This is an emergency that requires urgent attention. So, we want to know how long it will take for the results to come out. 

Secondly, World Food Programme is an international respectable body, which is known for good services. I really wanted to know whether they did some tests before they gave these food items out. If the tests were done, how did they carry out the sampling?

For food items, one would imagine that you would give a good representation of sampling. For instance, if you have a full container, you would not want to test just three or five bags. You would have to test over 100 bags to be sure this food is suitable for consumption.

Rt Hon. Speaker, this is very disheartening to the nation. We do not want it to happen again because Karamoja is a very sensitive sub region and all of us are concerned. Government should take responsibility of whatever takes place there -(Interjections)- you want to give me information? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, there are standards. You are not going to start soliciting for information. 

4.48
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I wish to also express my sympathy to the people of Karamoja. I just wanted to provide some information about UNBS. My understanding is that it is mandated to provide quality assurance for goods coming in and out of Uganda. Unfortunately, the capacity of UNBS has been lacking and we have been talking about it for several years. 

In fact, it took Parliament the other financial year to provide additional resources on the Floor here to construct the laboratory. However, it took them about 10 years to get resources to establish a laboratory. They were squeezed in some small rented rooms in Nakawa. In fact, they were being helped by a certain organisation. It is until Parliament intervened that they are now constructing a laboratory. They could have done so in one year but the resources provided were so little; so, they had to phase it out in three years.

They have been requesting for resources to recruit 100 additional staff to be deployed at every entry point to deal with problems of this kind. Until now, they do not have that money. I think it is within this coming budget that they are getting Shs 10 billion to recruit additional staff.

Therefore, whereas we have the capacity to collect revenue through URA from different sources where we have deployed people, we do not have people to look at the quality of products coming in or out of the country. I think it is a very big risk and Parliament needs to come out to address it and give UNBS the necessary capacity to provide quality assurance on the products that get in or out of this country. Thank you.

3.51
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. This problem in Karamoja has exposed the Prime Minister’s Office and all the people working with World Food Programme. It is not that there is no good food in Uganda but they are looking for cheap food where they can make a difference. That is still on. We have seen what has been happening in Kiryandongo and all those areas. They always connive to look for a difference. Therefore, this has been an exposure. Let the Prime Minister make sure that whatever they are talking about – the laboratory; we have that Shs 10 billion to work on the laboratory.

However, they diverted their ideas on the laboratory because that will stop their deals. This is the right time for us to act on those robbers. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we draw this to a close, honourable members? 

3.52
MS JOY ONGOM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. My sympathies go to the people of Karamoja and the Government of Uganda. I am disappointed, as a Member of Parliament, although we appreciate what World Food Programme is doing for the citizens especially in Karamoja.

I went to see the Karamoja schools and how World Food Programme is supporting them. Most of the children do not go to school if they do not see any smoke coming out of the school. At least there must be food there because there is no food in the community. Therefore, they will attend schools when there is food. However, this incident is very unfortunate. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, Uganda produces a lot of maize and soya beans but I do not know why World Food Programme cannot contract and buy food from Uganda. It was last year that we were asking Government for support and Government put in place Shs 100 million to give to the buyers of the maize because of the low prices.

Why can’t World Food Programme engage and buy from within and supply our people with that food other than buying from Turkey as if we did not have soya beans. It is very – (Interruption)

MR ODUR: Thank you, honourable colleague. Rt Hon. Speaker, the information I would like to provide to the House is that many of the development partners do budget. When they budget, they have different sources of financing and some of the items they receive are given in kind towards the budget.
Certainly, World Food Programme (WFP) is one. Therefore the House should also understand that it is possible that those countries we are accusing WFP of buying food from, actually offered it – because WFP normally makes a call so that they are supported to address issues of hunger. I, therefore, would like to give you that information just for your –

MS JOY ONGOM: Thank you. We appreciate the offer but we are also encouraging the Government of Uganda to encourage WFP to “Buy Uganda and Build Uganda”. We have enough food. Thank you.

3.55
MS MARGARET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. It is very sad that we lost those four lives. I personally propose that it is not enough to withdraw food items or investigate; the people who supplied the food must be held culpable for distributing poisonous food. That is criminal.

I am not hearing of anybody saying that World Food Programme must be held liable and then we start from there. They should tell us what happened to their food and the storage. Could it be terrorists that infiltrated their storage facilities? However, you cannot leave World Food Programme at large and move on.
Secondly, where was Uganda National Bureau of Standards? Did they ever test or check the safety and quality of this food? Or is it because it is World Food Programme, so automatically it must go without being tested? 

Personally, the other day, hon. Winfred Kiiza laid the “tablets” on the Table from the thermal flask but up to today, we do not know what has happened to those “tablets”. Up to today, we have not yet got the response and people continue feeding from these thermal flasks. This level of laxity and complacency, Rt Hon. Speaker, is unbearable and Parliament must pronounce itself on these issues. Thank you.

3.57
MR HAROLD MUHINDO (FDC, Bukonzo County East, Kasese): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. As the Office of the Leader of the Opposition, we indeed have already prepared a statement about this and hon. Kassiano Wadri is in charge of the statement. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have copies of the statement? (Applause) 

3.57
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to convey our condolences to the bereaved family and also send our sympathies to those who are hospitalised.

Having said that, before I go to what I would like to delve into, I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister. There are people who have been admitted in hospitals and successfully discharged – I am not a medical doctor but I will imagine that the successful discharge was as a result of medication and therefore the medical personnel must be having an idea of what they were treating.

I will appreciate if the minister could share that information since she is a professional in that area – what were these medical personnel treating so that from there, we do not have to wait for whatever is going to come from Mombasa or Johannesburg? It means there is preliminary information that is already accessible to us.

Secondly, in this country today, in the 21st century, many times we talk about soon being delivered into middle income status. While we are dreaming of middle income status, the first pride on our part should be that we are able to feed our own nationals. 

We are a member of the global village and there is the Maputo Declaration where every African country is mandated to have 10 per cent of its budget towards agriculture. Let us ask each and every one of us as we sit in this Parliament to appropriate resources to the various ministries and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries in particular. Have we lived to that obligation that we committed ourselves to?

To me, that is one of the many reasons why we are having a problem - giving our population to be fed by a UN agency. The UN agency should be more interested in giving a helping hand to feed refugees and not our own people. In this era, for us to abdicate our responsibility and expect the UN agency to come and feed our own children is something which we deeply need to think about.

Thirdly, Rt Hon. Speaker, we are a country well-endowed by nature in terms of agricultural production. Yes, we grow maize twice a year except in Karamoja where it is grown once in a year. Therefore, for the time we have a bumper harvest, by now we should be thinking about having silos so that instead of looking for a helping hand from Turkey, Italy and Belgium, we can be helped just next door. Kasese has enough maize that could feed our own citizens. 

It is high time we focused, especially for the front bench and those who are in government, in terms of appropriate resource allocation to help our own people rather than coming here to lament when we have lost lives. I hope that as we go into this budgeting process, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries will be top on our agenda so that it gets the right resource allocation in order to feed this growing population.

Once again, my sympathies are with the bereaved families in Karamoja. For those who are still in hospitals, I wish them quick recovery. Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, these are serious matters and the tone of your statement should capture that seriousness. When you use words like, “only two districts out of eight…” you do not need to say that. You can say “two districts out of eight”. The minute you say “only”, it means you are beginning to downplay the whole thing. Sensitivity is very crucial in this matter.

Secondly, this matter happened two weeks ago and there is no reference to what has been done so far. There are no preliminary results, as the Member for Igara County West said. Can we be responsive to these things, please, so that people know that we care? We care but we should communicate in our messages that we truly care. When you come and give a statement of this nature, we are debating it but it is not carrying that tone of urgency and concern. Please, honourable minister, respond to those issues.

DR MORIKU: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to put the record straight that Super Cereal is fortified food with micro nutrients that is meant to treat and prevent malnutrition and it has been given mostly to children, pregnant and lactating mothers, as hon. Esther has stated.

Secondly, Rt Hon. Speaker, under normal circumstances, when there is food poisoning –(Interruption)

MR OBUA: Rt Hon. Speaker, we are talking about life and death. When my first point of clarification was answered – that the source of this Super Cereal is Turkey, Italy and Belgium – I did a quick Google search. The search indicated that World Food Programme is investigating up to 50,000 tonnes of the same Cereal that was supplied to the same group; vulnerable children and pregnant mothers in three countries of Yemen, Bangladesh and Somalia.

Is the Government of the Republic of Uganda aware of this? I think enough is enough. We must tell World Food Programme to be honest to the people of Uganda. (Applause)

DR MORIKU: Thank you very much for that clarification –(Interjection)- you were seeking clarification and I made it very clear in my statement that we have a team of experts carrying out investigations. The team includes people from the World Food Programme, the World Health Organisation, the Ministry of Health and other bodies. The investigation is intensive and that is why I said that all these different investigations will be put together in a comprehensive manner, tied up with the clinical findings and presented to the public –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, let the minister finish.

DR MORIKU: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. Under normal circumstances, when somebody gets food poisoning because of contaminated food or food that has not been well prepared, the person is treated accordingly. One of the colleagues asked how treatment is offered. These patients presented with signs and symptoms of diarrhea, vomiting and abdominal discomfort. They also presented signs of central nervous system manifestations which I mentioned as confusion, altered mental state and convulsions. 

However, under ordinary circumstances, you counsel somebody on hygiene and sanitation – [MR OKOT OGONG: “Mr, Speaker, this is the cause of nodding disease and we are treating it lightly.”] - Under normal circumstances, we sensitise the community on cleanliness, hygiene, preparation of food as well as hand washing. When you hear that somebody has been admitted because of food poisoning, whether the person is from Kampala, Arua or Karamoja, the first advice is preventive. As the person is discharged, you need to talk about hygiene and preparing food in a proper way. That is why the communities have been advised to maintain hygiene and sanitation, especially when handling food.

On the issue of testing, I think somebody has already pointed to the Uganda National Bureau of Standards. They have the mandate to test even where this food is taken for storage. For that matter, once food is in the country, it is the mandate of the Uganda National Bureau of Standards to ensure quality control, the quality of food and the standards –(Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: Thank you very much. The honourable minister has an amazing point and we have no doubt that she is giving it in good faith. There are two issues raised here and the issue of sanitation is purely hers. However, the issue of safety of food – whether exported or imported – lies with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries that has food scientists and nutritionists, whether by statute or by fact. 

That is why when you making exportations, you seek the phyto-sanitary certificate and the certificate of approval of acceptance of food. The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should be candid enough, come here and partly take responsibility. 

Some people in Kalangala consumed dog food in form of cookies and they started barking like dogs. (Laughter) It is a reality. Unless we address this, people may take it as a joke. The food was not well labelled and people thought it was cookies. They consumed the food and started jumping around and barking.

The honourable member was talking about nodding disease and the minister is here seated silently. Be candid and honest to this country and take responsibility. It is very absurd for a country that can feed itself to rely on external food relief.  

4.12	
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) Mr Christopher Kibanzanga): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity and I thank my honourable brother for raising these issues.

It is true that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is responsible for observing sanitary and post sanitary issues and issuing certificates to those who want to import food and meat in this country. 

We are also responsible for crop protection and certification. We give certificates to those who wish to export food out of this country. The bad news for those of you who think that Uganda is a dustbin of a kind - we have reinforced our department of food certification and protection - we have signed a memorandum of understanding with the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Uganda National Bureau of Standards to work together and ensure that we resolve this issue.

I, therefore, pray and urge Parliament to be on our side when we crack the whip. We do not want the stories we are getting from the lakes.

DR MORIKU: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. In terms of remedy for those who have lost their lives and those discharged – and I would like to make the record clear - out of 265 people, 263 have been discharged. Unfortunately, we lost two in the hospital.

The remedy for those who have been discharged and those who are still alive is that the Ministry for Karamoja Affairs and the Ministry of Health are working closely to ensure that a follow up is made on the people who have been discharged.

Rt Hon. Speaker, there was a very important question about who is to be contacted in case of follow up. We have a team of experts and the team leader is the Director General, Health Services at the Ministry of Health and various bodies including the Ministry of Karamoja Affairs. These are teams that are still carrying out extensive investigations. 

Yes, preliminary results had come up but they cannot tie together with the clinical findings and other investigations. As I have said, the results that we are waiting for from the different laboratories shall be tied together because samples have been taken for toxic organic compounds, toxic metallic compounds as well as micro toxic elements. 

This is something that requires all the results to be put together for clinical presentation. That is why, up to today, we have the epidemiological team who are in Napak, moving around to get all the necessary information and following up on the patients so that these are tied together to give comprehensive results.

Rt Hon. Speaker, one of the Members said that there was a statement that was made by one of our colleagues to the effect that the first preliminary results had showed that there were nontoxic organic and toxic metallic compounds. It is true one samples had the aflatoxin that is not conclusive. That is why we are saying that the results should all come together as the hon. Esther has put it.

Rt Hon. Speaker, we held a meeting and agreed that the results should come together to enable us to communicate to the public in a comprehensive manner. I thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable minister, do you have a matter to raise on this issue?

4.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (NORTHERN UGANDA) (Ms Grace Kwiyucwiny): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.

I stood up because I heard the Office of the Prime Minister being mentioned. I should say that the Government and the Office of the Prime Minister are committed to this issue and the two ministers are right now in the field. They will soon come up with points of action to address this particular issue.

I also want to inform the House that as a matter of policy, the Prime Minister, even before this incident happened, met World Food Programme (WFP) and instructed them to begin buying food locally, which they are already doing. I thought I should clarify on that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Next item, please.

PRESENTATION OF MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

MINISTRY OF HEALTH

4.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the following Ministerial Policy Statements for:
    a) Vote 104 - Ministry of Health
    b) Vote 114 - Uganda Cancer Institute
    c) Vote 115 - Uganda Heart Institute
    d) Vote 116 -  National Medical Stores
    e) Vote 134 - Health Service Commission
    f) Vote 151 – Uganda Blood Transfusion Services 
    g) Vote 161 – Mulago Hospital Complex
    h) Vote 162 – Butabika Hospital
    i) Vote 163 – Arua Regional Referral Hospital
    j) Vote  164 – Fort Portal Regional Referral Hospital
    k) Vote 165 – Gulu Regional Referral Hospital
    l) Vote 166 – Hoima Regional Referral Hospital 
    m) Vote 167 – Jinja Regional Referral Hospital
    n) Vote 168 – Kabale Regional Referral Hospital
    o) Vote 169 – Masaka Regional Referral Hospital
    p) Vote 170 – Mbale Regional Referral Hospital 
    q) Vote 171 – Soroti Regional Referral Hospital
    r) Vote 172 - Lira Regional Referral Hospital 
    s) Vote 173 – Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital
    t) Vote 174 – Mubende Regional Referral Hospital 
    u) Vote 175 – Moroto Regional Referral Hospital 
    v) Vote 176 – China Uganda Friendship Referral Hospital
    w) Vote 304 -  Uganda Virus  Research Institute
    x) Vote 501-Vote 580 Local Governments for the financial year 2019/2020. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the committee responsible to handle expeditiously.

MINISTRY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT

4.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (MS Jenipher Namuyangu): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for: 

    a) Vote 011 – Ministry of Local Government;
    b) Vote 147 - Local Government Finance Commission; and 
    c) Vote 500 – All Local Governments in Uganda for the Financial Year 2019/2020

Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the appropriate committee for handling.

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS

4.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Col Charles Engola-Okello): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay the Ministerial Policy Statement for Vote 004, Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, for financial year 2019/2020. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is referred to the appropriate Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for handling.

MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

4.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Christopher Kibanzanga): Rt Hon. Speaker, we are asking for more time for us – (Interjections) – Rt Hon. Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The time was 15 March 2019 so, there is no more time.

MR KIBANZANGA: Rt Hon. Speaker, give me more time to do some consultations.

MINISTRY OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS

4.23
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Ministerial Policy Statement for financial year 2019/2020 for: Vote 007, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; Vote 101, Judiciary – (Interruption)

MR LUGOLOOBI: Rt Hon. Speaker, I am watching what my brother is doing and what he seems to be presenting looks like a draft. Is the honourable minister in order to present something where pages begin flying out even before we leave this place? (Laughter) Is he in order to treat such a very important matter in the way he is treating it? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you recall that this kind of issue arose one time and we accepted it so we have set the precedent because after all, we are more interested in the electronic one than in the hard copies.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Much obliged, Rt Hon. Speaker. As I was saying –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As long as you do not withdraw it.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: I am not going to withdraw it, Sir.

    a) Vote 101 - Judiciary
    b) Vote 102 - Electoral Commission	
    c) Vote 105 - Uganda Law Reform Commission
    d) Vote 106 - Uganda Human Rights Commission
    e) Vote 109 - Law Development Centre
    f) Vote 119 - Uganda Registration Services Bureau
    g) Vote 133 - Directorate of Public Prosecution	
    h) Vote 148 - Judicial Service Commission

I beg to lay. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to handle. Yes, point of order?

MS JUDITH AKELLO: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs in the names of hon. Otafiire – (Interjections) – in the names of hon. Otafiire is not dressed in line with the parliamentary rules. Is he in order to dress casually as if he is coming to –(Laughter)-  Rt Hon. Speaker, is he in order to come to Parliament when he is not dressed well?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For the information of the honourable member, that shirt is called “The Presidential”. (Laughter)

MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

4.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Christopher Kibanzanga): Rt Hon. Speaker, I take this opportunity to lay the Ministry Policy Statement –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you beg to lay. You do not take any opportunity here. You beg to lay. You are requesting to lay.

MR KIBAZANGA: I beg to lay the Ministerial Policy Statement of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Rt Hon. Speaker, we sent our Ministerial Policy Statement but unfortunately, it is not here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, which one are you laying?

MR KIBANZANGA: Rt Hon. Speaker, we are now on top of the situation. (Laughter) We beg to lay the Ministerial Policy Statement of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

Vote 010; Vote 121; Vote – (Interjections) – Rt Hon. Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, honourable minister.

MR KIBAZANGA: Rt Hon. Speaker – (Interjections) – Excuse me!
Vote 122; Vote 142; Vote 152; Vote – (Interjections) – I am coming 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we proceed? Please, honourable minister, go on.

MR KIBAZANGA: Vote 142; Vote 152; Vote 155; Vote 160; Vote 500 - Vote 850.

Rt Hon. Speaker, these votes are – (Interjections) – if that is your wish, I beg to lay. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the appropriate committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

MINISTRY OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

4.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay a Ministerial Policy Statement for Vote 008, Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to handle.

MINISTRY OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS

4.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay the Ministerial Policy Statement for:
Vote 009 - Ministry of Internal Affairs, headquarters
Vote 120 - National Citizenship and Immigration Control
Vote 144 - Uganda Police Force
Vote 145 - Uganda Prisons Service
Vote 305 - Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory.  
Vote 309 - National Identification and Registration Authority. 
I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is referred to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for handling.

MINISTRY OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

4.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. On behalf of the people of Bamunanika, I join you to convey our sympathies to the Speaker, who is sick.

I beg to lay at the Table, the Minister of Education and Sports policy statement for Votes 13, 132, 136, 134, 138, 139, 140, 149, 111, 127, 128, 301, 303, 307, 308, 122, 500 for the Financial Year 2019/2020.  I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is referred to the Committee on Education and Sports to handle.

MINISTRY OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES

4.33
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay at the Table, the ministerial policy statement for the Financial Year 2019/2020 for Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, with Vote 005 for Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives; Vote 154 for Uganda National Bureau of Standards and Vote 306 for Uganda Export Promotions Board. 

I beg to lay. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is referred to the appropriate committee to handle.

MINISTRY OF PUBLIC SERVICE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable ministers, please, have your policy statements in your hands.

4.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Public Service, Vote 005 for the Financial Year 2019/2020. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is referred to the responsible committee to handle.

MINISTRY OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

4.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the ministerial policy statement, for the social development sector for the Financial Year 2019/2020 covering Vote 018 - Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development; Vote 124 - Equal Opportunities Commission and Vote 850 - Local Government. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that; it is referred to the appropriate committee.

OFFICE OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

4.37
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay at the Table the Office of the Auditor-General statement for Vote 131. I beg to lay for Financial Year 2019/2020.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

PARLIAMENTARY COMMISSION

4.37
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay the ministerial policy statement for the Parliamentary Commission for Vote 104, for Financial Year 2019/2020. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MINISTRY OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE

4.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Information, Communication and National Guidance, Vote 020, for the Financial Year 2019/2020.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT
4.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mr Simon Lokodo): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay a ministerial statement for the Presidency for the Financial Year 2019/2020 for Vote 001 - Office of the President, including ISO - Vote 002; State House - Vote 107; Uganda Aids Commission - Vote 112; Ethics and Integrity and Vote 159 - External Security Organisation. 
I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER

4.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (NORTHERN UGANDA) (Ms Grace Kwiyucwiny): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay the ministerial policy statement for Financial Year 2019/2020 for the Office of the Prime Minister, Vote 003. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MINISTRY OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT

4.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Vote 012 and Vote 156 for the Uganda Land Commission for the Financial Year 2019/2020. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Committee, please, handle this.

MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

4.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay the ministerial policy statement, for Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs for the Financial Year 2019/2020.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is referred to the appropriate committee.

MINISTRY OF EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS

4.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay the ministerial policy statement for vote 021 Ministry of East Africa Community Affairs.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Committee, please handle. 

MINISTRY OF SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION

4.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay the ministerial policy statement for Vote 110 – Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is referred to the relevant committee.

MR BAHATI: In addition, I beg to lay Vote 023.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, honourable minister.

4.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay the ministerial policy statement for Vote 130 – Treasury Operations; for the Financial Year 2019/2020. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture that. It is referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

4.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay the ministerial policy statement for Vote 019 – Ministry of Water and Environment, Vote 150 – National Environment Management Authority, Vote 157 – National Forestry Authority and Vote 302 – Uganda National Meteorological Authority for the Financial Year 2019/2020.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture that. It is referred to the Committees on Natural Resources and Tourism, Trade and Industry.

What about Ministry of Works and Transport? Have we got their ministerial policy statement?

4.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay the ministerial policy statement for Votes 022 and 117 – Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture that. It is referred to the relevant committee. 

Which other ministries don’t we have? You see, we have created a timeline for the alternative policy statements, which is starting from today. Therefore, we need to have everything here today so that our timeline is not affected. 
	
Which one is missing? Where is the one for the Ministry of Energy and Minerals Development? The minister does not even have the courtesy to be here. What about THE Ministry of Works and Transport? If it is on your phone, you can lay it on the Table. (Laughter)

4.45
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Azuba): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to ask for permission from you that we lay it tomorrow. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When you come tomorrow, come with an apology to the House. You will start with an apology and then lay the ministerial policy statement. 

MS AZUBA: Most obliged. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Public Service Commission, is there a statement? Honourable minister, you have already laid it with the ministerial policy statement for Ministry of Public Service. Let us proceed. 

We have two ministerial policy statements for the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. We expect them tomorrow. Hon. Bahati, please coordinate so that we have these things tomorrow. Thank you.

Hon. Musumba laid the ministerial policy statement for Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.

MR NSEREKO: Rt Hon. Speaker, you had instructed that within a short time and before the House is adjourned today, we shall have the Minister of Internal Affairs come here to give us a response. I have tried my level best to consult with hon. Bahati but it seems that neither of the two ministers will be here to respond to the matters raised in the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what is the statement so that we can reschedule? You were assigned that responsibility.

4.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Rt Hon. Speaker, both Ministers of Internal Affairs are not available. We request that we reschedule this. Tomorrow, Government will make a response whether those ministers are available or not. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Tomorrow at 2 o’clock, this matter of security of tenants will be dealt with by the minister. Those who would like to listen to what will be said are welcome tomorrow. Thank you.

PRESENTATION OF REPORTS OF PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATIONS ABROAD

    I. REPORT ON THE PARTNERSHIP FOR MATERNAL, NEW BORN AND CHILD HEALTH MEETING HELD IN NEW DELHI, INDIA FROM 10 TO 14 DECEMBER 2018

4.48
MS SPELLANZA BAGUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report on the Partnership for Maternal, New Born and Child Health meeting held in New Delhi, India from 10 to 14 December 2018. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture that. Honourable members, we will find time and deal with this report comprehensively. Thank you.

    II. REPORT OF THE DELEGATION TO THE AFRICAN WOMEN’S CRANS MONTANA FORUM IN DAKHLA, MOROCCO FROM 16 TO 21 MARCH 2017

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Member for Kaberamaido? Let us deal with this matter tomorrow. Thank you.

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE NO. 2 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if you are not ready, we can go to the next item.

MR BAHATI: Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to move that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.2 for the financial year 2018/2019. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Chairperson Budget Committee, the honourable member for Kanungu District, hon. Otieno, hon. Alero, hon. Mawanda, and hon. Ndamira. Okay, would you like to speak to your motion or it does not require a speech? Okay, this matter was earlier referred to the responsible committee. Let us listen to their report.

4.52
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. Before I present the report of the committee, I have a report of national importance, which I would like to present, with your indulgence. It is a matter of national importance; just two days ago -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which paragraph is it? Is it in your report?

MR LUGOLOOBI: I am begging your indulgence; it is a matter of national importance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, please.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Hailstorms in Kayunga District recently hit my constituency leaving very many people affected and homeless. We would like the intervention of the Office of the Prime Minister and particularly the minister in charge of disasters to address this crisis. Therefore, I was asked by my people to make sure that it is done. I hope the Office of the Prime Minister will take necessary action.

Rt Hon. Speaker, I now beg to present the report of the Committee on Budget on the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.2 for the financial year 2018/2019. Specifically, whereas we have so many votes in this schedule, we are proceeding on two votes only, that is vote 156 - Uganda Land Commission and vote 016 - Ministry of Works and Transport.

On 20 February 2019, Government laid before Parliament, supplementary expenditure estimates under Schedule No.2 amounting  to Shs l,173.82 billion of which Shs 403.576 billion has already been authorised by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, within the 3 per cent legal requirement and Shs 770.239 billion, which requires prior approval by Parliament. The estimates were referred to the Budget Committee for scrutiny before reporting to the House.

Rt Hon. Speaker, the Budget Committee considered two items in the Schedule, namely; the Shs 12 billion for payment of ground rent arrears to the Catholic Church, for land leased to the Uganda Police Force, to enable the completion of the Namugongo Shrine in preparation for the Symposium of Episcopal Conference of Africa and Madagascar in July 2019. The second item is the Shs 280,046,776,933 to cater for financing costs of the Uganda National Airline.

Considering the urgency associated with the procurement of the two items, the committee took a decision to prepare and present a separate report for these items while the process of scrutinising the remaining expenditure requests continues.

The committee now wishes to report to the august House its findings on the two requests.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, Chairperson.

MR LUGOLOOBI: The methodology is there laid out and the legal framework within which we are proceeding is all clearly laid out in Section 3. In Section 4, the sources of funding the supplementary, which are mainly two for the Shs 12 billion, the source is going to be the additional revenues arising from the surpluses in revenue collection.

The second, which is for the procurement of the airlines, will come from revenue for the renewal of the MTN licenses amounting to $60 million and $15 million from the Petroleum Fund.

The committee observations, Rt Hon. Speaker, are as follows:

Vote 156 - Uganda Land Commission - Shs 12 billion 

The Uganda Land Commission requested for additional funding of Shs l2 billion to cater for payment of ground rent arrears to Kampala Archdiocese for the land leased to Uganda Police Force at Nsambya to enable the completion of Namugongo Martyrs Shrine in preparation for the Symposium of Episcopal Conference of Africa and Madagascar in July 2019.

The background to this is that the Government of Uganda owes the Archdiocese of Kampala Shs 17,634,120,785 arising out of ground rent arrears for the continued occupation and utilisation of the diocesan land in leasehold comprised on LVR 528, Folio l7 and LVR 4l8 Folio 20, land at Nsambya registered in the names of the Uganda Land Commission, commonly known as Nsambya Police Barracks.

The Government of Uganda has never met its obligation of the agreement since 1982 to date, thereby causing accumulated rent arrears of Shs 17.6 billion as returned by the Chief Government Valuer in his report dated 17 January 2017.

The Archbishop of Kampala has been demanding that Government meets its obligation through several reminders to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the Uganda Police Force.

The committee notes that due to budgetary constraints, Government has not been able to discharge this obligation. The committee was further informed that Uganda was chosen to host the Symposium of Episcopal Conference of Africa and Madagascar - in other words we are going to have about 400 bishops here. 

In preparation for this conference, Kampala Archdiocese plans to construct a priests' house at Namugongo Martyrs Shrine, valued at Shs 9 billion to accommodate the visiting bishops. In addition, Shs 3 billion is required to furnish the house, which is a total of Shs 12 billion.

Committee recommendations on the Shs 12 billion  

    a) The committee has noted the urgency of this matter and therefore recommends that the House approves this supplementary expenditure of Shs 12 billion out of the Shs 17.6 billion, as assessed by the Chief Government Valuer, payable to the Kampala Archdiocese; and  
    b) Government is urged to budget for the balance of Shs 5,634,120,785 in the coming financial year 2019/2020 to clear the outstanding balance. 

Now I turn to Vote 016: Ministry of Works and Transport - Shs 280,046,776,933

The Ministry of Works and Transport has requested for an additional Shs 280 billion to cater for investment costs of the Uganda National Airline.

Rt Hon. Speaker, allow me to present the status of the airline as it is based, on the report of the Minister of Works and Transport. We have been informed that the six aircrafts required to launch both the regional and international flights have been ordered and are being manufactured. The aircraft purchase agreements for the four Bombardier CRJ900 regional aircrafts and the two Airbus A330-800neo aircrafts for international operations have accordingly been signed.

The first two Bombardier CRJ900 aircrafts are ready for delivery by 31 March 2019. The remaining two CRJ900 aircrafts are to be delivered in July and September 2019, respectively. The delivery schedule for the Airbus A330-800neo long-haul aircraft is expected in the fourth quarter of 2020.

The committee has noted that failure to pay for the aircrafts as scheduled would not only be default under the purchase agreement, which would mean losing the deposits paid but would also mean that Government incurs penalties in price escalations of four per cent per annum on the aircraft price. 

In addition, there are other costs in insurance, parking fees and maintenance while the aircrafts are at the manufacturer’s facility. More importantly, there is the reputational damage to the new airline as well as the Government of Uganda should the reason for the default be the failure to pay as per the agreements.

Rt Hon. Speaker, under 5.2.2, we present the contractual obligations between the Uganda National Airline and Bombardier and Airbus and that detail is presented for the information of Members. I do not think I should go through the details of that but Members can read on their own. However, on page 8, the committee observes that whereas the above provisions of the agreement are biased in favour of the manufacturers, the manufacturers operate in a monopolistic seller’s market –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Rt Hon. Speaker, I seek your guidance in relation to Rule 201(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. Rule 201(1) says, “A report of a committee shall be signed and initialled by at least one-third of all the Members of the committee and it shall be laid at the Table.” 

The report of the Budget Committee, which has been uploaded on our iPads, has only eight who have signed out of 38 people. I beg for your guidance as to whether we are procedurally right, especially when it offends Rule 201(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament –(Interjection)- I am not lost. It was uploaded on the iPads.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There are two Members who signed the minority report and the minority report constitutes part of the report. Therefore, they are 10. What does the rule say about numbers?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Rt Hon. Speaker, for information, I have 10 Members who signed this report. This is the original copy. Ten plus two means 12 Members, which is more than one-third –(Interjection)- the original is here. One-third of 30 means 10 Members. We have 30 Members and they are here. The Rules of Procedure give committees 30 Members. Perhaps you are reading the report for last year.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a bit of confusion. I have a report – from the minister – that has 30 Members and it is signed by 10 Members. I also have another one, which was given to me, which has 38 Members. The main report is signed by eight people and the minority report is signed by two people.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Rt Hon. Speaker, I believe that is sabotage.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, how could a person in charge of sabotage bring it to the Speaker, of all people? (Laughter) Honourable chairperson, we need to harmonise this. There could have been a mix up in uploading.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to withdraw the document with 38 Members.  This report is for Financial Year 2018/2019; which one is this? (Laughter) No, I do not know that report. This one is withdrawn. It is not our report. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, Members! We have a problem in this House. Each time a small thing shows up and with excitement it blows up and you do not even understand where it is coming from. The report I received has 38 Members and the one that the committee chairperson is reading has 30 Members; which is which?

MR LUGOLOOBI: The one with 38 Members is withdrawn.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, our rules do not allow Members of a committee to exceed 30. Therefore, we cannot be debating the figure of 38, which is an illegality. (Applause) 

They uploaded an illegality and the person responsible should answer - No, there is no procedural issue here.(Laughter) The rule says 30 Members constitute a committee. Therefore, if they are 38, that is an illegality.

Who uploaded the report that is different from the one we are reading? Which one did you submit to the Clerk?

MR LUGOLOOBI: This is the original.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, are you saying the Clerk fixed some document from another place?

MR LUGOLOOBI: I really do not know what happened between the Clerk and the person uploading.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, please, clarify. Honourable members, this needs to be harmonised properly because what was submitted to the Clerk is what was uploaded. Therefore, if the one, a copy of which the chairperson has just given me is the right copy, then we might need to harmonise it and then we proceed properly.

Honourable members, all we need is the correct copy to be uploaded and the other copy taken down. Can we have this done quickly? Clerk, could you upload the proper copy and take out the wrong one so that we proceed together? Is the text the same? I have ruled on this matter – if it is the same issue. Please proceed, hon. Lugoloobi.

Honourable members, let us listen as they do the technical arrangement.

MR LUGOLOOBI: The Uganda National Airlines Company Limited
The committee perused the articles and memorandum of the company and made the following observations:

    1. The Uganda National Airlines Company Limited was incorporated on 30 January 2018 as a public company limited by shares.
    2. The company has a share capital of Shs 200 million, divided into 2,000,000 shares of Shs 100 each.
    3. The shareholders are the Minister of Works and Transport and Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has to be a natural person. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: 
    4. Each shareholder is allocated one share, making it only two shares allocated out of the 2,000,000 shares. This leaves a balance of 1,999,998 shares unallocated.
    5. The Directors of the company are Mr Waiswa Bageya and Mr Keith Muhakanizi.
    6. The Government of Uganda has injected approximately $29.9 million into this company but has only two shares allocated to it. 

The current investment in the company does not match the authorised share capital of the company. Whereas Shs 126 trillion has been committed for the purchase of the six aircraft and operating capital of $30 million was appropriated by Parliament in the Financial Year 2018/2019, the authorised share capital of the company is only Shs 200 million. This is a serious risk to the public funds invested in the company. Government is likely to become a minority shareholder in the event that the remaining shares are divested or sold to a private person or persons.

Details of supplementary requests 

Rt Hon. Speaker, at the time of the budget approval for the Financial Year 2018/2019, $29.9 million was provided for the capitalisation cost of the national airline, in anticipation that the external financing for the purchase of the aircraft would materialise in time.

The committee observed that this did not materialise and in order to fulfill the purchase agreement signed with Bombardier - one of the aircraft manufacturers, the Government of Uganda took a decision to self-finance the four Bombardier aircrafts at a cost of $115,800,000. In this regard, the financing, which had been provided for capitalisation was instead utilised to meet the pre-delivery payments of $27.7 million, as indicated in Table 1. 

The committee also noted that Government of Uganda further negotiated purchase of two Airbus A 330-800 series NEO at $ 220,000,000 (Aircraft from Airbus) and deposited $2.2 million as commitment fees. The details of the cost and what has been deposited so far and the outstanding balances are all presented in Tables 1 and 2. The total cost of all these six aircraft is $335,800,000 of which, $29,900,000 has been paid.

Rt Hon. Speaker, in order to meet the final payment for the two Bombardier aircraft, $41.55 million is required for delivery of aircraft No.1I and No.2 in March 2019. There is also need to refund the capitalisation cost of Uganda National Airlines of $ 29.9 million, which was appropriated by Parliament and $5 million, required for the spares for the Bombardier, totalling to $76.45 million, an equivalent of Shs 280,046,776,933.

Committee recommendations

The committee recommends that:

    1. The Uganda National Airlines Company Limited should allot all the shares to the two shareholders namely; the Minister of Works and Transport and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and at an appropriate time may divest them to the public on the stock market.

    2. The company should match the current investment capital with the share capital of the company. 

    3. The directors should be clearly stated as persons acting in their official capacities. For example, the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Secretary to Treasury – not as individuals. The Government should expedite the process of appointing the full board of the company.

    4. The House approves development expenditure totalling Shs 280,046,776,933 for financing cost of the Uganda National Airlines as failure to pay will result in severe penalties and damages against the Government of Uganda.

Conclusion

The committee requests the House as follows:

    1. That a sum of Shs 12,000,000,000 as recurrent expenditure be supplied to Vote 156 - Uganda Land Commission for payment of rent arrears to the Archdiocese of Kampala.
    2. That a sum of Shs 280,046,776,933 as development expenditure be supplied to Vote 016 - Ministry of Works and Transport for the purpose of purchasing aircraft for the Uganda National Airlines Company Limited.
    3. That the House adopts the report of the committee.

Rt Hon. Speaker, I have been served with a minority report which is attached and signed by two Members; hon. Atim Joy Ongom and hon. Winfred Kiiza.

Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to move. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson, for the report. There is a minority report. Can the authors please report?

MR LUGOLOOBI: I beg to lay these reports.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the full text of the report, including the minority report, I suppose.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Rt Hon. Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table, with your permission, the Purchase Agreement No. PA979 between Bombardier Inc., as represented by Bombardier Commercial Aircraft and Uganda National Airlines Company Limited, as represented by the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Works and Transport of the Government of Uganda, relating to the purchase of four Bombardier CRJ900 Series Aircraft. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: I also beg to lay on Table the Purchase Agreement between Airbus SAS as seller and Uganda National Airlines Company Limited as buyer.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those two agreements.

MR LUGOLOOBI: I beg to lay: 

    1. The minutes of the committee meetings;
    2. The report of the Chief Government Valuer on the Nsambya land; 
    3. The Certificate of Registration of Uganda National Airlines; 
    4. The Memorandum and Articles of Association; and finally
    5. The report of the committee with 30 Members.

I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you. Did you have a procedural matter, Member for Busongora North or it has been overtaken by events?

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I take cognisance of the fact that the documents, which the chairperson has laid on the Table, must be a product of the committee. It is a fact that the copy of the Purchase Agreement was not handled by the committee; he simply “somersaulted” it here. 

I do not know whether it is procedurally right that a chairperson can simply “somersault” a document to this House and it is considered a document of the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is for information. It may not have anything to do with the report but it is for your information. I think we should embrace any information that comes to the House and see what it is like, instead of chasing it. (Laughter)

5.23
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I present a minority report on the Supplementary Schedule No.2 for the Financial Year 2018/2019; Vote 156 - Uganda Land Commission; Shs 12 billion for completion of Uganda Martyrs Shrine and Vote 016 - Ministry of Works and Transport; Shs 280 billion for financing costs of Uganda National Airlines Company Limited.

Rt Hon. Speaker, the Supplementary Schedule No.2 of Financial Year 2018/2019 was laid on 20 February 2019 and subsequently referred to the Committee on Budget for scrutiny.

Pursuant to rule 202 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, I hereby present a dissenting opinion from the opinion of the majority of the Committee on Budget. The dissenting opinion was informed by;

    a) The legal frameworks of Uganda, particularly the Constitution, the Rules of Procedure, the Budget Act and the Public Finance Management Act;

    b) The committee interactions with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Ministry of Works and Transport, as well as the Uganda Land Commission; and 
    c) The parliamentary reports.

Areas of dissent

We dissented with the majority of the committee regarding the sources of funding towards the rent arrears owed to the Catholic Church and also the use of proceeds from MTN licence and shareholding of the Uganda National Airlines Company Limited.

Rt Hon. Speaker, I would like to put a disclaimer here. I do not want a situation where the Catholic fraternity will say that we are fighting this development. No, we support it but there is a problem somewhere. I am a wife to a staunch Catholic. Rt Hon. Speaker, I just wanted to put this disclaimer. Allow me to present now.

The dissenting observation is lack of prior approval of domestic borrowing. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development indicated that the Shs 12 billion, being payment of ground rent arrears to the Catholic Church, was to be financed from additional revenue and domestic borrowing amounting to Shs 887.5 billion. This is in the document, which I will lay, Rt Hon. Speaker.

It should, however, be noted that the ministry did not disaggregate domestic borrowing and additional revenue. Hence, it is difficult to establish how much each of the indicated sources would contribute to financing the supplementary request, particularly the Shs 12 billion that is indicated above. We would like the Catholic Church to be financed but it should not be fraudulent. Let the law be followed.

As regards domestic borrowing, it requires prior parliamentary approval before committing any funds sourced, as stipulated in Article 159 of the Constitution and rule 175 (1) of the Rules of Procedure. Domestic borrowing requires scrutiny by the Committee on National Economy so that it reports to the House for approval or rejection, as the case may be and would have been deemed fit. Furthermore, it is essential to establish whether borrowed funds are aligned with the Public Debt Management Framework, 20l3.

Critical benchmarks that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should address include whether the proposed borrowing would conform to:

    a) The present value of Government debt as a proportion of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) not exceeding 50 per cent of the GDP;
    b) Prioritising sectors of Works and Transport, Agriculture, Water and Energy;
    c) Ratio of total nominal interest payments on domestic and external debt combined with the total Government revenue, excluding grants, not exceeding 15 per cent;
    d) Contracting debt on fixed interest rates;
    e) Size of the net domestic Government securities approved by Parliament;
    f) Ratio of domestic debt stock to private sector credit not exceeding 75 per cent;
    g) Maturity time of securities;
    h) Ratio of bonds to bills, that is 70 to 30; and
    i) Clearance of domestic arrears, arising from non-payment of bills and invoices.

Recommendations

a)	Rt Hon. Speaker, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should disaggregate how much will be raised from domestic borrowing and should also display to this House how much we have generated in terms of additional revenue. This is what we want.

b) 	Prior to the approval of the request that is to be partly financed by domestic borrowing, it would be prudent that the Committee on National Economy reports the funds that are to be borrowed through domestic borrowing.

c) 	The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should indicate how the proposed borrowing (domestic and external) conforms to the Public Debt Management Framework, 2013.

I would like to reiterate that we are not opposed to the payment but we do not want the charge to be paid fraudulently -(Interjections)– okay, let me put it clearly that we do not want the law to be faulted.

3.2 Illegal use of proceeds from MTN Licenses

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development indicated that it was to use proceeds from MTN licenses amounting to US$ 60 million (approximately Shs 222 billion) to partly finance the Uganda National Airlines.

It is imperative to note that Section 71 of the Uganda Communications Act stipulates that the Commission’s funds may be used for its functions.

Section 72 of the same Act further stipulates that in the event of surpluses, they may be invested in fixed deposits, treasury bills and securities or any other activity determined by the Board and approved by the minister responsible for information and communication technology. This is what we are emphasizing. 

However, this was not ascertained. Hence it would be illegal to utilise the funds from MTN license to finance the airlines. It is also not permissible to utilise funds that are ideally reserved for the underfunded sector.

Our recommendation is that the $ 60 million (approximately Shs 222 billion), being proceeds from MIN licenses, should be reserved for the information, communication and technology sector as provided in the Uganda Communications Act until authorised by the responsible minister. The committee knows that we did not have any consent from the minister.

3.2 Shareholders of the Uganda National Airlines Company limited

The share capital of Uganda National Airlines Company Limited is 200 million. When divided by 2 million shares, it gives us Shs 100 of the 2 million shares only 2 shares worth Shs 200 to the Minister of Works and Transport as well as Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This makes both ministries minority shareholders, holding only 0.0001 per cent of the shares. 

At the moment the owners of the 99.9 per cent shares are unknown. The owners will only be determined when the directors decide to allocate the shares. It was asserted that the majority shares will be floated to the public. 

However, contention arose as to whether the minority shareholders can float what they do not own. It was however, asserted that this move was undertaken to limit the liability of Government, hence concern pertaining intentions of Government to establish a company that it already rates to be huge liability from the onset.

It was noted with concern that the shareholders appointed directors of Uganda National Airlines Limited in their individual capacities. That is, Keith Muhakanizi and Bageya Waiswa. These were appointed not in their official capacities as permanent secretaries for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, as well as the Ministry of Works and Transport. It is surprising that these individuals were preferred over the government's business arms; that is the Uganda Development Corporation that would ordinarily be best suited to manage the airlines.

It is further astonishing to note that Article 17 and 18 in the Articles of Association of this company empowers the current directors (appointed in individual capacity) to decline registration of transfer of shares and may also decline recognition of any instrument of transfer. This may pose a future risk of abusing the authority accorded by selectively determining shareholders.

Based on the above, concern was raised on whether it would be prudent to incur billions of money in purchasing aircrafts for a company in which Government does not own majority shareholding; it has shares worth only Shs 200.

It was also noted that the company will be trading as Uganda Airlines. This is in the agreement, which has to be given. This company will be operating as Uganda Airlines. In the recent past, it was reported that Uganda Airlines was already patented by a citizen. This raises concern as to whether the funds requested, if approved, may not be claimed by another business. Although the committee requested for assurances and evidence that the Government owns the business name, no proof was given.

Rt Hon. Speaker, this company is registered in the names of Uganda National Airlines Company Limited but it will conduct its business in the names of Uganda Airlines yet this has already been patented to an individual. We have to query this because we are putting so much money in this business.

The recommendation here is that aware that the approval of the supplementary request for Uganda National Airlines Company Limited is urgent, the House be suspended until Government:

    a) Tables proof regarding ownership of the business name of Uganda Airlines, and 
    b) The ministry amends Articles of association to allot itself majority shares that it can later float to the public, not minority shares.

Rt Hon. Speaker, I implore the members to support the minority report. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, you have received these detailed reports and the issues that they raise. We will not be able to start this debate now; we shall start it in earnest tomorrow. Please study the documents as we come back tomorrow to deal with it. Thank you.

RESPONSES TO URGENT QUESTIONS UNDER RULE 46 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE 

THE DELAYED OPERATIONALISATION OF ISLAMIC BANKING IN UGANDA RAISED BY HON. SEBAGGALA LATIFF SENGENDO, MP KAWEMPE DIVISION NORTH TO THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 

5.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati):  Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. At the Sitting of the Third Meeting of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda held on Tuesday, 24 January 2019, I promised to make a response to this question raised by hon. Latif Sebaggala.

Rt Hon. Speaker, Islamic Banking is provided for under the “Financial Institutions (Amendment) Act, 2016”. The implementation progress to date is as follows:

    1. Bank of Uganda, in consultation with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, issued financial institutions with Islamic Banking Regulations on 2 February 2018. 

    2. Early this year, Bank of Uganda received an application from one of the existing conventional banks for approval to operate an Islamic window and the application is under consideration by Bank of Uganda. 

    3. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is currently reviewing the tax regime with the view of establishing parity treatment for both Islamic and conventional products for tax purposes. 

    4. The Bank of Uganda has undertaken to conduct workshops before the end of this financial year to sensitise the public on Islamic banking and get stakeholders’ views pertinently informing the formulation of the regulations for establishing a Shariah Advisory Board in financial institutions licenced to provide Islamic finance and a Shariah Advisory Council in Bank of Uganda.
 
    5. The Shariah Advisory Council, once constituted, shall advise Bank of Uganda on matters of regulation and supervision of Islamic banking system and approving Islamic banking products as provided for under section 115(b)(2) of the “Financial Institutions (Amendment) Act, 2016”.

Rt Hon. Speaker, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development shall continue to work closely with Bank of Uganda and other stakeholders to address all outstanding gaps with respect to implementation of Islamic banking and finance in Uganda. 

So, in brief, we have approved the regulations. What we are waiting for is to constitute the Shariah Advisory Council as required by the law and that will be done after the consultation, which the Bank of Uganda is undertaking. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. There is no supplementary question.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT TO THE URGENT QUESTION RAISED BY HON. CATHERINE LAMWAKA, WOMAN REPRESENTATIVE, OMORO DISTRICT ON THE PERSISTENT ROAD CARNAGE IN OMORO DISTRICT

5.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. On Thursday, 24 January 2019, hon. Catherine Lamwaka, Woman Member of Parliament for Omoro District raised a question over the persistent road carnage in Omoro District, especially on an accident in Koro Abili. It has sparked angry protests from the citizens of the areas. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, police records indicate that since 1 January 2019, there have been six fatal accidents, 11 serious accidents; meaning victims had to be admitted to a health facility and ten minor accidents where no person was admitted to a health facility. 

The ministry sent a team to Omoro District to get first-hand information about the situation. The team conducted interviews with the Vice Chairperson Local Council V and police officers. We were informed that accidents were persistent at the following spots: 

    1. Bobi (frontier) 
    2. Kulu Otit (St Thomas)
    3. Bar ogal
    4. Koro Abili
    5. Minakulu - St Thomas Primary School
    6. Koro Pida
    7. Abwoor
    8. Palenga – at the primary school
    9. Koch koo – at the primary school
    10. Kuueyo – at the primary school
    11. Abili – at the primary school 
    12. Otema – at the primary school

Rt Hon. Speaker, most of the accidents at these spots are caused by:

    1. Speeding by motorists despite the presence of several road signs indicating the speed limits.
    2. Lack of compliance to road signs and road marking especially by the pedestrians like children crossing the road and unmarked crossing points.
    3. Unguided or uncontrolled livestock; cattle and goats on the roads especially during the dry season.
    4. Lack of driving skills of motor cyclists.
    5. Dangerous loading of motorcycles.

Rt Hon. Speaker, according to our findings, the angry protests were sparked by a Government owned motor vehicle registration number UG-2031S that knocked a boda boda cyclist dead. The motor cyclist was carrying three people; two children and their mother on a motor cycle registration number UEK-97M. The woman and her children were critically injured. The motor vehicle was impounded by the police and the investigations are ongoing.

By coincidence, this happened a week after another Government owned motor vehicle registration number UG-0799Z, a Ford Ranger double cabin was involved in a hit and run accident with a boda boda cyclist who also died at the spot. This motor vehicle is still at large. 

I take this opportunity to inform this august House that my ministry has requested the Office of the Prime Minister, which owns the motor vehicle with registration number UG-0799Z to find it and hand it over along with the driver to the police in Omoro for further investigation. 

This sequence of fatal accidents involving Government vehicles and other accidents caused anger within the surrounding community who staged demonstrations/protests calling for immediate action by concerned authorities. They demanded for more road humps and zebra crossings along the road. 

Planned Interventions by the ministry in Omoro District

Rt Hon. Speaker, the ministry is going to take the following measures to specifically address the situation in Omoro District given that the road has been recently rehabilitated and is in a very good condition:

    1. To educate the road side communities along the national roads on road traffic rules and regulations for their safety including teachers and children of the primary schools along the roads. This will also include engaging local leaders especially elected ones to ensure livestock and other obstructions are kept off the road. They will also be requested to support road safety initiatives by police or the Ministry of Works and Transport in Omoro District.

    2. To construct traffic calming features on the roads such as humps and rumble strips to complement the road signs which just warn motorists about presence of school children and speed limits without physically ensuring the motor vehicles reduce speed. 

    3. Painting and maintenance of visible zebra crossings at all the primary schools and installing the corresponding road signage.

    4. Several complaints have been raised on the behaviour of drivers of Government owned vehicles all over the country and not just in Omoro District. The ministry, therefore, is going to work with the Ministry of Public Service to ensure that all drivers of Government vehicles adhere to traffic rules and induce the specific mechanism for punishing the errant ones - even if this calls for amendment of the Public Service Standing Orders.

In conclusion, I call upon all Members of Parliament to lead the fight against road carnage in all parts of Uganda. This will go a long way in complementing the efforts of the ministry, Police and other stakeholders who are involved in the day–to-day fight against road carnage. I beg to move. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The matter was raised by the Woman Member of Parliament for Omoro; do you have a supplementary question?

5.50
MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Omoro): Rt Hon. Speaker, I thank the minister for the timely response to the question I raised on this Floor. Immediately, on raising the matter here on the Floor, it took only two days and a team arrived at the district to handle the concern raised here. On that note, no further questions. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Minister of Education and Sports, Minister for Karamoja Affairs, Minister for Disaster Preparedness; are all not here.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED, “THE NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter has been here; we debated it and gave the minister time to respond to the issues and we had stayed our approval of this motion because the minister had requested for some time over a matter that she was going to bring. To-date, we have not received any; can the honourable member come and I put the question to deal with this matter?

Honourable members, this matter was received, presented and debated exhaustively. The Member requested for leave to be permitted by this House to present a Private Member’s Bill entitled “The National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2019.”  He sought leave and we debated it; we only deferred this matter because the minister said that they had a corresponding thing that they wanted to bring; but we have been waiting for it for over a month now.

It would be proper to allow the honourable member to pursue this matter by granting him leave. Can I put the question that the member be granted leave? [Hon. Members: “Yes.”] I put the question that leave be granted to hon. Sam Lyomoki to present a Bill entitled “The National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2019”?

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lyomoki, you have leave. Please, proceed to access assistance from Parliament and Government to prepare this Bill for onward transmission to this Parliament.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON INQUIRY INTO ALLEGATIONS OF SEXUAL VIOLENCE IN INSTITUTIONS OF LEARNING IN UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am advised that the report was already presented and debate did not start. A question was proposed for debate; are we prepared to debate now?

5.55
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba County West, Gomba): I do not think so. I suggest we debate tomorrow because we do not have enough - even my members are not here. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, we pause it here and we will resume this debate on the matter of item 10 tomorrow. Thank you very much. This being this time as it is -

MR OKUPA: Rt Hon. Speaker, on 3 October 2018, when we passed a law on Over the Top (OTT) tax, I did raise the issue after we had passed that tax given the fact that the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development had also raised this matter that there is no law regarding the mobile money transactions.

Rt Hon. Speaker, you did make a ruling on that day that the minister should come back to this House with the law. Hon. Bahati in the Hansard of that day did say that within a month, a Bill would be presented in this House.

On 23 October 2018, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Matia Kasaija, wrote to the Speaker about the absence of the legal and regulatory framework for the mobile money and this letter was forwarded to me. In this letter, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development said that within a month from that date of 23 October 2018, a law would be presented to this House.

Rt Hon. Speaker, today is 26 March 2019; hon. Bahati is comfortably seated having given us a guarantee that within one month the law would be here. We are in the budgetary process and we need to raise money. Ugandans do not know their fate if anything happens to their country.

Therefore, is it procedurally right for the honourable minister to take us to another financial year yet he had given us a guarantee of only one month to present the Bill for us to have a law regulating mobile money - to continue sitting here without fulfilling what he committed to with his senior minister - in writing? This letter was copied to you as well and there was a note your office put to my attention.

Therefore, Rt Hon. Speaker, is the minister procedurally right to continue absconding from what he committed to do to this House given the fact that we are in the budgeting process? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable minister, first of all, you are not allowed to sit comfortably because you have not done very well. However, on this matter, you made an undertaking before the House; how far have we gone with it? Could you update us please?

5.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Rt Hon. Speaker, indeed I am not sitting comfortably after not fulfilling what we promised in the House. However, I do not know how to express that in the House.

I would like to request you, Rt Hon. Speaker, that I crosscheck with how far we have gone and then I report back to the House tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the time being what it is now, this House stands adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock. Thank you.

(The House rose at 5.59 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 27 March 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 


