

Thursday, 5 March 2020

Parliament met at 2.18 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to thank you for the work we did yesterday. I appeal to you that we should work expeditiously and deal with the two Bills which are on the Order Paper today, so that we can set the Electoral Commission into motion. Thank you very much.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was in this House last week and matters of very critical public importance were raised. The issues were in regard to the slaughter of breeding cattle from Njeru Stock Farm by hon. Ssempijja. It was a scandal and the country wanted to know under what circumstances hon. Ssempijja ordered for the slaughter of very expensive breeding cows. It was appointed that he comes here this Wednesday but he did not appear. 

In the same vein, there was the matter of the police blocking public meetings, the brutalisation of those seeking to consult the public about their presidential aspirations, and the crude manner in which the police was dispersing people who had gathered lawfully. This was after they informed the police and were authorised by the Electoral Commission. 

Madam Speaker, you had directed last Wednesday that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister would be in this House to answer matters pertaining to the roadmap and how political actors, particularly those aspiring to stand for president, can be enabled to consult as per the roadmap and the laws governing this country. I understood that there was a special Cabinet meeting on Wednesday but surely, this is Thursday. 

When matters of public importance are raised and the Speaker’s directive is on the Hansard, the Speaker’s directive should not be in vain. If it is Government’s way of doing business, this House is constituted of Members of Parliament and Government and at no time must this House be seen to fail to perform its duties as a result of failure or absence of the ministers.

Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for Government not to respond to the directives that you issued and they continue on matters that are teething? We are in the teething process. We are at the democratisation process and it is also our duty as Parliament to protect the resources and the wellbeing of this country. Are we procedurally right to allow the Front Bench to shy away from standing and responding to the very grave concerns that this House has raised and when they were directed to respond by you? Are we procedurally right, Madam Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as soon as I get the responses from the Prime Minister and the minister, I will put them on the Order Paper.

There was a small policy matter that has not been concluded. 

2.24
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise on an issue of national importance. 

For the last two weeks, elephants have been ravaging Kamdini Subcounty. They come in big numbers, numbering about 40 plus. These elephants have caused massive destruction in the gardens. They are destroying potatoes and cassava, pulling down pawpaw and jackfruit trees and causing so much more destruction that I cannot mention here.

At around 4.00 a.m. today, we witnessed yet another tragedy. The elephants came in big numbers again to Amati Village, Juma Parish, Kamdini Subcounty, Oyam District. This is about 12 kilometres away from the park. One man called Richard Otim, 65 years of age, was brutally killed by the elephants. They shattered his body into pieces and it was beyond recognition.

Madam Speaker, allow me to lay this on the Table for the minister in charge of this docket and the House to see this level of destruction caused by the elephants. Allow me to give my phone to the minister to see this and thereafter he returns my phone.

We have been raising this issue on the Floor; specifically, I have been raising it. Very many times, I have appeared on the Order Paper because of this problem. Because of this kind of brutal killing, last year the ministry promised to start electric fencing. However, what happened late last year was simply bush clearing. Up to now, there is nothing going on and yet we are being left with many orphans. Crops are being destroyed and to make matters worse, when our people are killed, there is no compensation. 

The ministry has been saying that there is no law, but we passed the law in this Parliament. Therefore, my prayer –(Interjection)– Let me state my prayer and then I give you the opportunity. I would like the minister to give assurance to this House and to my people and tell us when this kind of tragedy will stop. Also, when will the electric fencing start in Oyam District? 

Secondly, there is the issue of compensation. This was a businessman. At 65 years of age, he was doing business in Kamdini Town Council. Madam Speaker, the elephants are even moving as far as Kamdini Town Council; I think it is a familiar place. The elephants are going there. When will the Government compensate these victims?

Finally, on the issue of sensitization, the people are left on their own. They do not know how they are supposed to behave when there is a baby elephant. They do not know the processes and procedures to follow when someone is killed. I think this is a very big problem, not only to the people of Oyam but to the whole country. We are seeking for answers, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MS ADONG: Thank you, colleague. Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give my colleague is that the same issue is happening in Nwoya District. Last Friday, I met with a team that volunteer as scouts. This team has actually replaced the rangers; they are now doing the work of the rangers. However, they are facing the same challenges because the elephants still leave the park in herds and go to almost the third subcounty from the park. It is like Uganda Wildlife Authority’s rangers have failed to handle.

Our prayer is that since the law has been made, can we have the regulations in place to help operationalise it and compensate our people. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I had earlier in the week said that I would not allow Members with issues of national importance to raise them. However, in relation to hon. Alum, she has raised this matter consistently for several months but it has not been answered. 

In the meantime, hon. Jalia Bintu, hon. Abbas Agaba from Kitagwenda and hon. Karungi from Kanungu have all raised the same issue, including hon. Lanyero. That is why we asked you to come and speak to us about the impact of the Act - whether it is in force or not - and to update us on what is happening, now that we have heard those prayers. I do not know if you can say something quickly.

2.30
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Col (Rtd) Tom Butime): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, my condolences go to the family of the deceased in regard to what the honourable Member of Parliament demonstrated using her cell phone.

We shall do anything possible to authenticate that event. In other words, the rangers will travel to that area, gather enough evidence and then we shall respond as far as compensation and other issues are concerned. Actually, they are already moving there now.

Secondly, it is true that the matter about the incursion of elephants in Oyam was raised last year on 31 July 2019. However, this matter was answered by the then Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities in a very comprehensive statement. A copy of that statement is here. I can lay it on the Table.

Thirdly, the question was what steps had been taken to stop the incursion of elephants into people’s homesteads, gardens etcetera. First of all, we have trained scouts in that area and number two, there are trenches along Kamdini. I know Kamdini very well, personally. Secondly, this coming financial year, the Government of Uganda will construct 100 kilometres of electric fence to separate these animals from the homesteads and gardens of the people. This will be done because funds are available. On the completion of this electric fence, I have no doubt that we shall not have any more conflict between people/residents in the area and the elephants mainly. 

I would like to assure the honourable member that first of all, there are trained scouts in that area who are always present to assist if the elephants are trying to invade homesteads. Secondly, the trenches are definitely there, and they were mentioned in the statement of the minister, which he presented to Parliament last year in October 2019. Lastly, I am giving another assurance now that come next financial year there will be construction of 100 kilometres of electric fence.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had said that we would give some time to Members to review this matter. Are we ready for committee stage on the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill? 

MS ALUM: Madam Speaker, let me thank you, again, for this opportunity and I thank the minister for attempting to answer this question. However, I would like the honourable minister not to talk from Kampala here but to go to the ground and see what is happening by himself. There are no scouts on the ground and the trenches that he is talking about cannot stop the elephants from crossing to the people.

Therefore, in the meantime, what will your ministry do to stop this kind of disaster from occurring? This is a very serious issue because it concerns life and once life is gone, it is no more; there is no market for life.

You are telling us about a long-term intervention; in the short run, what are we going to do or what will the Government do -(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, hon. Alum, for giving way -

THE SPEAKER: Are you now carrying on your own debate? Hon. Alum, I said I would allow you because the matter has come up many times from you and I told you what would happen if we started. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ELECTORAL COMMISSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

Clause 1

MS VERONICA ERAGU:  Madam Chairperson, clause 1 of the Bill is amended in the proposed section 10A by substituting (1) with the following: 

a) 	“(1) There is established an Electoral Reform Committee, which shall be comprised of -
 (a)	 the Chairperson of the Electoral Commission, who shall be the chairperson of the committee;
 (b) 	the Secretary of the Electoral Commission, who shall be the secretary of the committee;
 (c) 	the Chairperson of the Uganda Law Reform Commission, or his or her representative;
 (d) 	a representative of the Attorney-General;
 (e) 	a person representing political parties or organisations nominated by the National Consultative Forum;
 (f) a person representing civil society, nominated by the umbrella body for civil society organisations in Uganda;
 (g) the Permanent Secretary of the ministry responsible for local government, or his or her representative;
 (h) 	the Permanent Secretary of the ministry responsible for women, youth, workers or persons with disability, or his or her representative;
 (i) 	a representative of the Uganda Law Society; and
 (j) 	a representative of the academia, appointed by the chairperson from persons employed in public universities.” 

b) 	In the proposed subsection (2), in-
	(i) Paragraph (a), by deleting the words “in liaison with the Uganda Law Reform Commission”. 
	(ii) Paragraph (d), by deleting the word “concrete”.

c) 	In the proposed subsection (3), by substituting for the words “general elections”, the words “of the presidential, general parliamentary or local government council elections.”

d) 	By substituting for the proposed subsection (4) the following:

	“(4) The Electoral Reform Committee shall make a report containing its findings and recommendations to the Law Reform Commission within eighteen months after being constituted and the Law Reform Commission shall submit the report and recommendations, if any, to the minister.”

e) 	By inserting the following new subsection immediately after the proposed subsection (6):

	“(8) The committee shall regulate its own procedure and method of carrying out its functions.”

The justifications are-

1. 	To reduce the membership of the committee from 12 to 10 for efficiency, ease of decision-making, and to guarantee its independence by preventing the domination of the committee by persons from the Attorney-General's office or the Electoral Commission.

2. 	The submission of the report and recommendations to the Uganda Law Reform Commission is in recognition of the law reform function of the Law Reform Commission under Article 248 of the Constitution and the Law Reform Commission Act, Cap 25.

3. 	Since the committee has a representative of the Law Reform Commission, the proposal to consult the same body in carrying out its activities will be redundant.

4. 	To expand the committee to include other stakeholders in elections management amongst the members of the committee.

5. 	To expand the membership of the committee to include the academia and the law society, as is the case with similar bodies in India, Nigeria, Canada, Antigua, Pakistan and United Kingdom.

6. 	To prescribe the general election that will trigger the formation of the committee in line with Article 61 of the Constitution.

7. 	For completeness, to grant to the committee the right to determine its procedures and methods of carrying out its functions.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What does the Bill say? Let us first hear from the mover. 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, we reject the proposal to amend clause 1 (1) for the reasons here below: 

1. 	The Electoral Commission chairperson should not be a member of this committee because the committee’s report, as a matter of policy, should be handed to the ministry and the Electoral Commission for implementation. We would rather maintain that the Secretary to the Electoral Commission be the chairperson.

2. 	The Uganda Law Reform Commission is already represented on this committee and it does not need to have a report submitted to them. 

3. 	Madam Chairperson, we believe that the composition of the Electoral Reform Committee, as proposed in the Bill, is good enough. Other stakeholders, including the Uganda Law Society and the academia, can be consulted by the committee during the process of electoral law review and reform. 

4. 	It is important that the Attorney-General’s Chambers and the Electoral Commission are effectively represented in the committee to expedite the process of electoral reform since the reforms are time bound, to be completed before the next electoral process. 

5. 	Since the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is responsible for the Constitution, policy and legislative framework on electoral law related matters and since the committee is required to make proposals in liaison with the Law Reform Commission, it is important that the recommendations of the committee are made to the minister and not to the Law Reform Commission, as proposed by the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs in paragraph (d), to avoid any delays in the process. 

On clause –(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I can see the Attorney-General trying to justify numbers. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right to know the functions of the Electoral Reform Committee vis-à-vis the current Electoral Commission as it is? What do we want to cure? 

If we are trying to have a committee to oversee what the Electoral Commission is supposed to do, then the Electoral Commission does not need to be the leader. First of all, explain to us so that we also move in tandem. Madam Chairperson, if you allow, I will make my comments after that.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: What are the functions of the Electoral Reform Committee? 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, the mischief we are trying to cure by creating this committee is that after an electoral process, we should have a committee that goes over what has happened and makes proposals for change or otherwise. Any of these changes would affect the next electoral process or the next electoral cycle. Therefore, we believe that it should be the Secretary to the Electoral Commission-

THE CHAIRPERSON: No; what are the functions of Electoral Reform Committee?

MR KAFUUZI: The Electoral Reform Committee is responsible, in liaison with the Uganda Law Reform Commission, for studying the electoral and other laws relating to matters and processes of elections.

The Electoral Reform Committee is intended to synthesize the various reforms proposed by the political parties, election observers and monitors, civil society and other stakeholders arising out of court decision. They would have these and many others –(Interjection)- They are in the Bill.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, from what the Deputy Attorney-General is reading, he is saying that after the elections, you need to find out what happened so that you prepare for the next one. In short, you are auditing the exercise. How can you audit yourself? How can the Electoral Commission audit itself? That is what you want to do.

Therefore, for us to be safe, if we want to put a committee in place, it should be a committee independent of the Electoral Commission. If you make it independent, that would be the basis on which to nominate people who are not participating directly. I will give you an example. If the election was rigged in a certain place for somebody by the Electoral Commission, will he say that the elections were not rigged? The only person who would do that is maybe the observers or the independent persons- (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I thank hon. Mafabi for giving way. I would like to thank you, Madam Chairperson, for what you have just done - being on the dot - (Interjection) - Everyone knows what I am saying.

The purpose for which this electoral reform committee is being created is also to provide an avenue - First, let us first acknowledge that the issue -

You know, we interacted with all political parties on the same Bill. We also interacted with the Electoral Commission on the same. Electoral observers have written reports but these reports are never synthesized, never harmonized, for purposes of reforming the law. Therefore, if you want anything- (Interjection) - I thought we were friends. (Laughter) Basically, as the minister stated, subclause (2) of page 3 of the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill gives all the responsibilities, the functions, and it enumerates several of them. 

Therefore, saying that we need an independent committee shall be denying the fact that under Article 61 of the Constitution, the Electoral Commission enjoys the mandate to reform and have all election related matters be processed and handled by them. They are not going to reform per se by hearing petitions, like hon. Nandala was saying, - that elections have been bad, so what do we do? 

This electoral reform committee is a hybrid, which we have seen in other countries, and that would be in total response to the cries that even this Parliament has pushed ahead. We do not have a basis of having electoral reforms. Government takes forever to come up with some of these reforms.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Chairman, for the information. Madam Chairperson, if the Electoral Commission wants to form committees in-house, they are free. They can form finance committees, electoral committees, monitoring committees; whatever they want. What we want to put in the law here is to have a body looking at what they have done. If you were really good, you should have gone to South Africa, Tanzania or Kenya where they have what you call an electoral council. Their electoral councils have different people, not necessarily the Electoral Commission.

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, given that the Electoral Commission has the mandate to form their own committees and even make the Chairman of the Electoral Commission or the Secretary chair those committees and have whatever they want, we cannot provide this for them. 

Since this is an opportunity, we should now provide for one which should audit the process. When an election ends, they look at it. There have been court cases and judgments, like the presidential election one where issues were raised, they look at them. Eventually, they form laws that should deal with these issues. The only body that can move that process should be one that is independent of the Electoral Commission.

That is why I wanted to move an amendment that we either agree to delete or we create an electoral committee –(Interjection)– I have circulated my proposals; even your Attorney-General got copies. My witness is the chairman of the committee. You can access it on your iPads.

Madam Chairperson, there are two proposals. If we want to look at the exercise, I want to move an amendment that this should be a council like the one in Tanzania, South Africa and even in Kenya. It should be comprised of nine members, consisting of three members representing political parties in Parliament, two representatives from the civil society, one representative from religious organisations, one representative nominated from the Electoral Commission and one representative nominated from the security. I will tell you why; we need the security to be part of this because they are the ones who manage the process. This council should exist for a certain period. If they are there for say four years, after the four years expire, another team should be put in place, to avoid them becoming part and parcel of the exercise.

Madam Chairperson, I will go ahead to elaborate the functions, if I am allowed. The functions would be- 

    a) To promote free and fair elections; 
    b) To monitor the organization and conduct of the elections; 
    c) Conduct election audits during each election cycle; 
    d) Establish and enforce a code of conduct for the elections; 
    e) Develop good election practices and standards;
    f) Collaborate with any Government and non-government agencies for purposes of executing its mandate.

Madam Chairperson, the reason I am raising all this is so that we ensure that after elections, we should not go to sleep. We should find out what really happened so that we can prepare for the next one better. If there are laws to be made, this council or committee would be the one responsible for saying that we need to amend this law or we need to put in place this law, so that we can move together.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When you read this proposal of the committee, I think that it would fit in the administrative structure of the Electoral Commission. When you look at the composition, for example the representative of the Attorney-General, why should it be three people to represent the Attorney-General? If you go to the Electoral Commission, their proposal, which of course the committee rejected, was that four should represent the Electoral Commission. So, this would really fit in as one of the working committees within the Electoral Commission. There would be no need for us to have it as a parallel committee.

If the Electoral Commission feels that they do not have enough professionalism, then they can co-opt members onto some committees, so that they are able to make studies and various proposals of reforms to the ministry responsible. 

Madam Chairperson, the Electoral Commission has always been giving proposals to the Attorney-General and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. The problem has been with the ministry; that is why we delay. These laws should have been amended two or three years ago when you kept demanding for them. To me, the problem is not the Electoral Commission. 

If the Government continues behaving the way it has been behaving, it will not solve the problem because they will behave the same way they have been behaving -(Interjection)– I thought as chairman you would know this. They have always been receiving recommendations from the Electoral Commission but they take long to submit the Bills here. This Parliament has been demanding because after the elections, the Electoral Commission has always been making recommendations and giving them to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Attorney-General. However, their slowness is what has led us to bringing these laws when we are remaining with merely seven months to the electoral process.

This can serve well as a subcommittee of the Electoral Commission. If they have shortage of manpower or professionalism, they can co-opt. In that way, we would even be cutting costs and they would be making recommendations two or three years after elections to the ministry who would then definitely bring these matters early enough. They would do this two years before the elections so that we can make any necessary amendments to the electoral laws. 

Madam Chairperson, that is my proposal. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I will be inviting hon. Mawanda and hon. Aogon but before that, there is something I would like to say. For now, I am not talking about where the office should be but I have asked myself so many questions. When the observers bring me the reports, I receive them and then ask myself who I should give them to. You resend them to the Attorney-General who has already received a copy and there is silence. When you send them to the President, there is no answer. 

However, I also wanted to remind the House that in the Seventh Parliament, we attempted to review elections that had past, but there was such resistance on the Floor from the Government. The late Mwandha was presenting a report but it was such a battle for the Government to even listen to an evaluation. So, definitely, we need a body to evaluate the elections and make proposals early enough. I do not care where it is but this one may solve my problem of receiving things and I do not know where to send them. 
  
MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I just have one clarification for the Attorney-General and hon. Nandala-Mafabi. The Attorney-General was saying that this committee should submit its report of findings to the minister, but the Law Reform Commission is mandated to revise and advise in respect to reviewing laws. So, if we take the submission of the Attorney-General, why can’t this committee submit its report to the Law Reform Commission?

Regarding hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s amendment, in case we take your amendment, why don’t we include a member from the National Consultative Forum because this is a forum that handles matters of political parties? I thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I would like to appreciate the committee for having attempted to propose something close to what might be okay, but it is not okay. 

I will refer you to Article 61(1)(f) of the Constitution. The committee seems to suggest that constitutionally, the Electoral Commission is mandated to house these committees. However, when you read through the functions of the Electoral Commission, I do not see anything close to that; maybe somebody else has seen it. The closest would be Article 61(1)(f) of the Constitution, which says, “to hear and determine election complaints arising before and during polling”. That is all; it does not mention after. 

We are talking about issues of reform, complaints which need an independent body from the Electoral Commission. We cannot house this committee in the Electoral Commission. Often, people actually have cases against the Electoral Commission. How do you now handle this? It will be conflict of interest within the Electoral Commission. What do you do in that case?

I would think that it is better for us to maintain the status quo and we go back and think about this properly. If we are thinking about an independent committee, we need time to think through it; it is not a small thing. We need a serious committee and we must put enough thought into proposing it, so that we come up with something reliable. 

Somebody has talked about benchmarking in India and Pakistan; it does not mean that when we benchmark, whatever we benchmark is always true and correct. Those people need to come and benchmark from us because we are the ones who are going to do the right thing. I suggest that we uphold the status quo, because this thing needs enough thinking through, so that we get a better committee which will manage these processes. Thank you. 

MS NAUWAT: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am looking at the committee’s amendment in (h), where they mention the ministry and they have listed the categories of people in that ministry. We are aware that under that ministry, we also have the elderly, but they have not been captured. I would therefore like to propose that immediately after “workers”, we insert the word “elderly” so that they are also catered for under that ministry.   

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. We have three proposals now. There is the proposal in the Bill, which has been modified by the committee and then the proposal by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I would like to make a fourth proposal that all these functions that are listed here should be given to the National Consultative Forum, which actually is almost lacking work. 

The National Consultative Forum has representation from political parties, as you will see in the Political Parties and Organisations Act, but it is like a club; what does it do and where does it report? The failure by Government to process proposals from either court or the Electoral Commission itself – Madam Speaker, even in this cycle of elections, the Electoral Commission made proposals to you and appeared before the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. They said that they made proposals, which you never processed. 

The Government does not process reforms not because they have not been advised by many people. Madam Chairperson, you will remember even when the Interparty Organisation for Dialogue (IPOD) brought proposals here and all the parties were represented, the Government side came and disowned these proposals. In the last Parliament, they said that there was no time to process the proposals. 

Therefore, my proposal is to do away with all these committees. Just assign these functions to the National Consultative Forum and maybe we will need to change the law – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you are a member of the committee; are you now attacking your report?

MR SSEMUJJU: No, Madam Chairperson. There is a proposal by the Government that was just modified by the committee. There is another proposal by hon. Nandala-Mafabi, which the committee never processed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi is not a member of the committee; you are. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Yes; but he has brought a proposal which I never had the occasion to look at. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is smuggling. 

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Chair. I tend to be persuaded by the argument of hon. Nandala-Mafabi. The reason is that this seems to be an audit committee. Whereas hon. Ssemujju was proposing that we can have the National Consultative Council, my position is that it is composed of the very actors in the elections. We need an independent body that can audit the process and come up with a position that is neutral and good for the country. 

In line with that, I would propose that we think of including the Inter-Religious Council of Uganda among those institutions that hon. Nandala-Mafabi has proposed. This is a body that has been actively involved in making proposals for the improvement of our electoral process and regime in the country. 

I would not buy the idea of the committee, that this is about electoral reforms. If that were the case, then the Government would not have proposed the electoral reform commission to be represented in this body. Therefore, I do not think, right from the onset, that this was intended to be a body to suggest reforms. In my opinion, this seems to be a body that was intended to audit the process and ensure that we come out with a better election at the next round. 

MR OBOTH: I just wanted to seek clarification from hon. Othieno Okoth. This proposal was made to the committee –(Interjections)- It was made by the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC). Isn’t it an open secret that hon. Nandala-Mafabi is the Secretary-General of FDC? The proposal is quite elaborate. In the wisdom of the committee, we thought that this was going to affect the long title of the Bill. 

What is being proposed, and what we are now debating – the auditing of elections where political parties are involved - is purely a matter that I wanted to ask hon. Othieno about. If it is not about electoral reforms, would you still find that that housing could be in the Electoral Commission Bill? Under Articles 60, 61, 62, the Electoral Commission is an independent organ. You cannot introduce strangers under the same law to give guidance and direction to this body. What we are debating would require a separate legislative agenda –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I would not have loved to raise a point of order against my brother, the chairman of the legal committee, because unfortunately, I have to pass through Tororo before I go to Mbale. Independence in performance of work does not mean you are not accountable for your actions. I would like to be clear on that. 

Is the chairman of the legal committee, my brother, Oboth from Tororo, right to say that when you are independent, you should not be checked for all you are doing because the word is “independent”? Even if you steal, kill or lie, you are independent -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, what I understood the chairman to be saying is that this council will be creating a body not provided for under the Electoral Commission Act and not allowed by the Constitution. You are creating a different body to go into the Electoral Commission. I think that is what he was talking about.

MR OBOTH: That is a very brilliant ruling. You were actually listening and following. (Laughter) A presiding officer’s attention is known when she makes rulings. Hon. Ssemujju said this and I think hon. Okupa said it too. Any organ or body created under this law should be within the mandate of the Electoral Commission. 

Hon. Nandala, with due respect, what you have brought is a very good proposal, in my own understanding of the electoral process, but where do we find housing for it. Would it not be a matter that we can move to have – since we still have issues of electoral reforms - probably in an Act? We could introduce a Bill here to really take care of some of these things. 

Hon. Nandala, the group really researched - I want you to know that - but we found it difficult to put it under this housing. Finding a home for it was difficult – a secretariat, a council, with very hybrid ideas. I just wanted to say that for the record. 

MR ACIDRI: Thank you, Madam Chair. I have been following the debate and I have realised that we are all searching for an independent institution which can help us improve our electoral process because this indeed is a chronic problem that we have faced since the 1980s. 

I would like to support the proposal by hon. Nandala-Mafabi, especially if it can cure the problem of eventually having an independent Electoral Commission itself. We have heard people raising issues regarding the composition of the Electoral Commission as to whether, based on the process of appointment, it is independent. 

If the proposal to create an electoral reform committee is meant to address that challenge of having an independent commission, then we would rather go with hon. Nandala’s proposal of having a council. This is because the electoral reform committee as it is is not really going to deal with all the challenges that are perpetually raised by both local and international observers, and are normally raised by the commission itself. 

In line with the spirit of moving together in the East African Community – hon. Nandala-Mafabi says this is the practice in Kenya and Tanzania and after all, we are aiming at a political federation – why don’t we take the best practices from the EAC member states to help us improve our electoral process? I, therefore, endorse the proposal for a council. The housing and the composition is what we should deliberate on to finally address this problem of electoral deficiency in this country, which reflects very badly on our democracy. Thank you.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Chairperson, we are all in agreement that there is need to have such a committee to handle post-election issues that have always come up. It usually takes time, after a court ruling, for us to have reforms because entities charged with this responsibility do not treat such matters seriously.

Madam Chairperson, I was sharing an idea with the Attorney-General. While the Auditor-General is an officer of Parliament, we do not direct what the Auditor-General does and what goes on in that office. I wonder what powers they have. We could form a committee that can be housed in the Electoral Commission but with special powers to insulate it from the influence of the Electoral Commission. The challenge we have is that petitions normally implicate the Electoral Commission and it cannot run away from what goes on. At times, most of them are interested parties and so they influence the malpractice that goes on.

Madam Chairperson, we could agree on the composition. A colleague talked about having religious leaders on board. We have the elders’ council; the elders normally have their proposals, which at times are not taken. We cannot have four people from the Electoral Commission because it would be like having nearly the entire commission on that committee. 

We are also talking of having three people form the Attorney-General’s chambers. We need to note that the Attorney-General’s office has messed us up every day. If we had powers, we would not even have any representative from the Attorney-General’s office. On several occasions, they have misled us instead of leading us –(Interruption)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Chairperson, the argument of hon. Kibalya puts us in a very difficult position. This committee is supposed to be chaired by the Chairman of the Electoral Commission. The Secretary to the Electoral Commission is the secretary of this committee. Therefore, what are you talking about? What is the issue?

This is literally the Electoral Commission by another name, if we go by his argument. When you look at the composition, we simply cannot reconstitute another committee to evaluate the Electoral Commission chaired by the Chairman of the Electoral Commission and having the Secretary to the Electoral Commission as a member. We shall not be doing any good work. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR OUMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. All of us would want to see a very smooth electoral process. However, I think the issue here is a matter of law. The Electoral Commission, by law, is mandated to oversee all elections. 

When you look at Article 93 of the Constitution, as we are creating another body, it is going to have financial implications and that means this can only be moved by the Government. In the circumstances, I seek clarification from our learned friends; when we create this committee, is it going to exist by law or not?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal came from Government, under clause 1(2).

MR BYANDALA: Madam Chairperson, the electoral reform committee is good and necessary. What is contentious is where it should be housed. I find it very funny for the people who are the major actors in this to be heading this committee. They can have theirs internally. We do not need to have it in the law. Let them discuss their issues internally and come to this independent electoral reform committee. We should get it out of the law and create one that is not headed or administered by the Electoral Commission.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The scandal we had at Bank of Uganda was because the board and staff were one and the same. For us to have the Electoral Commission deciding its fate is bad.

Nevertheless, yesterday when we discussed the amendment on qualifications especially for chairpersons of town councils – brought in by my senior colleague, hon. Okupa – it brought issues. I would like to agree with hon. Silas Aogon. Although this thing is necessary, it is not urgent. Can we first leave the issue of having an independent committee or whatever it is called, for now? When we come in the next Parliament, the people who will come will handle this. It is very important but not urgent. Therefore, I request Members to accept to drop the proposal as moved by hon. Nandala-Mafabi and maintain the status quo. Thank you.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Chairperson, hon. Waluswaka says it is not important for us to discuss the formation of a committee when immediately after elections, there was a court ruling that said we are supposed to handle reforms. One of the ways for us to properly handle the coming elections is by having this body in place. Is hon. Waluswaka, therefore, in order to say this is not urgent and that we can form this committee after the elections?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Waluswaka, if you have been listening to the debate, the body is long overdue. I think we need to define the housing.

MR WALUSWAKA: The Chairperson has guided that the body is needed. However, in my view – You see hon. Okupa is laughing but yesterday, he caused tension in the whole country over the issue of qualifications. (Laughter)

Anyhow, I beg Members that instead of causing more tension – These people will be earning more money, and the Government announced that they will not create any other organisation or authority but now they are creating this one to siphon money. I request that we save the taxpayers’ money. Let us first stay the formation of this committee; we can return to it later. Thank you.

MR ONZIMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The need to have a committee handle electoral reforms is, I think, a very good idea. However, when you look at the composition and the housing, Electoral Commission is also a player in the electoral process since it handles elections. Therefore, there is no way Electoral Commission can house this body since it is the major body that manages elections.

Secondly, the composition given here indicates that there will be four members representing this committee. I feel that the number is too high. We are also saying a representative of political parties - I always see political parties failing to agree in the Inter-Party Organisation for Dialogue (IPOD). Most times, they disagree. Who is that particular individual that will represent the views of all the political parties? I see that there is a very serious challenge.

Madam Chairperson, when these views are brought forward, ideally there should be someone who can bring them here so that they can be formulated into law. Most times, the first priority is given to the Government. In my opinion, if this body is supposed to receive complaints, which are supposed to be translated into law in order to harmonise and make electoral process better, I think it could be housed within –

Madam Chairperson, it is the responsibility of Government to bring issues that should be translated into law. I, therefore, think this committee could be housed within the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. That is my submission.

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Madam Chairperson, I also support the proposal moved by hon. Nandala-Mafabi to establish a council that will be responsible for prescribing standards of the elections. It will have the following duties:

    1. Promote free and fair elections; 
    2.  Monitor the organisation and conduct of elections; 
    3.  Conduct election audits during each election cycle;
    4.  Establish and enforce a code for conduct for the elections;
    5.  Develop good election practices and standards; 
    6.  Collaborate with any Government and non-government agent for the purpose of executing this mandate.

I beg to submit, Madam Chairperson.

MS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I disagree with the proposal to establish the committee or council because of the reasons that I am about to mention.

Madam Chairperson, the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, specifically Articles 60, 61 and 62, talk about the independence of the Electoral Commission. Article 61, in particular, talks about functions of the Electoral Commission. When you look at the proposals that we are making, I see as if we are clashing with the Constitution as far as the independence and the functions of Electoral Commission are concerned.

The Electoral Commission is supposed to be independent and so, if we create another council or a committee, what shall we do as far as the independence of the Electoral Commission is concerned in delivering free and fair elections?

It is true that in every election, sometimes there are problems. However, I feel that some of these problems can be squarely addressed by some relevant laws like the Local Government Elections Act on issues to do with monitoring elections and election audits. Before we proceed, we should look at the Constitution, specifically Articles 60, 61 and 62 so that we can proceed well. Thank you.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I believe, in principle, that we need this committee or council; I think it is necessary. However, when you look deep into what we are struggling with, it is the issue of trust. 

If the Independent Electoral Commission was doing its work the way it ought to do, as an independent body, we would not be looking for these kinds of body. Whether we put what kind of organisation, as long as the efficiency and trust is not there and the ability to do what they are supposed to do independently, objectively and truthfully, we will never have any satisfaction.

Having said that, I have issues with the proposed composition. You have four people representing the Electoral Commission and one person representing the civil society organisations appointed by the Chairperson of the Electoral Commission, which I think is basically to take care of the interests of Electoral Commission, which I feel is not right. I would rather that we look into the responsibilities of the Law Reform Commission.

If we need to empower and strengthen the Law Reform Commission, probably we would give this mandate to them. Otherwise, I do not see what we will leave them with; it seems that we are taking away their responsibility instead of strengthening them and causing another cost centre elsewhere, in the name of this council that is proposed. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MS AKURUT: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. It looks like most of us are in agreement that we needed this council or committee yesterday.

Madam Chairperson, I think the point of departure is on the composition of the committee. We are making recommendations for including other bodies like Uganda Joint Christian Council. I wouldn’t wish that we have four representatives from the Electoral Commission to be in this council or committee.

If we are creating space to include other bodies, I think we need to discuss the composition of this council or committee. Madam Chairperson, I buy the proposal that we need to establish this committee or council but focus on its composition in terms of the membership so that we can move forward. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it is clear from the debate that in principle, there is agreement that we need this body. What we have not agreed on is the mandate, the composition and the housing. I would like to propose that we delete it for now. Let us get time to reflect and see whether we can find another home, not here. Is that okay? 

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2

MS ERAGU: Madam Chairperson, clause 2 of the Bill is amended by:
    (a) Inserting, immediately after the proposed sub-section (1a), the following new sub-section and renumbering the provision accordingly.

“(1b) Notwithstanding the general effect of sub-section (1a), the commission shall put in place a digital display system at every tallying centre on which the votes being tallied shall be displayed to the general public."
(b) In the proposed sub-section (1b), by substituting for the word “may” the word “shall”.
(c) By inserting a new sub-section, immediately after sub-section (1b), the following new sub-section:
“(1d) The statutory instrument referred to in sub-section (1c), shall be laid before Parliament for information.” 

Justification: 

(i) 	To require a display of votes being tallied to the general public. 
(ii) 	To require the laying before Parliament an instrument made by the minister. 
(iii)	To make the provision mandatory so that every time the Electoral Commission adopts new technology, the minister informs Parliament by laying the instrument in the House.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, we accept the proposal with amendment and propose to redraft it as follows: “(1b) Notwithstanding the general effect of sub section (1a) the commission shall put in place a digital display system at every tally centre for the presidential, general parliamentary and district chairperson elections to display the votes being tallied in the general election.”

What is proposed by the committee is wide because they are talking of a display system for all elections including local council elections, which is nearly very expensive and not practicable.

For example, in the coming elections we have 400,000 women council elections so you are saying that we should have tally centres for such positions at every polling station?

However, if it were for presidential, parliamentary which is 456 positions or LCV district chairperson that would be practicable.

The Electoral Commission will put in place a digital display for vote tallying at vote tallying centre for presidential, general parliamentary and district chairpersons elections only as this can be done within their currently approved budget.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What you are adding is not in your amendment.

MS ERAGU: Madam Chairperson, the amendment restricts to only presidential, general parliamentary, and district chairpersons.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is that proposal?

MS ERAGU: Our proposal is not in this one.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I think we are now trying technology and we cannot do it piecemeal, we should give a real drug. That is why the display is what they do at that time.

However, it starts from how biometric is done, how you vote, how the results have been counted and displayed, this technology must also be known to the users. That is the public, voters, candidates and the stakeholders in this exercise.

I would like to make an amendment so that it will take care of even what we are talking about that is the use of technology and it should be integrated.

A proposal on use of technology; the subheading will be, “Use of technology:

(1) 	Subject to this section there shall be established by Electoral Commission an integrated, electoral system that enables a biometric voter registration, electronic voter identification and electronic transmission of results.

(2) 	The commission shall for purposes of sub section (1) develop a policy on the progressive use of technology in the electoral process because it changes every day.

(3) 	The commission shall ensure that the technology in use under subsection (1) is simple, accurate, verifiable, secure, accountable and transparent.

(4) 	The commission shall in an open and transparent manner – 
(a) 	procure and put in place the technology necessary for the conduct of a general election at least 120 days before such an election;
(b) 	test, verify and deploy such technology at least 60 days before a general election.

(5) The commission shall for purposes of this section and in consultation with relevant agencies, institutions, stakeholders including political parties, make regulations for the implementation of this section and in particular a regulation providing for -
(a) 	the transparent acquisition, disposal of information and communication technology assets and systems, testing and certification of the system; 
(b) 	mechanisms for the conduct of a system audit, data storage and information security, data retention and disposal, access to electoral system software codes, capacity building of staff of the Electoral Commission and the relevant stakeholders on the use of technology and electoral process;
(c)	the communication network for voter validation and result transmission, development, publication and implementation of disaster recovery and operation community plan;
(d)	the operations of the technical committee established under subsection (7)” - which we are going to say there will be a technical committee because we are trying to say that we shall establish a technical committee which I am going to put down.

“(6) 	The commission shall prepare and submit to Parliament the regulations required under sub section (4) within a period of 30 days from the date of commencement of the section.

(7) 	To establish a technical committee to deal with this matter.”

Madam Chairperson, I am bringing this because technology should not be at the tail end; it should be from the beginning and should be integrated, where every user or stakeholder knows what is happening. It should be simple and accurate. If we do that, then the next display, which the committee is proposing, will be simple and easy.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Before I go to hon. Nsereko, can I ask either the chairperson or the minister; in the presidential election, where is the tallying centre? How many tallying centres are we talking about? Is it every subcounty? Is it every parish? I would like to know that.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This august House would have done her country a favour to adopt the use of technology, bearing in mind that certain areas are not covered by technological access or with this infrastructure.

However, it is of a huge advantage in the progress of the electoral process that we adopt it but not to adopt it only at the tail end. We can adopt the use of technology from display of the register. You would ably be here and if, for example, you have your National Identification Number (NIN), you use a short code, like the one used the other time. You would simply type the slot code and know where you registered and the actual polling station where you will have to access it.

As regards the register for political parties and organisations, they should be given an electronic copy of the register and also another gateway where their member can access. For example, if a party has a register, it is easy to correlate the particulars of maybe your nominee with that of the national register.

Therefore, we need this integration in such a way that we embrace technology, not only at the tail-end but also the beginning. So, I largely support the view of –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you a member of the committee?

MR NSEREKO: But this is an amendment, Madam Chairperson. I am a member and I admit but –

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, have you moved away from the committee proposal?

MR NSEREKO: Someone has a good amendment, Madam Chairperson. It was not presented there. (Laughter) Madam Chairperson, I will sit down –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Chair –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Under what rule?

MR SSEMUJJU: Under rule 201, we are not supposed to debate our own report. Under rule 133, when we are at committee stage handling a Bill, we are actually allowed, Madam Chairperson. So, the procedural issue I am raising is whether committee members should be stopped from participating, yet the rules of processing Bills in committee stage, specifically rule 133, allows every member to participate? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you are debating the report now. The amendments arose from the report. I asked you a question which is relevant to this one.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, you asked about the number of tallying centres. Each district has a tally centre, which would make a total of around 135 and then one central tally centre manned by the Electoral Commission here in Kampala.

However, if we are to go per sub-county – if we are to have a tally centre at the sub-county to cater for all the parish elections, that would be impracticable. 
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like you to join me in welcoming teachers from Orimai Primary School in Soroti. Are you the ones? Stand up. They are represented by hon. Esiangu and hon. Osegge. You are welcome. (Applause)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Chairperson, I have looked at the proposal and I think we are stretching a little bit too much when we say “digital”. My understanding is that if the reading is to be accepted, we would put a bar, of which we require a standard for the Electoral Commission to abide by. We want a public display of the tallying process.

The Electoral Commission should devise means because technology keeps changing. Today, you are digital, the next day you are electronic and the next day you are going quantum. You do not even know what will be there in the next ten years down the road. 

Therefore, if we are to make a law that will endure, let us put a standard that we require and say, “Notwithstanding the general effect of sub-section (1a), the Commission shall” – because we are now removing the word “may” – “put in place a display system at every tallying centre on which the votes being tallied shall be displayed to the general public.”

Now –(Interjection)– let me first make the argument and then I will allow the information. Madam Chairperson, this will require that the Electoral Commission should, at any time, procure the necessary system, which shall ensure that this is done efficiently. If we restrict ourselves to this word “digital”, they may use something else and it is more efficient.

The argument that the Attorney-General is bringing is that it is not doable, even at lower government. District chairpersons are elected the same day with councillors and they are normally announced at the district tallying centre. Even councillors and chairpersons of sub-county lower governments are announced at the same tallying centre.

Therefore, one system that has worked for the presidential and parliamentary elections will work for the lower governments. So, his argument does not, in any way, hold here, that it is because they are so many. It is the same equipment you put in place and the period is normally not far along apart. After two weeks or a few days, we elect the local government.

The Electoral Commission will procure one system that shall work for presidential and parliamentary elections on the same day and then work for the district. The same equipment will then work for the lower government elections. So, your argument is not true that resource-wise, they will be constrained.

Therefore, the bar we want to put here, Madam Chairperson, is that they should device a system that gives us an output that enables the public to know exactly what is taking place. If it is digital that is appropriate let them adopt that. If it is electronic and is appropriate, let them adopt that. However, for us to be so strict and say “digital” we will be stretching it a little far.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Supposing they say “technological display”, would that help?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Yes, technological display.

THE CHAIRPERSON: If we do not qualify it, they can put a kipande there and start writing –(Laughter)– because that will be a display.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, we have had troubles with technology, more so when we talk about “digital”. Kenya tried some of these things and they had problems. United States of America has had problems and I think the problem we have now is the timing. How can we bring such a law when we are left with only something like nine months to an election? Don’t you think we are going into chaos?

Therefore, I really think that what we want is good; the spirit is good and welcome. However, we need to rethink the timing. Otherwise, we shall mess up the whole thing and we shall be in a quagmire as a country.

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think what hon. Aogon is raising does not hold. I would like to inform the House that out of the overall money that the Electoral Commission needs to run the 2021 elections, that is Shs 864 billion, Shs 115 billion is towards the acquirement of this. Therefore, if we do not have a proper law, we are going to see what Madam Chairperson was talking about – kwarakwara; this is from hon. Nandala and I am borrowing words from him. (Laughter) “Kwarakwara” means something which is fake, like fake technology.

Therefore, this is a lot of money. Shs 115 billion is not little money and as such we need a law that will help us come up with something which is good - which will not only be used at presidential and parliamentary elections but will also go down and help others -(Interjection) - No, I was not giving information; I was given my time -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please make your proposal.

MS LUCY AKELLO: My proposal is that let us come up with this law which will help us to use this technology well. Thank you, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I wish that we now address real proposals of what should be said and not the ideas.

MS PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. First of all, I would like to appreciate hon. Muwanga Kivumbi for letting us know that when we restrict ourselves to digital, we may reach a point where we are missing something.

Therefore, my proposal is that we need to specify digital in (a) but also the Electoral Commission must come up with a system that must be fully packaged so that you have alternative (a) and (b) - (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Nsamba. Madam Chairperson, if this can help because we are trying to get the word about display, can’t we use the word like “electronic” display because that is broader? If we say “digital” it is limited but electronic encompasses even the digital. Therefore, it would be based on that. That is the information.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you very much, hon. Okupa. For us here as Parliament we may not be conclusive on that. But what we need from them is to present to the country, “This is how we will be displaying the results at the tally centre”. They will tell us that we have (a) digital, (b) - even to the point of using the kwarakwara things –(Laughter)– even to the point of using the boards and the pen. It can also work in instances where technology has failed or where there are power outages or any other excuse.

Madam Chairperson, my request is that we give the Electoral Commission to present to the country a system on how they will be displaying and not being specific on -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us now just address what word to use and we move on.

MR KIBALYA: The chairman will summarise some of these things. He is also participating in our debate. He should wait for us to debate and then he comes in to summarise. However, he is becoming an active member in debating.

Madam Chairperson, we agree that we require electronic display because it will save very many things. On most of these occasions during tallying at the tally centre, you see people seated and feeding in the computers and then somebody comes with a paper and begins to read and you see people disputing. However, if somebody is adding and we are seeing this board showing in and out, it will give confidence to the people at the tally centre. We have enough time.

Madam Chairperson, you have just completed the CPC conference and procured this equipment for the camera and screens where at every centre in every room people were watching what was going on. This is a Government that has time to purchase some of this equipment to make sure that they can properly display this information.

The only thing I wish to bring in is that we are fond of people fighting for procurement and making a deal out of this. Maybe this time, we need to have a law that if somebody is involved in this procurement and he brings in equipment that is shoddy and will shut on the first day or after inputting the first information, somebody should be held individually responsible for this.

This time we should have people responsible for what goes on. Otherwise people will fight for procurement, bring in screens because they have got a deal and the screen shows the first information for the first one hour and it shuts down and then we begin going manual again.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have agreed that we have left the manual system and we are no longer manual. Therefore, among the words “digital”, “electronic” or “technological” which is the best to describe where we want to go. That is all we are looking for. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I would like to agree with your guidance and for information of members, when I get up, it is not that I am debating; we are processing this Bill and it is my responsibility as a committee chairperson to help the process.

The choice of “digital”, “electronic” or using “technology”, the digital and electronic are all part of technology. I would suggest if members agree that we go with “electronic display” that would cover technological and everything so that we move on, with this Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, the proposal is that we delete the word “digital” and substitute the word “electronic” in the proposal. Is that okay? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then the next one is between the committee’s amendment and what the minister proposed. What does the committee say about that? That presidential, parliamentary - chairman?

MS ERAGU: Madam Chairperson, we have no problem with that one. We accept.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Chairperson, just for information: I have explained here that literally you need to set up over 100 at district level in terms of infrastructure to handle all the levels of elections. The display system you will install for presidential and parliamentary elections on the same day, it will be the same display system that will work when you are electing district official - both chairpersons and councillors. It will be the same system that will be used when electing sub- county chairpersons and councillors.

Therefore, you will not even incur an extra cost in terms of procurement of the infrastructure because all these official results are declared at the district tally centres.

MR OBOTH: The committee had that in mind and this Member of Parliament who represents people who grow mairungi is thinking in the right direction. At first, the minister was thinking like others - that it would be with additional costs. But when you look at this, you will have one computer or a display and all results are tallied at the district.

Therefore, the committee’s proposal is that every tally centre -we should now reject the minister’s proposal and we maintain that of the committee and we move on.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I had raised amendments. So do I have to bring them as another sub-clause or -

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do they say about the amendments?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the amendment in the Bill is about the minister. They say, “The minister, in consultation with the Commission, by statutory instrument, shall make regulations….” They are saying “in consultation with the Commission.” I think it should be “in consultation with all the stakeholders.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, are you going to invite 500 parties to sit down with the Commission and design an instrument? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, Madam Chairperson, I want the stakeholders to be Parliament and so, the amendment reads in part:  “…with approval of Parliament.” If you say you are bringing it to Parliament for information then, they have nothing to do. When it comes to Parliament, the parliamentarians will put their input. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We will adjust later. Let us move honourable members. 

Members, I put the question that clause 3 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8

MS ERAGU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 8: Amendment of section 30 of the principal Act. Clause 8 is amended by –

(a) 	substituting subsection (1) with the following: “(1) The Commission shall, by notice in the Gazette, appoint a returning officer and an assistant returning officer for each electoral district and for elections for special interest groups and the person appointed shall be a person of high moral character and proven integrity.”

(b) Inserting immediately, after paragraph (a), the following new paragraph and renumbering the provision accordingly. (b) by inserting, immediately after subsection (1) the following: “(1a) Notwithstanding subsection (1), the Commission may, by notice in the Gazette, appoint a returning officer and an assistant returning officer for a municipality, city division or any other area in an electoral district as the Commission determines necessary.”

(c)	By substituting for paragraph (e), the following: By substituting for subsection (3) (a), the following – “(a) has been adversely mentioned in an election petition judgement to have participated in election irregularities, illegal practices or participated in the commission of an election offence.”

Justification

    a) To require, in the appointment of returning officers and assistant returning officers, that, the persons appointed have integrity and are morally upright.

    b) To allow the Commission appoint a returning officer and an assistant returning officer for a municipality, city division or any other area in an electoral district, since some areas like Wakiso and divisions in Kampala have a high population density that require the appointment of such officers to ease the burden of administering elections in those areas.

    c) To require the removal of a returning officer, where such a person participated in election irregularities or illegal practices or participated in the commission of an election offence.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, we are okay with the other proposed amendments save for the proposed amendment in (c), which says, "By substituting for sub-section (3)(a), the following: (a) has been adversely mentioned in an election petition judgement to have participated in election irregularities, illegal practices or participated in the commission of an election offence.” We reject that proposal. 

The proposed amendment requiring the removal of a returning officer, who has been adversely mentioned in an election petition judgement to have participated in election irregularities or illegal practices or participated in the commission of an electoral offences would defeat the essence of the constitutional presumption of innocence by condemning a person as guilty without being heard or without being proven in any trial by a competent court. This is unconstitutional and such action by the Commission may lead to legal action against it. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to oppose the argument moved by the honourable Deputy Attorney-General; I support the committee’s proposed amendment. 

Madam Chairperson, you heard of hon. Mawanda’s case and what he went through. It was because of the misbehaviour of some of the officials. I think the proposal by the committee is a well-thought one. It will instil discipline and reduce on the number of court cases and costs. I would like to call on the members to support the committee’s proposed amendment.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I served you notice to bring an additional amendment to clause 8, which is to insert, immediately after subsection (6) the following – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Did you circulate it? 

MR MAWANDA: Yes. I gave you a copy and even the chairperson got one. You acknowledged receipt, Madam Chairperson. My proposed amendment says: “Where in any election petition, court finds the Commission to have committed an election irregularity or an illegal practise and awards compensation to the successful party, the returning officer, who is found to be personally liable for that election irregularity or illegal practise, shall pay a portion of the compensation as may be determined by court.”

The justification to ensure returning officers comply with electoral laws in performing their duties by imposing an obligation on a returning officer who is found to be personally liable for the commission of an election irregularity, or illegal practice to pay a portion of the compensation imposed on the Electoral Commission as maybe determined by court.

Madam Chairperson, when we were debating the Bill, I indicated that in my case, after the elections, the returning officer had the right results but they wanted him to read the wrong results and he refused. They brought another returning officer from another electoral area, who read the wrong results. That is why I went to court and finally won the case.

Therefore, we would like a person who will be misled to know that if he does so, he will personally pay the costs. I think that will deter them from making that mistake.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, join me in welcoming a delegation in the VIP Gallery from the National Assembly of Namibia. We have Mr John Shimaneni- Acting Deputy Clerk, Mr Efraim James- Director, Specialised Service, Ms Lydia Indombo- Director General, Finance and Administration and Ms Theresa Philemon - Chief Parliamentary Clerk, Committee Services. You are welcome. They are here on attachment.

Honourable members, I wanted the committee to explain the words “adversely mentioned”. You know, I can say this person is a bad person, that is adverse but does it mean you have condemned me? You are commenting on me but have you convicted me when you say I am a bad person? I wanted to understand the use of the words “adversely mentioned”.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, we have had cases; election petitions and you find a returning officer is found to be culpable and sole cause of the mess in the electoral process. Whereas the law, as it is now, says that if they find the returning officer culpable, they can either condemn that person or criminal charges could be preferred, we have not had any. 

Therefore, this is purely to make sure that those who have been found adversely - Here we are saying, it must have really been demonstrated that he is responsible and liable for the mess. If there is a better word, we can put it there. The members here can help the committee to modify that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I was wondering, if you use the words “found culpable” instead of “adversely mentioned” -

MR OBOTH: Yes, we could adopt that. The Attorney-General’s duty is to protect those public officers until they will get him one day. (Laughter)

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, I do understand that my colleague had issues with returning officers, especially for the primary elections and that might be reflected in his argument.

Madam Chairperson, my bigger concern is this; there is such a thing as the presumption of “innocence”. Whereas a Judge sitting in a petition may make mention of either nonfeasance or misfeasance of a particular electoral official somewhere, that official has not been brought before court. He has not had the chance to examine his accusers and we are here making a law condemning that person to pay. Won’t it then be challenged or aren’t we making a law that goes against the provision of innocence under Article 28(3)(a)?

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have listened to the submission of the Attorney-General and in his capacity, I want to believe that when the committee says somebody is “adversely mentioned” it has been as a result of a due court process. I do not think someone would just go in the newspapers or TV and mention this. It should have been a thorough due process where somebody is held culpable. What more would we need to prove that somebody played a role in undermining the electoral process?

Personally, when I listen to hon. Mawanda’s proposal, it does not allocate commensurate responsibility. When you say a “portion” I would rather hear a percentage of the total costs that have been awarded. Therefore, I seek clarification.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Chairperson of the Education Committee. The information I want to give is, there are cases where you have emerged a winner - For example, it took three days to pronounce me as the winner. I had to call my bad boys to come and threaten and they had to break the fence. 

Therefore, instead of saying a “portion” we say “100 per cent”. That is why in NRM for transparency, we are going to line up. 

Therefore, these people should be held responsible so that they know that when they declare a wrong result, they are held responsible.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this matter involves the third arm; the Judiciary. Therefore, we cannot really determine for them the proportion and what the compensation will be. That is their work.

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, if we made a law that prescribes what should be done, I would imagine that the Judiciary would work according to that.

For me, it is not just about defining the portion but there should also be an alternative punishment. If it is imprisonment, it should be the number of years that are commensurate to the fine.

MR MUGOYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think we need to move –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, the rule regarding the dress code in Parliament is well known. The honourable gentleman who has just sat, in a wrong place moreover - When we read our rules, his dress code does not fit the description of the dress code for Members of Parliament. Is he in order to come dressed casually and speak in Parliament? I remember we chased hon. Centenary when he came dressed in that form.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you are not visible. 

MS AKURUT: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We were talking about either court judgement or orders, for example, some of us were in court and at the end of the day even when we won the cases, we were not awarded damages, instead we were awarded the court fees. 

Now, in a situation where we are saying we get some of these returning officers culpable in these malpractices, yet at the end of the day the petitioner is not awarded damages. Maybe your name has been tainted that you actually lost the elections or you could have stolen when actually you did not, how can we address that here since we are amending this law at this stage? In addition, this would help so that at the end of the day petitioners should be awarded damages for the malpractices that go in elections. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We cannot legislate on that; that is the work of the court.

MR KASULE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In all forms and practice, employees are protected by the law itself. Yes, the law itself protects its employees as long as they are doing the duty as assigned to them.

Secondly, when we go to petitions, the electoral officials are not given hearing unless that petition makes sure that the electoral officials are called to defend themselves –(Interruption)     

MR OBOTH: The returning officers we are talking about here would be those – any election petition where there is a petition and he is talking about the quality and irregularities pointing out a returning officer or electoral officer, the officer will be mentioned by the petitioner. That officer mentioned by the petitioner under the rules will be able to swear or make an affidavit. So, it is upon the affidavit if it is necessary he will be cross-examined and if it is not necessary that is the basis upon which the judge will be able to make the findings. 

So, you cannot go for somebody who is innocent and that is not the kind of person we are talking about. We are talking about the person who has been in thick and thin of electoral process and he has been involved.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, when there is such an exception, then it is allowed. Once somebody has been called to the petition and he has the right to defend his or her self then I think that it is administered. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, if you are familiar with the cases, it is always so and so versus the returning officer. It is the returning officer who is always the party; you cannot have a petition without electoral officer.

MS KUNIHIRA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I pray that we don’t legislate for ourselves. I agree the returning officers can make errors but take a full district where a returning officer just sits and waits for results, working with other individuals. Yes, the returning officer does not work alone and he cannot be everywhere in the district. So, my prayer is that let the burden and responsibility remain to the institution. Every institution makes errors and therefore, they are held responsible. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Attorney-General, can you leave the chair to listen to the member’s submission because I am referring to him. Stop disturbing the chair. Hon. Oboth was very clear when he made a clarification here. So, the honourable member representing the workers, we know you represent the workers but the chairperson has made it clear that the officer mentioned in the judgement is what is referred to. It is not just from the blue that you are going to mention the returning officer and you will be penalised.

In the amendment of the committee, I don’t think that they have mentioned that the officer named is going to be fired from the job. I would like to agree with the amendments of the committee because of the experiences. We had a case in Serere District when they were recruiting the past supervisors, information came that there were issues regarding the recruitment. So, when we called for the meeting having got information, she had burnt all the applications of the members to kill the evidence of who had applied because they had wanted to smuggle in names of the people who had not applied and had not done interviews. Of course, these were mentioned in court. I think that is what the chairperson is referring to. If it is such a case, how do you expect that person to really continue working? 

She even admitted in the meeting that she burnt them because she did not need them. Those are the types of people if mentioned in court, should be dealt with because they are the ones who cause the Government and taint the name of the Electoral Commission.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, for the comfort of the members, we are dealing with section 30 of the Electoral Commission Act. Appointment of returning officers and what we are dealing with is sub-clause (3) of the section. It reads: “The commission may by notice in the gazette remove from office any returning officer, where the returning officer has ….” So, this is just one of the areas where the Electoral Commission can remove if the person has been – not just waking up and chasing them. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to give a live example. I don’t know why the Attorney-General is really panicking. If you make a law to allow criminals to thrive, they will thrive. The law we are trying to make - because many of these people know that the person who suffers the burden is the tax payer. So, he says “even if I commit a crime, the tax payer will pay” and that is where we are having a lot of problems in electoral process. 

However, if somebody knows that he will pay, he will do the right thing. They will be sanctioned and I would like the Attorney-General for the first time to agree that you have been one of those who suffered those and now because you have crossed do not turn around and you have suffered twice. 

So, I would like to say that what hon. Mawanda has brought is good but they might not be able to pay and we should put also something to do with imprisonment. Madam Chairperson, in the National Audit Act, where we were with my brother hon. Kasule, he knows that we said that if we get an auditor on the wrong side, he/she goes for 12 years; there is no paying because she/he could have stolen enough to pay. So they straight away go to prison. 

For Electoral Commission, we are saying they should pay, but we should also put there imprisonment and the imprisonment should be for at least 10 years -(Interjection)- yes, to deter people we must – why should he steal an election? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you please address the amendment?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like to amend that a person shall be made to pay whatever amount set or imprisonment for not more than 10 years. 

The justification is to deter this bad practice among presiding officers. 

MR OSHABE: Madam Chair, from what you have read to us from the parent law, you have indicated that this one is about removing somebody from office. 

What hon. Mawanda is bringing is a punishment to a returning officer who has been involved in election malpractices. 

I am wondering how we are going to marry the two, because the one for the committee is intended to remove somebody from office, and the other one we are looking to cure a mischief, what must be done to this person who is a midwife who chooses to kill the baby.

The procedural issue I am raising is, how are we going to marry the two, Madam Chair?

THE CHAIRPERSON: We do not have to marry them. (Laughter) Let us first go to the committee proposal, can we find the right word?

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chair, I wish to propose a redrafting. Instead of talking of “has been adversely mentioned”, I would like to propose that it reads as follows, “Has been found guilty by a competent court to have participated in election irregularities, illegal practices or participated in a commission of an electoral offence”

There we can even prescribe – 

MR OGUZU: I think the proposal by the Attorney-General is not commensurate to the issue we would like to address. The impression he is giving is that this person was taken to court for a criminal case and is now found guilty. 

What we are saying here is that you have been engaged in aiding malpractice in elections and the courts have found that there was a malpractice. 

So, it is not a case of this petitioner against the returning officer but the challenge is the electoral process in which the returning officer is involved. Therefore, the person must be found culpable. We are not going to prove guilt in this case as if it is a criminal case. Thank you. 

MR KIBALYA: Madam Chair, the situation that has been existing, the Electoral Commission is faulted on this, they say there was malpractice and it was done by the returning officer who is representing the Electoral Commission in that area. They say because of this, they cancel the election. 

What has been happening, the Electoral Commission withdraws its officer from that side. They either bring that person to the head office or transfer them to another centre. 

This is what we want to cure. We want to hold that returning office responsible. The cover of hiding in the Electoral Commission as a body should be removed. We want that person thoroughly held responsible for that and we prescribe a punishment. 

This is the situation some of us went through. We went to the extent of bringing a mattress for the returning officer who wanted to hide because we had got information that he had received his “thing” and he was looking for the shortest way to announce – because the other person told him, “Announce him and the rest would be sorted in court”.

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Thank you, hon. Kibalya. Madam Chair, I have listened to submissions by members, hon. Sebunya has gone away, hon. Waluswaka is here, I do not think that this law is about those registrars or organisation that should be protected over illegalities or fraud. 

When you say the law protects workers who are performing duties on behalf of the organisation, there is no organisation – I would like to believe – even the Electoral Commission does not deploy returning officers to organise a fraudulent election.  Therefore, nobody should be talking about workers being protected there. 

The issue here, like hon. Kibalya is saying, we do not want to keep mobilising mattresses all over Uganda to ensure that the people who are charged with our elections announce the right results. We are trying to cure the problem. So let someone be aware that there are dire consequences.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you propose the right words that we should use?

Before I go there, honourable chair of the committee, I do not know why you are removing (3)(a) and substituting it, because (3)(a) is a requirement to notify by the Gazette, someone who has left office. I do not know why you are removing that and substituting with this one of punishment. You may have wanted to add but I do not think you should remove (3)(a).

MR OBOTH: (3)(a); since the appointment of the returning officer is also by Gazette – I think they publish in the Gazette – I think that it could have been an oversight on our part to interfere with that. Even the removal should be –  

Honourable members, how about if it read like this? “Has been found in an election petition judgment to have participated in election irregularities, illegal practices or participated in the commission of an election offence.” 

Madam Chair guided, when you look at section 30 of the Electoral Commission, to provide instances upon which the Electoral Commission would remove this person. 

When we put this, this would be one of the grounds. As we speak now, Electoral Commission has no power to remove these people. Let me look at the secretary of the electoral commission -(Laughter)- they do not. They keep on recycling them from Sironko to Igara, to Kyenjonjo and other parts where they are not known. 

This is being orderly. We are not targeting any Electoral Commission officer or any returning officer; we want to bring sanity.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I heard the reading of the first and I think you deliberately put it for a good cause. Committee chairperson, I think there is a problem - even in what you are submitting - because I have the benefit of keeping in the company of learned people. I would like to inform you to be careful with the wordings of the Attorney-General. 

Electoral matters are on the principle of balance of probability – something like that. In these matters, even if you are found to have given a bribe, the reason you cannot be imprisoned is because of that principle of balance of probability.

The drafting of the Attorney-General is aware of that principle. If you follow his wordings, no official will ever be found guilty by the stretch of that principle. He is taking advantage – that we do not know that principle. Therefore, by moving that way, under the law, you will never catch anybody. That is what I wanted to inform you about.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us get the right words and move, please. 

MR OBOTH: I would like to agree that what the Attorney-General is saying does not apply. All we needed was to have it that if it has been mentioned in an election petition that this man or woman was negligent or biased - When the judges know this law exists, they will make such recommendations. They do not go for criminal prosecutions. No, we are not going to take them that way.

MR OGUZU: Madam Chairperson, can I make a comment that we should use the word “contributed” – “… a returning officer who has contributed to any irregularity which is proven…” because contribution can be in many ways.

MR OBOTH: Now you want to measure the percentage of contribution. In law, there is what we call negligent contribution – it could be 40 per cent, 50 per cent – We are proposing that the words could be redrafted to read, “Has been found in an election petition judgment to have participated in election irregularities, illegal practices or participated in the commission of an election offence.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is better. Honourable members, there is something I would like the Attorney-General to do before we take this. You know the Government wanted to repeal sub-section (3)(a) but you cannot repeal it because it is applicable. You still need to notify the country if you have removed somebody from some place and appointed him somewhere else. Therefore, subsection (3)(a) should be there. 

Now, we introduce a new subsection after subsection (3)(a) –Honourable members, we retain sub-section (3)(a) and then introduce the amendment proposed by the chairperson of the committee.

I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, the issue of hon. Mawanda – of compensation, do we leave it? Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 30, as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 30, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, under clause 9, what they are trying to do is to remove it from being published in the gazette. In fact from the notice to be published, they do not want to publish the appointment in the gazette.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, the power to appoint has been given to the Electoral Commission. It was removed from the returning officer. It is now the Electoral Commission to appoint. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 9 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10 agreed to.

Clause 11

MS ERAGU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. There is an amendment to clause 11. We propose to amend section 33 of the principle Act. We are deleting clause 11. The justification is that the proposal to remove the timeline is likely to affect the effective notification of the public as to the location of polling stations as well as places where the voters’ registers are to be displayed.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, we reject the committee’s proposal. Instead, we would rather reduce the number of days from 60 to 30 – the days within which to publish the list of places at which voters’ registers and the list of polling stations are required to be displayed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t you read your amendment into what you are saying, properly, so that we can catch it? What are you proposing?

MR KAFUUZI: “The commission shall, within 30 days, publish in the gazette -”

THE CHAIRPERSON: They are proposing 30 days instead of deleting it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, at least a register should be displayed. What the Electoral Commission wanted is to say “as practicable”. Therefore, they might say it is not practicable to display the register. For us to have a register displayed we must have a timeline and the register must be displayed at every polling station.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, do you agree with the minister’s proposal? The committee wanted to delete it altogether.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We should say the register shall be displayed at every polling station –

THE CHAIRPERSON: … within 30 days?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No. If it is within 30 days, even one day to the election is within. Madam Chairperson, I would like to move an amendment that the Electoral Commission shall display the register 30 days to an election. 

The justification is to enable people to know where their names are and where they are going to vote from. 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This clause is very important; we cannot delete it. I think we even need more than 30 days. If possible, it should be 60 days. Voters should have ample time to check their names on the register.

The on-going voters’ register display – there are so many people who have not participated in the verification and display. We, therefore, people need ample time to crosscheck their names to ensure they are present in the voters’ register. I propose 60 days because 30 days are not enough. Thank you.

MS NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, this is the amendment; The Commission shall, not later than 60 days before the date of the general election, open the voters’ register for the verification of biometric data by members of the public at their respective polling stations, for a period of 60 days.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t we revert to the proposal in the principle Act, which says 60 days?

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, we concede to what is in the principle Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is no amendment to that clause. Let us go back to the principle Act, which says 60 days.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have a new clause to insert. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: On clause 11? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Madam Chairperson. I would like to insert a new clause to enforce technology and it reads, “Subject to Section (12), the Electoral Commission shall establish an integrated electronic system that enables biometric voter registration, electronic voter identification and electronic transmission of results.”

The justification is to enable the Electoral Commission to integrate new technology.

Under the same clause, I would like to move as follows: “The Commission shall ensure that the technology in use, under subsection (1), is simple, accurate, verifiable, secure, accountable and transparent.”

The justification is that the technology that will be applied should be simple so that everyone can know. 
My next proposal reads: “(1) The Commission shall, in an open and transparent manner -  (a) procure and put in place the technology necessary for the conduct of a general election at least 120 days, before such an election; and (b) test, verify and deploy such technology at least 60 days before a general election.”

Madam Chairperson, the technology to be applied should be in place and tested to enable people agree to it.

Accordingly, I propose this: 

“(1) The Commission shall, for purposes of this section and consultation with relevant agencies, institutions and stakeholders, including the political parties, make regulations for the implementation  of this section and in particular the regulation providing for –

    (a) The transparent acquisition and disposal of information and communication  technology  assets and systems;
    (b)  Testing and certification of the system; 
    (c)  Mechanism for the conduct of a system audit;
    (d)  Data storage and information security; 
    (e)  Data retention and disposal;
    (f)  Access to electoral systems  software’s  source codes;
    (g)  Capacity building for staff of the Commission and relevant stakeholders on the use of technology in the electoral process;
    (h)  Telecommunication network for the voter validation and result transmission; 
    (i)  Development, publication and the implementation of a disaster recovery and operations of continuity plan;
    (j)   A technical committee to be established under section (6);

    (1)  The Commission shall prepare and submit to Parliament the regulations required, made under subsection (4), within a period of 30 days from the date of the  commencement of this section; and

    (2)  They shall establish a technical committee.

Madam Chairperson, since we are moving towards technology, everyone needs to know what is taking place; garbage in, garbage out. It would be important, if we are going to embrace technology, to have a system, which is verifiable. A system that can be audited and store dates since someone can destroy data and claim that there is nothing.

Also, we should have a policy on how to deal with this technology in an organised manner without being mismanaged by individuals.

MR OGUZU: Madam Chairperson, I move to second and support the proposals made by hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

In this country, we have had cases, where technology has failed many people during the electoral process. Whatever technology we would be deploying during the electoral processes, we must be able to put in place measures that will ensure accuracy, consistency and quality results from it. 

The proposals he has made enormously contribute to addressing the challenges, which may arise, if we want to have fair and free elections that are credible in light of the current infrastructural challenges we have. I would, therefore, implore Members to support the proposals he has made. Thank you.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, my senior colleague’s proposal could be quite cumbersome. It requires each polling station to have a biometric data verification machine. This will attract additional costs to take care of deployment of the equipment, recruitment and training as well deployment of competent manpower to operate the machines for internet connectivity in all these polling stations in the districts and head office. This also calls for the requisite infrastructure.

Madam Chairperson, this may not be practicable, especially if we legislate upon it and bind ourselves. In light of what we have seen in other jurisdictions, the most recent being the primaries in USA where they have the economic muscle to deploy the machines whereas we lack it to deploy the machines and even the connectivity is unreliable. 

The Kenyan one nearly caused mayhem so, I would rather we leave the proposal by my senior colleague for the future. Most obliged.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have already adopted a provision on the use of technology in clause 2; so, we cannot have two competing provisions in the same law. I put the question that the Title do stand as part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.07
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Chairperson, I wish to move that the House resume and Committee of the whole House do report thereto. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.08
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2019 and passed the following clauses:

Clause 1 was deleted, clause 2 passed with amendments, clauses 3 to 7 were passed, clause 8 passed with amendments, clause 9 and 10 passed and clause 11 passed with amendments. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: We reverted to the principle Act so we abandoned the proposal to delete.

MR KAMUNTU: Yes, clause 11 was reverted to the parent Act. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.10
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted. 

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE ELECTORAL COMMISSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

5.10
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE ELECTORAL COMMISSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes. (Applause)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

5.12
Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Chairperson, we propose to substitute for the proposed section 19 the following: 
“Code of conduct for political parties and organisations
A political party or organisation, a leader, official, candidate, member, agent or representative of a political party or organisation shall adhere to the code of conduct set out in the Fourth Schedule to this Act.”

The justification is to merge sub-clause (1) and sub-clause (2) of the proposed section 19 of the Political Parties and Organisations Act, 2005 since they are related and having them separate will create confusion and redundancy.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to the chairperson to help me understand. Every political party has its code of conduct and what the Political Parties and Organisations Act has done is to register and operate.

Are you telling us that we now need to put a different code because every political party or organisation has its own code of conduct? What are we trying to cure by bringing Schedule 4?

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I am surprised that a Secretary-General of a political party that appeared before us and they were unanimous in this matter - Political parties sat where they usually sit and came up with this.

They said that they wanted to remove the mandate of prescribing a code of conduct from the minister to have it prescribed in the law. This is way they agreed upon as the political parties’ code of conduct. It is a general code of conduct for all the political parties, including the one where he is leader; the Forum for Democratic Change.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us address the objectives of the Bill; an Act to amend the Political Parties and Organisations Act to remove the powers given to the minister to prescribe a code of conduct for political parties.

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: Madam Chairperson, be it as it may, wouldn’t it be right for us to stand over that until we have passed the Schedule? At the first call, we need to first look at what is in the Schedule and what we are approving.

MR KAFUUZI: I should have come in earlier before hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Madam Chairperson, we wish to reject the proposed amendment and maintain the provision in the Bill. 

The provisions of the proposed section 19(1) address political parties and organisations, whereas Section 19(2) addresses political parties, organisations, leaders, officials, candidates, members, agents or representatives of political parties or organisations and emphasise adherence to the code of conduct during and after elections.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, this law has nothing to do with elections. This is for establishing a political party and how to operate their businesses. For elections, it is clearly stated in the Electoral Commission Act. What is this you are trying to cure?

What we had thought is that we are removing powers from the minister to prescribe the code of conduct of a party. I remember when we came to the committee, we said that the code of conduct shall be formulated as follows - because the parties had to formulate, not again what you feel you should do.

This is talking about a code. Unless you deal with the code first; then you can deal with that. In its current state, supposing we reject the Fourth Schedule, what will you do? The law will fall aside.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, I do not know.  Why do you have a problem with the merger because section 19 (1) deals with a political party and an organisation? The second deals with the leaders, officials, candidates, members, agents and representatives. They are simply merging it. Instead of two clauses, they are merging it into one; that is their proposal.

MR KAFUUZI: Yes; and our proposal is that we maintain the status quo. We should not merge.

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, I know my senior brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, seems to be intimidating me because I have just arrived. I came 30 minutes ago and I have been patiently listening, watching –(Laughter)– and following each and every stage of what has been going on. 

I think the chairperson should tell us the spirit behind which part two has been arrived at. You are telling us about political parties, leader and agents. I do not know whether even agents must follow a certain code of conduct; I do not understand. That is why they should first explain to us the spirit behind this amendment.

Two, they should not run because the Attorney-General seems to be running to say let us maintain the status quo, without helping us to understand the basis on which this amendment came in. That is why I want the chairperson of the committee to come and explain. At the same time, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should come and explain to us this amendment.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, when I said we should maintain the status quo, I meant in the Bill because the intention is to operationalise Article 71(2) of the Constitution.

“71(2) Parliament shall, by law, prescribe a code of conduct for political organisations and political parties and provide for the establishment of a national consultative forum…”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Haven’t we already established that? Where is the parent Act?

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I still do not know why the Attorney-General has a problem with the proposal to merge. This is a law we are proposing for everyone. Look at the Bill on page 2 and then look at the proposal.

“A political party or organisation shall comply with the code of conduct set out in the Fourth Schedule to this Act”.

That is what is in the Bill. That is one.

ii. a political party or organisation, a leader, official, candidate, member, agent or representative of a political party or organisation shall adhere to the code of conduct referred to in subsection 1 during and after election”.

The committee proposes to redraft it and merge them and say:

“A political party or organisation, a leader, official, candidate, member, agent or representative of a political party or organisation shall adhere to the code of conduct set out in the Fourth Schedule to this Act.” Period!

We said these relate to the same thing. As a committee, we do not even have a big problem because our reason here is to oppose the status quo in the Bill, if it is in the wisdom of this House. Our consideration was that these relate to the same and having them separated might cause confusion to think that they are talking about different things. 

When you read sub-clause (1), it says this and when you read sub-clause (2), it says this when actually, proper drafting would put this under (1). We are not even yet on the code of conduct but we are simply on stating how it should be. 

I do not know. Attorney-General, what would be the problem with ours and you were seated there when we were processing this? (Laughter)

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, it is very difficult to go against my chairperson. Anyway, legally speaking, it does no harm to maintain both or merge the two. In that case, I concede to the committee proposal.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, before we deal with that, we need your guidance. You see, first of all, we have a schedule which is the real meat of this section. You cannot go to deal with this without dealing with the meat.

Our proposal would be to stand over this. Let us go through the schedule because it may have addressed something or may not have addressed it. That is the reason –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, whatever will be addressed will be in the Fourth Schedule, not in the Sixth or Seventh Schedule. It is the Fourth. We then shall deal with the contents; unless you are saying that you are moving it to the Seventh Schedule. That is a different matter but we are saying it will be in Chapter Four.

I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, before we go to clause 2, I would like to move an amendment because clause 2 is going to deal with the schedule. I had wanted to insert – Yes, clause 2 is dealing with the schedule. Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.

You remember when we were processing the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, we were looking for where to house that electoral reforms committee or council; whichever name we shall give it. Having gone through it, we found that the best place to house it is under the Political Parties and Organisations Act.

The reason we are saying that is because it has some outsiders and they are all dealing with issues of audit of the election process. Since we agreed that it is a good committee, I would like to move an amendment that we insert that new clause here –(Interjection)- that is why I said that you have just come in- which have discussed and I have consulted with the Chairperson  of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and he agrees. I have also consulted with the Attorney-General. (Laughter) 

However, if you agree on the principle, I would like to move that that committee, which we were trying to put in the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Act, be put here. This is the committee - (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: For the record, when we were caucusing over where to find proper housing - in my view when we were introducing other officials of political parties and the several others and we do not want the Chairperson of the Electoral Commission to be the chairperson - within the committee referred to as the electoral reform committee, then we thought that we could have another housing somewhere else.

Now I did not agree to hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s proposal but if it is in the opinion of this House to modify it and find housing for it under the Political Parties and Political Organisation (Amendment) Bill, it would be like the other national consultative fora where the secretary to the forum is - who is the chairperson? And then you can look at the secretary. The Electoral Commission and political parties are involved; for purposes of sharing information and thereafter making sure that there are electoral reforms.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The political parties to be the ones to determine the reforms? Then you bring the civil servants, electoral commission, Attorney-General and they are in the political fora?

MR AOGON: That is why I stand by what I said earlier. Let us maintain the status quo. These matters needed separate Bills probably to handle them in a proper manner because we need proper housing for such a very important issue. We cannot take it casually, no. It is better I take this information – (Interruption)

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Chairperson, the information I would like to give my colleague is that when you talk about political parties, we need to go and consult deeper because FDC is lucky that their Secretary General is here and we also need to consult the NRM and other parties. Therefore, I agree with my senior brother from Kumi that we stay everything until further consultations because we are going to better stuff.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I also suggest that it would be better if we have it as a standalone Bill so that we prescribe how this committee will operate; the membership, the quorum, the procedures and very many things. It is not something of creating a funding or where it is housed and you even do not know what you are housing. Thank you so much.

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, this Bill is talking about Political Parties and Political Organisations (Amendment) Bill, 2019. It is not talking about reforms committees meaning that if we want to talk about the reform committees, like my brothers form Kumi and Butaleja have rightly said, we should be dreaming about that in the next Parliament or any other time and not in this one or a a standalone Bill.

This requires a thorough analysis and consultations so that everybody will is involved; so that we are able to see whether it is something proper or not. However, I do not agree with smuggling it here.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. We are struggling on where to put a matter we found very important. We have the Law Reform Commission Act and it empowers the Law Reform Commission to review certain laws within the country.

Whereas I do not agree with putting it here in the Political Parties and Political Organisation (Amendment) Bill, 2019, it is high time that we reviewed the Law Reform Commission Act and give them the mandate to constitute this committee every after elections. Once we amend that, we give the Law Reform Commission to constitute this committee and we will have had headway other than coming up with a separate Bill; we formulate a committee and come up with an Act, which would not be very appropriate.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it is a good proposal but for now, we shall not take it up because we are dealing with the Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill, 2019. If you look at the proposed composition both by the committee and the minister, I do not think that we can house it under this. You bring the permanent secretaries for Works, Gender, Law Reform Commission and the Solicitor-General into the political forum?

Hon. Nsamba, the idea is good but we need a separate Act and it should standalone like we did with the National Audit Act so that we can - I hope you, people, will move it quickly. You know it is necessary.

MR OGUZU: Madam Chairperson, it will be good to get commitment from Government since the proposal is good. We would like to know if they would want to take this up and after what period of time because we have seen such good proposals just disappearing every time Government tends to drag her feet on such useful matters. Therefore, can the Attorney-General help us?

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, we do acknowledge the importance of my senior brother’s proposal. We shall take it under advisement working closely with him and see what to do.

THE CHAIRPERSON: How soon; because it is long overdue?

MS OPENDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a very important committee that would help us look at the elections and other reforms necessary, arising out of the 2021 elections. Therefore, considering that Members, after all this hectic exercise may start disappearing, I think we need to give a timeline to this.

I would like to suggest that within a month –(Interjection)- no it is already a proposal that came from the Government side. Therefore, a month is adequate for - (Interruption)

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I would like to give notice that -(Interruption)

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, that is my proposal; that we have a timeline for this otherwise it will get lost.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, since my brother the Attorney-General has agreed that this by next week –(Interjection)- no I am putting a notice because seriously, if you want us to do this, we can work. Hon. Oboth, you know how I work.

Madam Chairperson, I would like to say that by next week, we should bring in proposals to ask or seek leave of Parliament to bring a Bill to address what we have been discussing. I can assure you that on Tuesday, I will produce it. 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, I do appreciate my senior colleague’s commitment and I have worked with him in the past; so I know how fast he can be. 

However, procedural protocols would require that I have this discussed in Cabinet but I can assure you that working with the mover, we shall do our best to bring it. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Of course, it is difficult for us to set the time but it is really urgent. We have needed this after every election. We have needed this over the last 15 to 20 years; so, it is really urgent. We will give you one month. You can also bring your own motion and we debate it. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I will bring the motion and then my young brother will own or reject it.

Clause 2

MR OBOTH: Clause 2 is amended to read as follows – 

“(a)	In the proposed paragraph(4)(2) and everywhere the word appears in the code, substitute for the word, “subsection” the words “sub-paragraph.” That is the only amendment on that. 

2 (b) By substituting for paragraph (6) the following – 

“(6) Abuse of position
(1) 	A political party or organisation shall not - 
(a) 	Abuse a position of power, privilege or influence for political purpose or 

(b) 	Use Government, local Government or other public money or resources for campaign purposes subject to existing laws.”
  
(c) 	In the proposed paragraph (9), by substituting for sub-paragraph (a) the following – 
“(i) 	is abusive, defamatory, belittling, threatening or inflammatory.
(ii) 	by substituting for the word “section” and wherever it appears in the court the word “paragraph.” 

(d) 	in the proposed paragraph (10), by deleting the proposed sub-paragraph (f) (iii). 

(e) 	in the proposed paragraph 13(2) (b), substitute the words “handbills and leaflets” the words “election campaign materials”.
(f) 	by deleting the proposed paragraph (15).” 

Justification 

The proposal to replace the words “section” with “paragraph” and “subsection” with “sub-paragraph” is intended to be consistent within the nomenclature used in courts and schedules, where the provisions are referred to as “paragraphs” and “sub-paragraphs” and not “sections” and “subsections.” 

The proposed amendment to paragraph (6) is to remove redundant words in sub-paragraph (1)(a) and to delete sub-paragraph (2) since it is redundant. 

The amendment in paragraph (b) is for clarity. 

In addition, the amendment to paragraph (10)(f)(iii) is intended to remove redundant provisions. 

The amendment in paragraph (13)(2)(b) is intended to expand the provision to include all election materials other than handbills and leaflets. 

The amendment in paragraph 15 is intended to remove redundant provisions since other laws have already granted a party aggrieved by the outcome of the election to challenge the outcome in courts of law. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Did you have an issue, hon. Othieno?

MR OTHIENO: The chairperson of the committee is now confusing things. First of all, he is now talking of paragraphs and mixing up – because now they are on clause 2. However, when you look at the amendments he is bringing about; they are running through clause 6 up to the last clause. It is becoming difficult for some of us to follow because we need justification to some of the reasons they are removing some of these things. He was moving under clause 2 but now he is hiding under the cover of paragraphs, when in actual sense he has made a movement to the entire Bill.

MR OBOTH: Hon. Othieno Okoth is bound to be confused indeed because in one way, that was to indicate that in the whole Bill, other clauses do not have any problem. When it came to clause 2, where those words started appearing, we had to start there and go all the way. 

Therefore, it does not stop you, hon. Othieno Okoth, and my neighbour, to regain your conscience and follow clause by clause.  

MR OTHIENO: Madam Chairperson, I am alive to what I am raising and I am very conscious of what I am saying because I am referring to specific provisions of the Bill. For me to do so, I should be in my normal state of mind. 

Is hon. Oboth, the chairperson, who is even my neighbour and brother, in order to say that I am not conscious when I am actually referring to the actual provisions of the Bill? Is he in order? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, hon. Othieno is completely conscious.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, we have some responses to make. We accept the proposed amendment to paragraph (a) to substitute “sub-paragraph” for “subsection” and make similar amendments wherever the word “subsection” or “section” occurs. 

We reject the proposed amendment to replace paragraph (6)(1) and (6)(2) in the Bill. They have to be read together in context. Omitting paragraph (6)(2) dispenses with the definition of “position of power”, “privilege” or “influence”, which is critical to completeness and implementation of the provision. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the Bill just has – 

MR KAFUUZI: I hope I have not caused hon. Othieno confusion. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: The Bill has two clauses; so these are paragraphs. 

MR KAFUUZI: Yes. Madam Chairperson, I hope I have not escalated the Othieno – can I proceed, Madam Chairperson? 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Chairperson, with your indulgence, this is a very critical Bill with literally two clauses and the rest are paragraphs. Our procedural matter is that we would like to conduct the processing of this Bill at this stage. We should go paragraph by paragraph and then move the amendments or objection (2) by the ministers as per the paragraphs. Each of these paragraphs is in the ordinary making of the law; a provision of its own. 

Therefore, in order for us to follow, I beg your indulgence, Madam Chairperson, that we follow paragraph by paragraph in clause 2 for us to be able to follow with the full import of what we are approving.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I want to refer to our Rules of Procedure but off the cuff. Our rules state that when you are processing a Bill at this committee stage, it should be processed clause by clause.

The indulgence you are seeking - when the Bill has only two clauses, you are free - because the rest are all code of conduct. That is why my brother - and I apologised for the misunderstanding, when he said he was confused. I knew this was supposed to confuse a little. When you have only two clauses, we are done with the first because the second introduces the code of conduct.

Therefore, the Bill introduces them in form of a section and sub section. The very first amendment we propose is that for us to refer to all those sections and sub sections as paragraphs. For all intent, the real gist of the code of conduct, as proposed by political parties - we never changed; we left them intact apart from that technical expertise that the legal committee provided.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, still, let us go paragraph by paragraph. Okay, let us start with paragraph one.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Chairperson, in paragraph 1 sub section (a), the Bill talks about tolerance, peaceful co-existence and democratic principles between and among political parties, organisations, their members and supporters and this is occurring everywhere. 

The word “supporters” - I have a problem with putting responsibility of supporters to a political party. A party has a membership. You can only control as far as you can control your members and supporters are very volatile; they change every minute.

Now, I have seen this word trying to put a responsibility and/or stretching it to political parties to control their supporters. The word “supporters” when you talk about political parties and organisations - I do not think supporters are part of what political parties control. I move that the word “supporters” be deleted. 

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, when we bring in the issue of supporters - I have seen, for instance in football clubs, if you are an Arsenal supporter and do something to the contrary of what is expected of you, they will not fine only the supporter but the club as well. These things have happened. That is what they call discipline. Maybe if we want to say we are not yet ready to be there, we can decide to be here.

MR OTHIENO: Madam Chairperson, the clarification I am seeking from hon. Aogon - not every supporter is a member of the party. Just like the Arsenal you are talking about, not everybody who supports Arsenal is a registered member or fan of that club. 

Therefore, the question here is: how do you make a party responsible for actions of another party who is just supporting but they are not members? He is just happy with what I am doing and becomes my supporter. How do you make a party responsible for such member’s actions? How do you differentiate between a real supporter who is a member and supporter who is not a member?

THE CHAIRPERSON: But honourable members, I think the code is only saying that you should promote tolerance, peaceful co-existence, and democratic principles between and among different political parties and organisations and their members and supporters. Why don’t you want to promote that?

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Chairperson, the issue of supporters should be brought here because you have political parties with errant supporters; very arrant and unruly including my political party, NRM. However, I know that the people who have errant supporters do not want their people to be put catered for in this legislation –(Interjection)- no, the Secretary General is a good man but the supporters of his party. Therefore, we should include –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we agreed in 2005 that we should go multiparty and that everybody under the Constitution, I think Article 29, is free to associate.

Is my colleague from Butaleja in order to come and talk about the supporters who are there today but not there tomorrow? For example, if you saw the nomination of presidential candidates of 2016, even Hon. Amama Mbabazi had over 2000 motorbikes but they never appeared on the voting day.

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, these are temporary and come by wind. Is my brother -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, wouldn’t you want to say we are riding together but do not knock DP if you find them; let us just ride nicely?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, that is where we are coming in. At that time, if you know what the law is going to set, it is going to set obligations on the part of the party. What I will do is: I will get an NRM supporter dressed in an FDC T-shirt yet they are not FDC, and ask them to cause mayhem. However, what the Bill is saying is that the police should arrest the FDC Secretary General, in this case, but for a mere supporter who is not a member. This is where we have to be very careful. This country is so spoilt that people can try to disorganise others and one of them is your party, my brother.

Therefore, is hon. Waluswaka, in order to say that my supporters are worse than his supporters yet his are worse? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, I have no experience of either supporters; so, I cannot rule on that. I do not know who are worse than the others.

MR WALUSWAKA: Finally, Madam Chairperson, even in our campaigns, if you do not tame your supporters, they can embarrass you. 

In addition, politically, when your supporters, for us in NRM, when your supporters become unruly - I am not saying they are not unruly - and you tell them to calm down, they will calm down. This is why we want a political party to be responsible.

MR AGABA: Thank you, hon. Waluswaka, for giving way. 

Madam Chairperson, I think our colleagues need to read the proposed Code of Conduct in detail and juxtapose it to a situation of campaigns or a situation of political party activities where supporters are obvious. Yes, you may have quiet supporters who you may not control because you are not very sure of their choice; whether they support you or not but there are overt, open and clear supporters. 

The intention of the Bill is for us to try and take charge of our own supporters, especially in promoting tolerance, peaceful coexistence and democratic principles. There will be situations where people are following you and they are unruly and you are a candidate. You should be able, as a candidate, to contain and control them and appeal for good conduct among them. Where you cannot take responsibility for them, of course the law will also understand.

Madam Chairperson, the information I am giving my colleague is, for objective 1(a) the intention is preferred to open, direct supporters who we can take charge of and who are glaring that they can conduct themselves well in the spirit of peaceful coexistence of political parties. 

MS OSEGGE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. There is a saying that once beaten, twice shy. We are discussing politics and in politics, there is what they call sabotage. If we pass that law and say a political party is responsible for supporters and in essence trying to make a candidate or whoever is campaigning a traffic officer or a police officer, we are opening a situation where an opponent can come and masquerade and do something just to cause the other opponent a problem. 

We are still fresh to the issues that happened in Arua Municipality during the election of hon. Kassiano Wadri, where a stone was cast in the name of certain supporters. Madam Chairperson, we cannot afford to be blind to this because we are fond of abusing the law. We pass laws on the assumption that everybody is genuine and objective but somehow, you find our colleagues who are supposed to implement this abusing it and bending it to the disadvantage of an opponent. Therefore, I wouldn’t want this to appear as a responsibility of the political party.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us get focused. The objective of the code is what is presented here but the compliance issues are at the back. The code expects you to be tolerant, peaceful and this is the ultimate objective. This is not for action but it is what we expect. Later on, there are areas of compliance where we will have to say, a political party must do a, b, c and d. This is just saying what we would like you to be; tolerate and peaceful.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to agree with what you are saying but the objective is the one, which translates into the law. We are talking from experience and I would like to quote my experience. In the 2011 elections, a lady came to Mbale and claimed that I had threatened her on a specific day because she supports NRM and she got a miscarriage. Now, I had a case at the police and I was taken to Court. By the time I reached Court, the Judge was ready to send me to Maluku Prison.

I was saved by the fact that the day she quoted was the same day that I had travelled to Nairobi very early in the morning and so, I was not in Mbale. I had my boarding pass and passport. The Judge was determined to send me quickly to Maluku Prison because he had become these cadre judges. The reason was that I was terrorising a supporter of the NRM party yet in reality, the lady was not even a supporter because she had no card to prove that she was a supporter.

From what I see, the issue of a supporter runs through the Bill up to the end. If you go down, you will see a supporter. If we leave it up there, it goes down unless we define who a supporter is.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I cannot get tired of appreciating your guidance. When you stated what you read through the whole of paragraph 1, it gives the objective. It does not create any offense or responsibility. It gives you –(Interjection)– Show me anywhere where it creates an offense that if your supporter does this under objective -

My brothers and sisters, when the proposal here is giving you why this code is provided - and this is really for those in the multiparty dispensation – it does not, in any way - They are about five here. The law also governs Independents differently. 

On the basis of the guidance of Madam Chairperson, this is why clarification will be sought. Let us listen to one another first. My heart tells me that I need to say this before I sit down to clarify. We want to listen to what we want but not necessarily –(Interjection) How many of you have a copy of the Bill? Refer to paragraph 1 under objectives. Does it create any offense? Now, I can clarify. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it only creates the basic standard expected in a multi-party democracy; regular elections in the party, promoting good governance and that is all. 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I think that there is no problem with the objectives. However, the FDC Secretary General is wondering; do they have control over supporters? What they have control over are their members. Therefore, they just want us to drop the word “supporters” and concentrate on members because political parties have control over their members –(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Regarding the issue of members and supporters, these are political party proposals. To draw a distinction between members and supporters would be as good as not providing because people will ask, what is the rationale of this law? I was in Mbale in 2000 when they were holding a by-election, which brought hon. Wamanga-Wamai, the first time he came in. I was in Mbale for that by-election. The people who were in Mbale Municipal Council Chambers – I was working with Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs- we went as observers. The supporters of hon. Jack Wamai, led by hon. Nathan Mafabi, putting on a white short-sleeved shirts, became a bit rowdy when it was drizzling. There was no way you could draw a distinction between a member of FDC and a supporter. 

The electoral Commission officials said they could not proceed with the exercise if these people were not prevailed upon. That is when I knew hon. Nandala was a leader. He stepped up on the steps and said, “balebe, mwikale”, everyone sat, even though the ground was wet. 

That was not for supporters or for members, it was for everyone. We all know how rallies can be. You cannot make a law that is only for members. Membership is not going to be carried all the time. This is to bring order and harmony.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to say that if the Kyabazinga of Busoga got up and told all of us to sit down, we would because we pay allegiance to the Kyabazinga. (Laughter) But on membership, I know why I am raising all this. You know –(Laughter)– I am putting up this because there are political parties that have members and members cut across the country. 

Let me give an example. I have gone to Karamoja. I do not know their language. What if I speak Lugisu or English and they do not sit and they are supporters - what will I do?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the objective is just to set standards. Supposing I come to Mbale when you are being nominated? I am not a member of FDC but I can come as your friend and I am shouting as your supporter (Laughter)

MS ALUM SANTA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am seeking clarification from the chairperson of the committee. When we talk of supporters, sometimes supporters can be very tricky. People can even pretend to be your genuine supporters when they are not. Your opponent can even send her own people to disguise as your supporters. 

I am having difficulties because I read through the Bill and on clause 5, talking about the rule of law, they are saying that a political party or organisation shall ensure that its leaders, members, supporters and candidates shall comply with this Act. The word “shall” is mandatory and this becomes a problem for me. Could the chairperson clarify on that?

MR OBOTH: Yes, that is why obligations must be – how do you instill discipline? You must distinguish two things; under the Parliamentary Elections Act and the Presidential Elections Act, they distinguished supporters and agents in terms of creating liability. You cannot be liable for the actions of your supporters because you do not have control over them.

That is under the presidential elections but this is now a matter for political parties and organisations – (Interjections) – No. 

MS AVUR: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I appreciate that political parties can have control over their members. But, like hon. Nandala has said, unless we define the word supporter, there are very many ways of mobilising support these days. Music is one way. You find a musician that will sing a beautiful song about me or about a party and the same musician will also sing another insulting song against someone else. 

The situation, which the chairman described that hon. Nandala was able to control is not the same as the situation where you are mobilising through music. 

People just follow the music and stage somewhere in the trading centre and they start singing - some insulting, obscene or degrading songs about you. How would you, as a party, control such a situation? Unless we say that we are going to register supporters as well. Support is very fluid. Somebody may be your supporter this week and the following week they are not. 

MR GODFREY ONZIMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When we look at the principle of this submission, it is meant to promote harmony among political parties. And to put political parties to task that they should take responsibility and ensure that there is harmony. 

Whereas we are asking for harmony, we are also putting responsibility on the political parties to ensure that those who identify with them, when they misbehave, they should take responsibility. 

I do not see why people should run away from this. If for example, I go for a rally, I am a member of NRM, those who follow are members of NRM but because I am going for a rally, they become supporters. Therefore, since they are supporters, I should take responsibility as a member of NRM over my people. 

When we say we need harmony and co-existence and yet you run away from responsibility of the people who move with you, how do we ensure this harmony? Therefore, I am in agreement with this proposal.  (Interruption)

MR ACIDRI: Thank you, my colleague, hon. Onzima. The information I would like to give is that we are talking about very good values like harmony and tolerance. These are really noble values. However, don’t you think we should start within the political party? The idea of tolerance must start within the political party before you start preaching it to the other parties. 

We have seen political parties where somebody writes a letter to dismiss a member. We have seen other parties where people say things like, “this is my party, if you do not want what I am saying, leave.” 

How do we start saying that we should be tolerant amongst each other as political parties when you are not tolerant with each other? Even when we disagree with you based on people’s views, you tell us that – (Interjections) Please, sit down, how do you start preaching these values before you nurture them in the institutions that are supposed to promote them? This is where we get it wrong. The political parties must first sort themselves out before you start talking about code of conduct among political parties. Thank you.

MR ONZIMA: Madam Chairperson, on the point raised by my friend as information, I would say that if there was no tolerance among the political parties – for their members – maybe it was because there was no law. That is why we are saying this law should now be there.  The tolerance we are talking about should not only be about taking control over your supporters but also among your members. 

Members, I would like to persuade you that we have been seeing situations in campaigns where people clash. We have had supporters of one party clashing with the others’ and nobody takes responsibility. I think this is the time for us to heal this.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, as I invite hon. Ogwal, I would like to emphasise that this code of conduct is just setting the standards.

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I would like to share my long experience of working with political parties. I do not think there is anybody in this House who has managed political parties longer than I have. I see this code of conduct just as a way of giving us guidance, generally, so that all of us have a standard. They are saying you must promote peace and you must do this and that. 

That is why the universal practice is that, normally, there is specific training for supporters and poll watchers. It is to give political parties the opportunity to give information to their supporters that, “please, at this particular time, do not give people money.” At this particular time, do not buy for people Lira-Lira – this crude waragi – because it can promote violence. It is a way of giving all of us an equal platform in order to check on our conduct.

I would like to tell you something. In December 1980, when we had elections, there was commotion in Kawempe and we were told that the youth of UPC were the ones causing commotion. When I went there, I found they were the youth of DP. Eventually, when they checked the votes, UPC got zero votes in some polling stations. I said, “Now you can confirm that they were not UPC but DP youth causing commotion.” Therefore, this is just to make sure that all of us conform to the standards that we ourselves have worked out. (Applause)

The second thing –(Interjections)– do not hurry, please. I am trying to help you. My only problem, Madam Chairperson, is on the appeal. I helped one of our colleagues, Sebaggala. He was being arrested in Nakawa East. We were from different parties. Our problem is, where do we report in case an individual is causing problems and it can be misunderstood that it is a party causing the confusion?

What you call the “National Consultative Forum” is not adequate to restrain the behaviour of the individuals, which can easily be misunderstood as being the behaviour of the political party. Where do we report in case individuals are trying to cause confusion and mar the image of the political party?

That is the information I am trying to give. This is a code of conduct. It is harmless and it is for all of us. I think we should accept it and each of us must go back and train our voters, poll watchers or agents so that they conform to the code of conduct laid down. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank God for seniority. (Laughter) Honourable members, I put the question that paragraph One be part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Paragraph One agreed to.

Paragraph Two

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose to delete subparagraph (2). The justification is that under the clause – when we were trying to merge, we were saying that it should be encompassing. Here, it is trying to say – you remember that under the clause itself, the committee removed “before, during and after” elections and merged the whole thing. Here it is –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where? We have finished with that one.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am following from what we passed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. It is a consequential amendment.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, it is a consequential amendment – that we delete clause 2(2).

THE CHAIRPERSON: We deleted the words “before, during and after elections”. Okay, honourable members, I put the question that the clause be amended by deleting the words “before, during and after elections”.

(Question put and agreed to.) 

Paragraph Two agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 2, as amended, do stand part of the Bill. (Laughter)

Honourable members, what do you want? Do you want me to vote for you? First, I said there was a proposal to delete the words “before, during and after elections”. I put the question to that and you said: “Yes.” Therefore, it was deleted. I, then, put the question to what was remaining. (Laughter)

Okay, I put the question that what remains of clause 2 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Paragraph Three

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, under paragraph three, the Electoral Commission now wants to start controlling political parties. Do you see what they are saying in paragraph 3(d)? Having said “work with Electoral Commission to promote transparency, impartiality and confidence in the electoral processes”, it is going back and saying “and give directives to the parties”. 

I propose that sub clause (e) be deleted. The justification is that the Electoral Commission is not supposed to control political parties. The parties have their laws and they must also follow the laws of the country.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to object to hon. Nandala’s proposal because the Electoral Commission is vested with authority to preside and oversee the conduct of elections. During that process, it has the powers to make directives as to how the process should be conducted. I believe that is what is envisaged in this sub clause (e) – “obey any lawful…” It is not that it is the Electoral Commission, which is making the laws.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we should not emasculate the Electoral Commission. We gave them authority to manage the elections. Let us give them the opportunity to manage them.

Honourable members, I put the question that paragraph three do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Paragraph three agreed to.

Paragraph four agreed to.

Paragraph five agreed to.

Paragraph six agreed to.

Paragraph seven agreed to.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Paragraph eight, sub section (b) says “accept or use public resources other than those allocated to political parties.” 

Madam Chairperson, we allocate money to political parties through the Political Parties and Organisations Act. I need to be educated, for instance, if a party outside this mechanism cannot accept – It says “accept or use public resources other than allocated…” It is okay now.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that paragraph eight, do stand part of Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Paragraph eight, agreed to.

Paragraph nine, agreed to.

Paragraph 10, agreed to.

Paragraph 11, agreed to.

Paragraph 12

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, Paragraph 12 is about the relationship between political parties and the Uganda Police Force.

When you look at Paragraph 12(c) and (d), specifically in (d), we already have an Act of Parliament; the Public Order Management Act, which the Uganda Police Force has continued to abuse. Often, political parties are not allowed to organise.

If we include Uganda Police Force under the Political Parties and Organisations Act, where we are saying they must give order and from what we are experiencing today, it is already a challenge. The Uganda Police Force does not allow any other political party, except one, to operate.

If we cannot stand in this Act and continue to give Uganda Police Force powers – I suggest that Paragraphs 12(c) and (d) be deleted.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Looking at the character of our current police officers, I feel that we should delete the whole of Paragraph 12.

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, as we talk about political parties cooperating with the Uganda Police Force and recognising their authority and following their instructions, we need to clearly define the role of the crime preventers, since they operate and are supervised by the Uganda Police Force. How shall we manage? (Interjection)

We need to know how they will be managed. Otherwise, Crime Preventers are managed under the Uganda Police Force. They are recruited, trained and supervised by the police. Therefore, I think we need to insert a clause somewhere that indicates that when we talk about the Uganda Police Force, it does not include Crime Preventers. We need to be very clear about this. 

Otherwise, Gen. Kayihura has done us a favour to say that so far, we have 11 million registered Crime Preventers. This has already shifted the electoral process. Because if we have 11 million registered Crime Preventers against 15 million registered voters – Madam Chairperson, you know what I am talking about. So, as interested parties in this law, we need to demarcate the role of the Uganda Police Force and that of the Crime Preventers.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What does the minister say about the Crime Preventers?

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, every Ugandan has an obligation to prevent crime. If there is a unit established for that purpose, we should feel obliged to cooperate with it.

That notwithstanding, the said Crime Preventers are in the field purposely to prevent crime. They work closely with the police. Like all Ugandans, they are not above the law. 

Recently, this Parliament passed a law, which holds everyone who commits an offence where a police officer can be – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this House enacted the law to govern the Uganda Police Force. They are defined under an Act of Parliament. Do not smuggle Local Defence Units and militias. 
I put the question that Paragraph 12 do stand part of the Bill

(Question put and agreed to.)

Paragraph 12, agreed to.

Paragraph 13

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I have not been getting up on the view that I handled the – I am making a procedural inquiry regarding technical issues on paragraphs and sub paragraphs that are replacing sub sections, which were running all through. I hope we are taking care of them, as we pass each of these paragraphs in clause 2. I wanted that to be on record, as we had proposed at the beginning.

One of our last amendments, which we call Paragraph 13 (2)(b) says; “substitute the words “handbills and leaflets” with words “election campaign materials”. That is quite specific instead of limiting it to just handbills and leaflets. You can have many campaign materials to use and we gave the justification.

Madam Chairperson, we would propose that the clause go with those other words that we changed like substituting the word “subsection” with the word “subparagraph” so that we can follow. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is what we have been –

MR OBOTH: It is not fatal. Hon. Kivumbi got up and said Members would get confused. They wanted to handle each of the paragraphs. I said the rules require us to go by each clause and the Presiding Officer guided and we started handling paragraphs since I had already put those amendments and nobody disputed them. I take it that they have been endorsed, for the record. Thank you 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you suggesting that we do not deal with more paragraphs? I have been putting the question to the paragraphs.

MR OBOTH: Yes. I suggest that we merge those sections as you have put because it was just clause 2 and we said we had these words - sub section under 19 – we said that in putting codes of conduct, you do not refer to those paragraphs as sub sections. It was a technicality that the draft man can change. We just wanted to have them on record.

THE CHAIRPERSON: When the minister comes, he will report on all the clauses because all these are part of the clauses. 

MR OBOTH: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please, let us finish. 

MS OGWAL: You have a problem with your neighbour not us.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, are there any paragraphs that have changes other than what we have already finished?

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, the amendments proposed by the committee – and those are the ones I am referring to – that is all I needed to be captured on the record because I read all before hon. Kivumbi came and said, for purposes of following, they did paragraph by paragraph.

I would not be getting up because I thought the committee is already on record on those paragraphs. The rest were not fundamental; they were not going into the text. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You amended what and what of the paragraphs?

MR OBOTH: We amended the entire clause, running from clause 2, paragraphs 4 (ii), 6, 9 and 10, deleting paragraph (f) (iii) and paragraph 13(2)(b), which we have just proposed now. It is intending to expand the provision to include all election materials other than just handbills and leaflets. I have not heard any Member suggest to the contrary. I just wanted to have them captured for the persons who will be reading the Hansard in the future. They were no changes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, there were no other changes?

MR OBOTH: Yes, there were no other changes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So the last change was in 13?

MR OBOTH: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Start from 4 and end where?

MR OBOTH: The other change we were proposing is to delete paragraph 15.

MS OGWAL: When we are still on 13.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I wish you had left me to do my work. You are really disrupting me, you people.

MR OBOTH: I am sorry.

MS OGWAL: Still on 13 -

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have voted on 13.

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I am seeking clarification on 13. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Paragraph 14, I put the question that -

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, we are still on 13. We have not reached there. When the committee chairperson talked about campaign materials - I am seeking clarification if we could also include colours associated to parties because that can also cause confusion. So, can the chairperson clarify on that because if I come to a polling station and find the place decorated with unthinkable colours?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Isn’t that already provided for under the existing law? It is already there.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, the only thing that was remaining -

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that paragraph 13 do stand part of the Bill -

MR AOGON: The Chairperson of the committee is only wondering whether the question you put was for what he has read out or on a paragraph by paragraph arrangement. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, you are doing very well and we want you to continue. I only wanted to be on record that we mooted some proposed amendments and now in 13(2)(b), which is a unique one, we are replacing the words “handbills and leaflets” with the words, “campaign materials.” I thought that –(Interjections)– colours were not before us.
	
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that paragraph 13 be amended as proposed.

(Question put an agreed to.)

Paragraph 13, as amended, agreed to.

Paragraph 14, agreed to.

Paragraph 15

MR OBOTH: We are proposing to delete it for the reasons we gave; it would be redundant. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that paragraph 15 be deleted as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Paragraph 15, deleted.

Paragraph 16, agreed to.

Paragraph 17

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that paragraph 17 -

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: This paragraph is very critical because it talks about the national consultative forum enforcing the code, with wide ranging powers, which could include it writing to the Electoral Commission to comply.

I looked at section 20 because the paragraph says, “…in accordance with section 20 of this Act.” Just for purposes of clarity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is no section 20? What is the problem, hon. Kivumbi?

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: There is a national consultative forum to enforce this code, it has a lot of powers and it is constituted under section 20.

Is it the other national consultative forum for all political parties that will enforce this code? The one responsible, Madam Chairperson - that is why I want clarity on this issue because when you look at its powers – it can recommend dismissal of members. What passes as a normal code of conduct now carries penalties, which can even include deregistering a member in accordance with the law, through the high court.

This national consultative forum comprises all political parties registered, including those that have no representation whatsoever, in Parliament and it is normally an omnibus.

I have seen political parties in this country and I have interacted with leaders of some of these parties, I know that there are briefcase political parties. Do you still want us to let such briefcase political parties to be the ones to enforce this code of conduct? 

That is why personally, I would have been comfortable that parties represented under Inter-Party Organisation for Dialogue (IPOD) became those have outright stake in these matters and they should be the ones tasked with enforcing this code of conduct. If we go for parties that have no representation like councillors, they are simply out there. They are registered – Yes, I know. 

However, in many democracies, merely registering a political party is not good enough. You have to go ahead and demonstrate that this party has the requisite support across the country, so that, that party that I see in my village is alive and kicking and is enforcing this code of conduct. However, a briefcase political party, as we know them, and you want to task them –

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know because in the parent Act, as long as even those briefcase political parties are registered, they are entitled to be in the forum. 

MR KIVUMBI: Madam Chairperson, that is why for me, this code of conduct should be enforced by political parties under the IPOD. I seek to be clear on this. It is only parties under IPOD that we fund and allocate money because to be under IPOD, you must have at least one Member of Parliament. 

You see, you must qualify. Even political parties must qualify. Merely registering a political party out there and at the end of the day, you keep it in your house, you sit on this forum and you are there giving orders on how we conduct political parties when –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Have you got his proposal? He wants those –

MR KIVUMBI: Madam Chairperson, I am being very patriotic on this. We have many political parties that we cannot mention. I have had an opportunity to be an activist for 20 years and I know who leads some of these parties. They are on the books; they are 25. I have been with you in the trenches for many years. We have the personalities that are leaders of some of these peasant parties; I have seen many of them.

My proposal is - and this is very critical - the parties that we fund, that get money from the Consolidated Fund, that have a reasonable footing and a vested interest in the real politics of the country should be the ones to enforce this code of conduct –(Interruption)

MR KAFUUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I am concerned when my colleague talks of briefcase parties and says it should be parties under IPOD to enforce the code of conduct. There may be parties, which are not under IPOD, but they have a sizeable number of supporters. 

The code of conduct is imposing an obligation on them to enforce the rules upon those supporters. In essence, you are saying that these parties with a sizeable number of supporters, which are not members of IPOD, should be free to be errant, which is wrong.

MR KIVUMBI: You asked for clarification. Madam Chairperson, that is not the point I am making. For enforcement - Even now, political parties exclusively created IPOD and excluded other parties and they are on the books. It is under IPOD that you made most of these proposals; you did not even use this Act.

Therefore, the point I am trying to make is, a political party that is really a political party in actual meaning - Legally, you can be there. Under IPOD, you only need one Member of Parliament and that is why JEEMA is a member of IPOD. It should be these parties that enforce this code of conduct. 

However, for some briefcase political parties to enforce this code of conduct and give recommendations to even deregister - you are entering a very bad territory.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, when we decided to provide monies for political parties, we said we cannot fund all the registered parties. We included criteria on how we should fund them. I think it should be the same spirit even when it comes to this. You are registered and we should fund you. Otherwise, if that is the case, then we provide for and fund all of them.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, if the honourable member, hon. Oguzu could – I think we are confusing a few things here. Some members are asking what IPOD is. Is it established by an Act of Parliament? This is the Political Parties and Organisations Bill amending the Political Parties and Organisations Act, which is established by law for all political parties.

Actually, this is to regulate the conduct before those parties bring their people here. We are not preoccupied with regulating members who are already here. That is under the IPOD. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson –

MR OBOTH: You are the one who brought these things. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the National Consultative Forum consists of at least one representative from each political party. These political parties are about 100. 

The issue, which is coming up under paragraph 17, which hon. Kivumbi is raising is that the parties, which are participating in the electoral process, may be about five. Those 95 parties who do not participate would want to make a decision for those that participate.

If you see paragraph 7, you are taking this to enforce the code. You are saying that those who do not even participate shall enforce the code. The issue, which hon. Kivumbi is raising is, supposing the 95 gang up and say they are deregistering NRM? They will because you have said they will be the ones monitoring the code of conduct. The 95 can come up and say they are deregistering FDC.

Therefore, what we are trying to put up –(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: I take you as an intelligent person. (Interjections) Thank you for those kind words. You cannot say that those ones will gang up. By the way, you cannot rejoice as to why other parties are not participating; they have their challenges. We cannot rejoice that others have 10 contestants and you are three or unopposed. You should not rejoice. People either look at their strengths or weaknesses.

This is a legal framework established from the Constitution to provide for political parties and organisations. This is properly housed and I would seek the indulgence of members that we support this. What hon. Kivumbi and hon. Nandala-Mafabi whose house I have been to a few times for a cup of tea – We should be able to distinguish between what is happening in IPOD and National Consultative Forum.  This is – (Interjection) – Please –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 17 –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, what they are saying under 5(d) is, “Make a recommendation to Electoral Commission to exercise its powers under section 21 of the Act to apply to the High Court for an order winding up the political party organisation.”

You see competitors can ask somebody to wind up. Therefore, Madam chairperson, because winding up a known procedure, 17(5)(d) should be deleted because there could be mob justice to force -(Interjections)-  this is-

THE CHAIRPERSON: The High Court would have to go through a process and apply giving reasons and the High court would have to sit and hear the reasons and see whether the reasons are sufficient to deregister. It is not that Kangaroo.

MR OGUZU: Madam Chairperson, there are cases where the conduct is urgent and requires attention. In clause 17(2), it says “where there is breach of any of the provisions of this code, the agreed political party or organisation or person shall in writing report the breach to the national consultative forum.”

I imagine the national consultative forum sits somewhere. Let us take a situation where a poster has been defaced or a candidate or a political party is stopped from holding rallies. Where will -(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: I appreciate your vigilance to - this Political Party Organisations Bill does not consider defacing; those are criminal acts and under the criminal code and other electoral laws. Madam Chairperson, he has been insisting on the microphone and I thought he was going to help us. I am disappointed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that paragraph 17 do stand part of the Bill?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Paragraph 17 agreed to.
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, for the record, the paragraphs, which we have passed constitute the fourth schedule, which is part of clause 2. Therefore, I now put the question that amendments proposed in clause 2 do stand part of the Bill? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2 as amended, agreed to.

The Title agreed to.
 
MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.57
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.58
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill, 2019 and passed the following; clause 1, with amendments, clause 2(1), clause 2(2), clause 2(3), clause 2 paragraphs 4, 5, 6,7,8,9,10,11,12, are all passed. Clause 2(13) is passed with amendments and paragraph 14 is passed, paragraph 15 is deleted, paragraph 16 is passed and paragraph 17 is passed.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.59
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

7.00
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2020”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes. Congratulations.

7.01
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank members of Parliament who have endured and successfully processed five electoral reform Bills; Presidential, Parliamentary, Electoral Commission, local Government and now the Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill, 2019. 

I thank them, especially the Members of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and the staff attached to this committee.

I also thank you, Madam Speaker. We get out and you stay. You have endured us –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the chairperson of this committee happens to be in this Parliament under the umbrella of independent. Now he has passed all these laws and I would like him to clarify on how this law he has just passed, which he is congratulating us on will apply to you? Or how will you take care of violence intimidation and harassment on individuals like you like who will be facing these people under political parties? Can you clarify that to us?

THE SPEAKER: Just finish with thanking.

MR OBOTH: Thank you hon. Ogwal. The experience you gave of 1980 was very helpful in the processing of the Bill. I would like to thank the two ministers, hon. Prof. Kamuntu; he was welcomed with six Bills and the Deputy Attorney-General, jumping from the committee to the front bench. We must thank them and congratulate them. (Applause) 

The use of the word “jumping” is that when he got appointed, he was a member of the committee and now, he got himself on the front bench. Thank you, you learnt on the very baptism of fire and we thank everyone. 

Whoever we could have exchanged unpleasant words with, consider those as just - hon. Okupa and hon. Mafabi, thank you very much -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Honourable chairperson, you are forgetting to thank - there are Members, since we started this week, who have been sitting here with you from 2 p.m. up to 9 p.m. Do not forgot those members. These are the Members you must appreciate that have kept with you and passed the Bills. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would also like to add my thanks to first the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. They have the biggest number of Bills in this House and despite the fears around their work, they have done a very good job and we congratulate them.

I would like to thank the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs for being present and visible and active. He has had the baptism of fire. 

7.04
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much and thank the Members. The remaining Bill is the Administration of Judiciary Bill. Once that is done, that will be the day. Otherwise, my past is okay. Do not quarrel with the past, otherwise, you will miss the future. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Let me also welcome the Deputy Attorney-General, who landed right in the thick of things. I would like to thank the Members on all sides of the House because they have actively stayed here. (Applause) 

I would also like to thank the Clerk and her team. We have had very long days but they have stayed. The Hansard and the Sergeant at Arms team have been working. Thank you very much. We have done our duty. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should give us a party. Five Bills are done; where do we meet later today? (Laughter) 

Honourable members, there is just a small matter; a report about the Commonwealth Day. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, hon. Bintu, whom I had stepped in for, has come in. I would like to ask her to take over. I do not want to take over her role but I was here standing in for her. The report is here; you can present it.

STATEMENT ON THE OCCASION OF COMMEMORATING THE COMMONWEALTH DAY, 9 MARCH, 2020

7.06
THE CHAIRPERSON, CPA UGANDA BRANCH AND VICE-CHAIRPERSON CWP, AFRICA REGION (Ms Jalia Bintu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to present a statement to Parliament of Uganda on the occasion of commemorating the Commonwealth Day, which is always held on 9th March. This year it is going to be held on 9 March 2020. 

The Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA) was established in 1911 as an association of Commonwealth Parliamentarians, who, irrespective of gender, race, religion or culture, are united by community of interest, respect for the rule of law and individual rights and freedoms, and pursuit of the positive ideals of Parliamentary democracy.

The CPA has a membership of about 185 Parliaments with 17,000 members from over 180 branches across nine regions namely: Africa, Asia, Australia, British Islands and Mediterranean (BIM), Canada, Caribbean, Americas and Atlantic (CCAA), India, Pacific and South East Asia and has been the voice of parliamentary democracy across the Commonwealth for more than 10 decades advocating for Parliaments to play a more active role in the development of their countries.

The CPA is recognised by the Commonwealth Heads of Government and intergovernmental agencies as an organisation, which strengthens good parliamentary governance and contributes tangibly to the development of all Commonwealth people. 

The CPA is further recognised for promotion of the advancement of parliamentary democracy through enhancement of knowledge and understanding of democratic governance, youth engagement in democracy, gender equality and equal representation.

The CPA is headed by Her Majesty, the Queen of England, Queen Elizabeth II and she heads the Commonwealth and is the Patron of the CPA; H.E Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of the Republic of Uganda is the immediate past Vice-Patron (2019) Rt Hon. Speaker, Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, the Speaker of Parliament of Uganda is the immediate past President of CPA (2018-2019).

The Commonwealth Day is an annual celebration by the Commonwealth Member States and falls on every second Monday of March. For this year, it will be held on 9 March, 2020 and will be celebrated with activities including debates, school assemblies, flag raising ceremonies, street parties, cultural events and a multi-faith service at Westminster Abbey in London. That is where the headquarters of CPA are situated. 

The theme for the 2020 Commonwealth Day is “Delivering a Common Future: Connecting, Innovating and Transforming.” This theme is in unity with the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) (2020) and for the work of the Commonwealth for this year. This year’s CHOGM will be held in Rwanda Kigali. 

Honourable members, as you may be aware, Uganda joined the CPA in 1962, when she gained her independence from Britain, and since then, Uganda has remained part of the Commonwealth family, using a similar democratic system. Uganda adopted and practices the conventional parliamentary democracy system, modelled against that of Britain. 

Uganda, just as is with the British system, uses English as the official and main language of instruction in the school system and in the administration at both national and local government levels as well as in public service structures.

Uganda is an active member of the Commonwealth including its organs as has been demonstrated through the following;

Parliament of Uganda hosted the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference (CPC), the first of its kind, in 1967 - this is the gathering of all the members of the CPA.

Uganda hosted the Biennial Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) in 2007, which saw high delegations of all 53 member countries gather in Uganda's capital, Kampala, with the Head of the Commonwealth Queen Elizabeth II of England also in attendance. Madam Speaker, I would like to congratulate you because I know you were around, including some of us. 

The Parliament of Uganda hosted the 4th CPA Africa Regional Youth Parliament in April 20l8, which attracted a big number of youth from across Africa, who came to Uganda to deliberate on the issues that concern the youth. Madam Speaker and honourable members, Uganda managed to produce the Speaker of the CPA Youth Parliament during that meeting here in Kampala. 

Uganda has consistently participated and competed in the Commonwealth Games; this is an international multisport event or an Olympics of sorts for the Commonwealth of Nations held every four years. A number of Ugandan athletes have won gold medals and other accolades and even recently, some of our Ugandan members; men and women, won these accolades. 

In September 2019, Uganda successfully hosted the 64th Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference at Speke Resort Munyonyo, where in delegates from across the Commonwealth Member states participated under the theme of “Adaption, engagement, and evolution of Parliaments in rapidly changing Commonwealth." Madam Speaker, from the conference, a number of resolutions were made, which, at a future date, will be presented for debate by the House.

I would like, as the Chairperson of CPA Uganda Branch, to extend our appreciation to you, Madam Speaker and Members, for a successful 64th Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference.

Uganda hosting the above events is an indication of her willingness to be part of the Commonwealth as it delivers a common future for its members. 

The country recognises the special value in the insights we gain through the Commonwealth connection. This has helped us overcome our differences, thereby making diversity a cause of celebration rather than division.

Therefore, by this statement, CPA Uganda Branch pledges, on behalf of Parliament of Uganda, to continue working with the Commonwealth and the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association at both international and regional levels as we secure a common future for all of us through connection, innovation and transformation.

Uganda will join the rest of the Commonwealth to commemorate 9th of March as the Commonwealth Day for the year 2020 and in supporting this year's theme, Parliament of Uganda will carry out the following activities:

The CPA, Uganda Branch in liaison with Uganda Parliamentary Women's Association (UWOPA) – which serves as the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians (CWP) Uganda Branch – will, on 16 and 17 March, 2020 at the Golf Course Hotel, hold a sensitisation workshop for Members and staff of Parliament to enlighten members of Parliament about the four pending gender-related Bills under consideration by the respective committees. The Bills are: Sexual Offences Bill, 2019; Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2018; Employment (Amendment) Bi11, 2019 and Marriage and Divorce Bi11. 

Details of this workshop will be communicated in due course. Once the Bills are passed, Uganda will have joined other Commonwealth Countries in delivering a common future to her citizens, including special categories like the women, youth and children.

Secondly, Uganda recognises that a secure future requires a conducive and sustainable climate; basing on this, as a way of ensuring a secure climate for the next generations, Parliament of Uganda will participate in tree planting activities along the major roads in most of the cities. We shall start with Kampala, the capital city and then we shall roll it out to other regions. 

The arrangements for this are underway under the leadership of the CPA Uganda Branch and Members shall be informed in due time to participate.

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, on behalf of CPA Uganda Branch, allow me appreciate the following distinguished persons for the support they rendered while organising and during the 64th CPC that was successful due to their efforts:

    i. H.E Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President and immediate past Vice-Patron of the CPA 20l9;
    ii. Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, Speaker of Parliament and immediate past President of the CPA 2019;
    iii. The Cabinet Ministers representing the Executive arm of Government;
    iv. Honourable members of Parliament, representing the Legislative arm of Government;
    v. Members of the Judiciary, representing the third arm of Government;
    vi. The Clerk to and staff of Parliament;
    vii. The armed forces such as the Uganda People's Defence Forces (UPDF), the Uganda Police Force (UPF), Uganda Prisons and many others;
    viii. Public servants from different MDAs and;
    ix. All the citizens of Uganda.

I, therefore, wish to invite all members of Parliament and Ugandans to join the rest of the Commonwealth as we celebrate the Commonwealth Day by participating in the scheduled activities. 

And finally, I call upon Government of Uganda to;

    a) Join the rest of the Commonwealth to observe 9 March, 2020 as the Commonwealth Day;
    b) Continue to educate its citizens on the principles and values of the Commonwealth and;
    c) Support and participate in the Commonwealth activities.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, thank you. For God and My Country

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I think that was information. (Hon. Aogon rose_)

No, we need to go home. Honourable members, I think we have done a lot of work and we need to allow even the Hansard team to go and rest.
 
So, I want to adjourn the House to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 7.21 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 10 February 2020 at 2.00 p.m.) 
