Wednesday, 17 March 2010

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you, but I must say I am disappointed with the numbers. Everyday I appeal to you to find time and come for parliamentary work, especially at this time when we are working to clear very important business on our table. I know elections are contributing to this, but since we want good elections we should come here and make good laws and reforms, because if the numbers are not here, I may not be in position to pass those laws before Parliament is prorogued. 

Once again, I would like to appeal to you to mobilise your colleagues to attend to parliamentary work. And when you look at the Front Bench, there is only one Member present, yet a lot of the business we have here is business for that bench. So, what do I do with it? It is true today is Cabinet day, but Cabinet should adjust its time so that it does not prejudice the work of Parliament.

2.42
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is true today is a Cabinet day, however, I would like to inform you that we had agreed with the ministers who have business to handle in the House to be here and I am sure they will be here any time from now.

THE SPEAKER: It is not a question of only ministers with business being here; all ministers should be here. My appeal to you is that you should have a way of adjusting your Cabinet meetings on Wednesdays so that you can end your work by 12.00 p.m. for you to be here by 1.00 p.m.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, I will accordingly communicate this to the leadership. Thank you.

2.43
MR JOHN KIGYAGI (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to make a wake up call to raise a matter of national importance. I remember during the Budget Speech, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development banned the use, manufacture and sale of polythene carrier bags, old fridges and computers. But in the Finance (Amendment) Act, we agreed, as Parliament, to extend the period to prohibit the importation, manufacture and sale of polythene carrier bags, fridges and old computers to 31 March 2010 from 1 October 2009.

As I speak, we have only 14 days to the expiry of this provision. And in the amendment to that Finance Act, we asked the Minister of Finance, in collaboration with the Minister of Water and Environment, to lay on the Table, a list of polythene materials that would be allowed. This was so, because although we banned them, there were certain cases that had been exempted for carrying food items. It is 14 days to the expiry of the extended period for a total ban to be effected, but there is nothing going on. It is business as usual. I am sure they did not even cancel the importation licenses; we have not seen any guidelines from the Minister of Environment to tell the nation how that will be managed, and we have not seen any introduction of alternative carriers.

THE SPEAKER: I think that is enough of a wake up call.

MR KIGYAGI: Mr Speaker, this is a wake up call – it is 14 days to the end of that time. It is my appeal to Government to lay on the Table the exceptions that were allowed in the law. I thank you.

2.45
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Kigyagi for raising that wake up call. I will make sure we act promptly so that we are not caught out of time. Thank you.

2.46
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of great importance for this country. As everybody knows now, Kasubi Tombs were last night burnt to ashes. Kasubi Tombs are located in Rubaga North, an area which I have the honour to represent in this House. News broke out at about 9.00 O’clock that fire had gutted the tombs.

Mr Speaker, people ran to save the situation, but it was not possible. I am sure that at the right time, Government through the minister concerned will make a statement. However, I would like to concern myself –

THE SPEAKER: Well, the minister had booked time on the Order paper to make a statement, but he is not here; he had indicated to me that he would be making a statement.

MS KAMYA: It is very shocking that the minister is not here. Anyway, what I was trying to say is that people came to the site to try to help – Police and fire brigade were there, but they unfortunately did not have enough water to contain the situation – it looked like the tank was half full and could not do the work. But the people came in large numbers – security personnel were there too.

This morning, I went to Kasubi Tombs, but what I would like to report to this House is that that priceless facility for this country is no more. The popular belief, through the press and the people, is that it is arson. Of course at this point no one can firmly establish whether it is arson or not, and I hope investigations will be done to establish the cause of the fire. However, Kasubi Tombs is about the only facility in Uganda that was gazetted by UNESCO as one of the tourists’ destinations of the world. It is a 128-year old facility that has been housing four past kings – Muteesa I, Ssekabaka Mwanga, Ssekabaka Muteesa II and Ssekabaka Daudi Chwa – they were all buried in that place.

As we all know, it has been a great tourist attraction that has lifted and promoted the image of Uganda and raised funds for this country. What is of serious concern right now as we collect – and I am sure the Buganda Government will issue a statement – is the security situation in that area. Armed men have been deployed in Kasubi in great numbers. When I went there at about 9 O’clock this morning, I found armed policemen deployed. This prompted me to talk to the DPC. I asked him to tell me if the guns were loaded because if they were, I said to him, we could not have them there. I told him that we could not continue having death all the time from Police and security agencies in this country. 

Mr Ochwom together with the DPC – I personally spoke to them by asking whether the guns were loaded because we did not want to have a repeat of Makerere University – they assured me the guns were loaded; that they only had rubber bullets and teargas. I was shocked, an hour after I left, to hear gunshots and the report I have is that four people are confirmed dead and many wounded.

What happened was that the President was expected to visit Kasubi and so an advance party was sent there. But the crowd there indicated that they were not ready to receive His Excellency the President at that time. That is when the firing started. Hon. Kyanjo was there and I am sure he can fill in the details. Otherwise, what I can confirm is that four people are dead and many others wounded.

Mr Speaker, I have serious concerns on two things; one, on the intelligence network in this country. I am saying this because if it was functional, they would have informed the President of the mood at the site. The mood –

THE SPEAKER: That he should not go there?

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, may I please make my -

THE SPEAKER: That the President of the country should not go to the site?

MS KAMYA: I haven’t said that, Mr Speaker. The mood was that the people were rowdy and if you sent PGB in that situation, it would be an error of judgment. For the President to go there at this time was an error of judgment. I think the best thing would have been to let the crowd cool – who would wish the President to go into such a situation? It could even have been dangerous for the President, himself. Who would want to do that, Mr Speaker? I think it was not a good choice at the time. It was not a war situation that he was going to see. He has not even made a public statement to this country. The situation could have cooled – there was nothing wrong with waiting for the situation to cool down. I think that if the President had been wisely informed, he would also have made a wiser decision and maybe waited a while. 

As I wind up my presentation, I would like to say that this is perhaps the third worst day in the history of Uganda. The first time was when the Bazungu colonialists came and built up this country, Uganda, without consulting anybody on the design. The second was the 1966 crisis for which we are still suffering today, and the third is this day. 

I really hope that whoever is concerned, will handle this matter gravely; that this should be the starting point of finding the real problem of Uganda and, therefore, the real solution to that problem. I am saying this because if we do not focus on the real problem, we shall never get to the real solution; we shall never have peace in Uganda.

Mr Speaker, I thank you for the time given to me, but I wish to call upon Government to assure us about the security situation that is in that place. Are these armed people going to stay in Kasubi the way they are? Are they going to meet head-on? What does Government project, of what is going to happen in Kasubi? Are we going to hear gunshots? Thank you.

2.54
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, as Government, we agreed that a statement in regard to this unfortunate development at Kasubi has to be made on the Floor of this House today to let legislators know what happened, what is on the ground and what steps are being taken to contain the situation in that area, to make sure the culprits are brought to book. I expect  three ministers -  the Minister of Internal Affairs, the Minister Gender, Labour and Social Development, and the Minister in charge of Tourism – who have been working together, to come up with a statement so that we can all be brought on board in regard to the unfortunate circumstances. So, I would like to appeal to hon. Beti Kamya –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek some clarification from the Government Chief Whip. The issue of Kasubi Tombs is not a small one. Everyone was aware that Parliament would today begin business at 2.30 p.m. – we are all aware how sensitive Kampala and Buganda are to the security of the whole country. 

The clarification is, is the country really serious? I am saying this because if the statement is still just coming, we would rather adjourn and wait for it. We are not going to start talking about other things when area MPs like hon. Beti Kamya are almost breaking down on the Floor of the House. 

Let us have passion and feelings for those who are in pain. So, can the minister assure us – would the ten-minute adjournment be appropriate for us to receive this important statement? We do not want to have chaos by evening because many people are hoping Parliament is going to do something about this situation, and this is the time to do that.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, when you were opening the sitting this afternoon, you clearly informed the House that you had been told that a statement would be made on the Floor of this House. In my understanding, this statement is coming. I cannot pledge any minute or hour to it, but it will be here before we advance further in the discussions of the House this afternoon. 

THE SPEAKER: No, I think the problem is that although I was told this statement would be made, nobody has rang me to say, for example, it would delay for ten minutes or so. Hon. Kamya was in my office and I told her a statement would be made and that once it is made, she would make a contribution. She stood up because that statement was not forthcoming.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, I have been in touch with the Minister for Gender who has been coordinating the writing of this statement. We had agreed that we must all –

THE SPEAKER: Okay, what we do is this; the statement of the minister is debatable; Members will make contributions, but what we can do now is not to suspend the House. Let us have hon. Ssekikubo’s personal statement. I hope by the time he gets done, the minister will be here. The problem is that if we continue with this debate and the minister subsequently makes a statement, we shall be duplicating it. So, hon. Ssekikubo, make your personal statement.

2.59
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker, this is a statement of personal explanation moved under rule 42 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. 

In November 2009, I was approached by Rev. Mushabe of Kinoni Church of Uganda in Lubaale Parish, Lwemiyaga sub-county, with a request that I spearhead a fundraising function for the church. He also informed me that some other members of the church had wanted the fundraising to be led by hon. Sam Kutesa. 

I then agreed with Rev. Mushabe that since hon. Kutesa takes precedence as a minister, and also that since we are looking for money for the church in the constituency that I represent, the honourable minister would be invited as chief guest and I would attend as the area Member of Parliament, and together we would contribute to the church. Subsequently, the fundraising was fixed for 28 February 2010 and I was duly invited to attend. 

In the morning, I received three police officers, namely, the District CID Officer, Mr Yiga; the District Police Commander and the District Special Branch Officer, who expressed concern to me that there was going to be chaos at the fundraising function. I assured them that I would personally ensure that there is no chaos; unless it is caused by some other people, which in any case was not to the best of my knowledge. The trio then left for the venue to carry out further assessment of the situation. 

In the meantime, Mr Herman Ssentongo the LC V Chairman, Ms Joy Kabatsi, Mr Byarugaba the LC III Chairman for Lwemiyaga, and myself, held a meeting with a group of our mobilisers, after which we sent them back home, as we proceeded, the four of us, to the function. I then saw hon. Sam Kutesa’s vehicle and that of the RDC, Capt. James Mwesigye Kyana, and some other vehicles followed by a lorry belonging to a one Rwanshaija Reg. No. UAL 897N with a group of people. He did not directly proceed to the fundraising function, but had a detour at Kyeera Primary School where they held a meeting with a group of youths. 

While I was still attending a meeting in Lwemiyaga sub-county with my mobilisers, I received a call from the District CID Officer, Mr Yiga, to the effect that the fundraising venue was peaceful and that there was no cause for alarm. 

At the fundraising, Mr Kutesa bought some items and declared the function closed. Shortly after we arrived at the fundraising venue, apart from hon. Kutesa, I found other fundraisers, including the RDC of Kasese, Capt. James Mwesige, still at the venue with the fundraising items up for sale. 

I was welcomed by Mr Bangababo, and the area sub-county councillors, among others, and led to a seat in the tent. Hardly had we sat down than I saw a group of youths disembarking from Mr Rwanshaija’s lorry with sticks and stones and they were being led by a one Ninsiima Agaba; there was Tandeka Stephen; Kakyemba of Kabukongote; Kakuru Michael; Buyayo Benon; Baguma Herbert; Luwagga Jamil; and Byamukama of Kyattuba; Caleb son of Mzee Rwanyambirizi; and Kivule, among others. 

They attempted to throw us down by pulling the chairs and tents. They started beating up people and I personally saw Tandeka Stephen, Agaba Ninsiima and Luwagga Jamil hitting people with sticks, chairs and benches, and a lot of people suffered injuries, particularly a young boy, Ivan Ndyamuhaki - he was struck with a chair. Mwesige Hassan Ali and Silver Bampata were badly injured. I saw Tandeka Ninsima rush to a tinted car, get out a bundle of grazing sticks, and one detective, Sgt. Ngaiga, struggling with them over these sticks that they wanted to be distributed.

Ninsiima and Tandeka were now hitting the table where I was seated with sticks and from behind where I was seated; a one Basajja Richard hit me with a bench on the back of my head. 

I have duly seen a Police surgeon and the report is already out; it shows a bruise and swelling measured at 6 inches, 5 centimeters, and tenderness over the left back of the head. (Laughter) This was consistent with the assault with a blunt implement –

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, can you read it again?

MR SSEKIKUBO: It shows that a bruise and swelling measured at 6 inches, 5 centimeters, and tenderness over the left back of the head; and the classification was harm. It was consistent with assault with a blunt implement with some considerable force. I lay – 

THE SPEAKER: Is it authentic?

MR SSEKIKUBO: This is a medical examination report from the police surgeon, and I lay it on the Table, Mr Speaker.

In total danger and with all armed police, SPCs and LDUs having run away, my bodyguard, Mugabi Alex, fired a shot to disperse the marauding gang. On retreating they gathered stones for a counter attack. I saw Luwagga Jamil throwing a stone at my vehicle, smashing instantly the glass on the right hand passenger door. I also saw Ninsiima Agaba throwing a stone. Mr Speaker, the damaged vehicles and the effect of that is captured in the photograph and I lay it on the Table. 

Thereafter, I witnessed our attackers lining up and sharing money and goats. Regarding the Canter Lorry Reg. No. UAL 897N belonging to Mr Rwanshaija, the previous evening I had booked this lorry for UShs 150,000 to help carry my mobilisers. Late in the night, Mr Rwanshaija sent a message that he would not be able to avail the vehicle to me as some other persons had paid more and given him other assignments to collect members of 3K; 3K standing for Kaguta, Kutesa and Kawooya brigade. I knew indeed that they were collected from as far as Lwebitakuli in Mawogola County, and some from Sembabule Town Council, Kirama and Ntuusi sub-counties. 

When the violence had ceased, my group and I resumed the fundraising where we contributed UShs 550,000 which we handed to the head of the fundraising committee, Mr Bangariza. Thereafter, the host, Rev. Mushabe, gave a closing prayer and the fundraising was closed. 

We then set off looking for the injured and took them for medical treatment. Three cases have so far been reported to the Police that include assault SD Ref. B/28/02/2010; the second one being malicious damage SD Ref. 14/28/02/02 of 2010; and another one being incitement to violence SD Ref. 15/28/02/2010; and this incitement is against honourable minister, Sam Kutesa as a person.  

Curiously, Ninsiima Agaba, one of the ring leaders of this violence stormed Lwemiyaga Police Post on the 3rd – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, I think you should leave the files out because the particulars in the Police files can only be known by the Police and not outsiders like you or me. You just confine yourself to what happened to you, and what you saw, and not what you heard. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Okay. A one Ngaiga, a Detective Sergeant, who came in to rescue the group, has summarily been transferred to Bushenyi. 

As a consequence, on Sunday, 14th March, a similar incident happened at Meeru fundraising function where the same group of youths were transported in the same canter lorry No. UAL 897N and a one Agaba Ninsiima, who was leading a group of people beating up others with sticks, emerged with two military escorts at Meeru Primary School again. He has 12 files against him, but he was still at large and this time round, he came with two armed men in military fatigues, and they were captured in these photos. 

This is Ninsiima with a stick leading the group, but as you can see here, he is the same person being guarded by the military on the subsequent day of 14th March, at another fundraising function at Meeru. I am laying these photos on the Table. 

It is so grave that in my presence, even the Police officer in charge of Lwemiyaga Police Station who was calming down the situation, was confronted by the same armed group. If the Police cannot offer protection to itself, then this is going too far. 

And on a personal note, when you see the politics of this country, particularly in a place like Lwemiyaga - Lwemiyaga is cosmopolitan with all tribes; Baganda are there, Bahima are there, even the Bagisu carry out their imbalu in Lwemiyaga; we have the Acholi quarters because there used to be a railway line. 

But where a leader gets young men - in the photo I am showing you - of a particular tribe and gives them sticks to go and terrorise their colleagues – you see, you can do that in an urban area, but in a village where everyone is known to each other and they are known to all of us - I can see Kakyemba; I can see Byamukama; I can see Ninsiima; I can see Buyayo. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, the birth of any of us is not by choice. You are born either of a Muganda parentage or of a Muhima and sometimes some of us get caught up between the two. You could be sharing parentage. On which side will you fall in such circumstances? But where a responsible person trains young men, transports them – and these are Bahima boys and I know them; they are my uncles! But you tell them to go and beat up and even kill – because they said, with Ssekikubo, break his head, but with Ms Kabatsi, you whip her; you can break her legs, but do not kill her; do not kill the wife of my friend. But for the nephew, that one can go to meet his creator. (Laughter) And they are here, Mr Speaker. The Hima boys are given sticks and some other tribes are given stones because they are champions with stones and these are champions with sticks. 

I think this has gone very far and it is there for everybody to see. The seeds we are sowing for short-term political gain may be hard or very difficult to reverse in the long-term. The short-term gains that hon. Kutesa insists on gaining in Lwemiyaga may be lost in the long-run when you look at the big picture - the country. When you look at people lifting benches and at the end of the day, Mr Speaker, they line up to receive rewards - this is very disturbing. 

Nowadays, any fundraising in Lwemiyaga has to be guarded by the Mobile Police Patrol Unit. Any civic meeting or meeting for registration of members has to have Police presence with tear gas. I think this is going too far and I entreat all those concerned – we may have politics for the time being, but the seeds of destruction that we are planting today might germinate. Fortunately, for some of them they seem to be in the evening of their life, but for us, God willing, we shall be here much longer. (Laughter) And it will take us a long time to try and heal these wounds. I thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity, but God forbid; this country belongs to all of us. 

THE SPEAKER: I see the Minister of Gender is here. We shall adjust the Order Paper to allow him make his statement. Can you please make the statement? 

3.16
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gabriel Opio): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to apologise for coming late, but Cabinet had requested me to go to Kasubi tombs. His Excellency was also there, and after returning from Kasubi, I had to discuss the matter with my staff, and this is the statement I would like to make.

This is a statement to Parliament about the gutting of Muzibu Azaala Mpanga hut at Kasubi tombs, a world heritage site. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members of parliament, last night, 16 March 2010, Muzibu Azaala Mpanga in Kasubi tombs complex, was gutted down by fire. Muzibu Azaala Mpanga was the biggest and most prominent of the huts in the complex. It was built in 1882 and converted into a mausoleum in 1884 by Muteesa I. This main hut contained four royal tombs; that of Muteesa I, Kabaka Mwanga, Daudi Chwa, and Edward Muteesa II. 

The mausoleum contained a collection of royal artifacts such as traditional instruments, photographs, weapons, shields, fetishes and other symbols of the kingdom. 

His Excellency the President and I were at the site this morning. However, the facts about the extent of the damage and loss have not yet been established. The cause of the fire is also not yet known. (Interjection) Mr Speaker, the copies are coming. 

Today, Cabinet constituted a committee to study the situation and provide a detailed report to Cabinet and later on to the public. 

This committee includes, the Attorney-General; the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; the Minister of Tourism Trade and Industry; the Minister of State for Finance and Planning (General Duties); the Minister of Education; the Minister of Local Government; and myself, as the chairperson. The committee will also co-opt the Secretary-General of the National Commission for UNESCO.

Kasubi tombs are very important to us as a nation. It is a world heritage site that was put on the world heritage list in 2001 by UNESCO. It was selected because it was a masterpiece of human creativity, both in its construction and in its execution. It bears witness to the living traditions of the Baganda. The special organisation of the Kasubi tombs represents the best example of the palace’s architectural ensemble, which reflects technical achievements developed over many centuries. Also the built and the natural elements of the site are charged with historical, traditional and spiritual values of the Baganda. 

The site is a major tourist attraction as well as a historical educative centre for the country. It has been generating revenue and employment for the country. 

As the Minister responsible for Culture in the country, I wish to convey my sincere condolences to the Kingdom of Buganda and the nation at large for the unfortunate incident. I appeal to the public to remain calm to enable Government carry out thorough investigation. A detailed report and the way forward will be presented to the House soon. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.20
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Female Youth Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I want to thank the minister for the statement. I am a woman of words, but today, I do not have words. The situation at Kasubi Tombs and what we witnessed this morning show that Uganda is in trouble. It is unfortunate that this incident happened. We do not know how it happened, but it is getting worse. 

We went there as Members of Parliament basing on our culture in Buganda to see what had happened and to console our leaders in Buganda. But to our shock, there were people shooting at us. As I speak now, I have just survived narrowly because the lady who was lying down with me was shot dead. I do not know why this happened. I am a woman of my word; the situation at the tombs is so worrying. I agree there were many people there; I agree that maybe there was need for enforcement, but not that kind of force. 

Mr Speaker, I had never seen war, but today I have seen war; I cried tears, I did not know what was happening. I was seeing people just shooting; I did not know what to do until I was told to lie down. 

As the minister calls upon the people to be calm, I think the army and the soldiers should be told to be calm as well. They should be told that these are civilians. We know that we need order in this country; we know we need peace and we cannot solve the challenges that are taking place now by using guns. An armed person is more dangerous than any other person – civilian are civilians.  

So, I appeal to the minister, who has read the statement, to address this matter to the people who are manning security at Kasubi Tombs and even in the whole country. People are being shot dead; people are dying. When someone lies down on the floor, they are assuring you that they have no trouble and are helpless. I was helpless on the floor; I did not have a gun, I would have been shot, just as many have been shot. 

We need peace! We have fought for this peace and we still need this peace. I appeal to Baganda and everybody else to remain calm. We are so sorry about what happened. But let the security people know that we need our lives. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.23
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here on behalf of the Opposition in Parliament, to convey our most heart felt condolences and sympathies to the Buganda Kingdom and the people of Buganda over the unfortunate event of the inferno that occurred in Kasubi Tombs. 

Last night, when I watched WBS, it was like drama unfolding. I could not believe that the historical site of Kasubi Tombs that date to about 130 years old could be destroyed in a moment. I mean as a country, the Kasubi Tombs were a pride to us. It was a symbol of the Buganda culture. Culture is not only defined by what we say; culture is defined by language, culture is defined by tools that the people ordinarily use in their day-to-day living, culture is defined by the menu that the people serve their people, culture is symbolized by the social practices that a community practices and it is symbolized by tradition. And in Uganda, Buganda as a region and Buganda as a tribe, I am happy to observe that it is the only tribe that has been able to leave up to this culture and be able to treasure what it ordinarily has. The rest of the other tribes in Uganda have only had their traditional representations in terms of tools housed and kept at the museum in Kamwokya. But now, this big tradition which dates back for so many years has been destroyed in a twinkle of an eye. This is a very serious matter to us!

Personally, I would like to say that this is what I consider as the third most serious event that caused bloodshed in Uganda. The first one was in 1966: the Buganda crisis, we all learnt about it in history, we did not have the chance to see it as we saw what happened yesterday and today. Last September on the 10th, there was bloodshed here in Kampala and we lost property and lives. 

My appeal to Government is to restore calm. It is unfortunate that much as we depend on our police force and on UPDF, I think not many of them are humanely trained to handle such matters. I am sorry to observe that they are trigger-hungry. The people who are supposed to provide us with security are trigger-hungry. If such a thing has happened, all of us should be focusing on the unfortunate thing, but instead we are continuing to lose life. 

On the other hand, even us the civilians cannot go scot-free without any blame apportioned to us. We need to appreciate that stone-throwing to a person who is armed will provoke retaliation. But the most important thing at this time is to appeal to all parties concerned to calm down. We request Government to conduct an inquiry into what exactly happened because it is not by surprise. The tombs have been in existence for nearly 130 years and survived even during the days of turmoil and there was no opportunity of arson. We have had coups in this country: in 1971, we had a coup, in 1979, when Amini’s regime was overthrown we had Saba-Saba but still Kasubi Tombs were never touched. In 1985, when President Lutwa overthrew the regime of President Obote, there were gunshots here, but Kasubi Tombs were left interact. In 1986, when President Museveni shot his way to power with the NRA, they were very careful not to touch Kasubi Tombs because they knew what the tombs stood for. 

What has happened now under this peaceful arrangement that we are having, where there is law and order, there is peace and tranquillity and everything is honey and roses? We need to personally ask ourselves what has happened in this peaceful Uganda where law and order, rule of law, is in place. [MR ODONGA OTTO: “Fundamental change”.] I would not like to say it is a fundamental change, my brother hon. Odonga Otto. I would not like to ask that question because the right time will come when we will ask that question.

As of now, I once again want to reiterate, please Government save us loss of lives and further destruction. I think that is the most honourable thing that we can do for the time being. Please, expedite your investigations and we hope at a later time that the minister will be able to come to us with a more detailed statement because he has not even talked about what my honourable colleague has said that during her presence the lady who was next to her was gunned down. The minister is very silent about it and is only talking about the arson and the burning things. He has not talked about lives. So, my friend “Angel Gabriel” Mr Minister, Sir, I trust you as Gabriel and you know what that name means, talk nothing but the truth. Please, give us enough information on what is happening on the ground and at the same time, we will be interested in hearing that apology from the bottom of the heart of this country and from its leadership. That probably will be able to sooth the hearts of the people and be able to cool their hearts and quell the situation. 

Once again, my sincere sympathies and condolences to the Buganda Kingdom and the people of Buganda upon the loss of this great historical site because we as a nation have lost a lot! How many of us have ever visited Kasubi Tombs? And even when we go there, we go there as tourists, where you go, culturally remove your shoes, you go in, you make your contributions there and you walk away. You have somebody employed there to explain what all you see in that site means. 

We are here as a country crying about employment and an employment opportunity which existed, which was providing livelihood to a number of households, is gone. Even our chance as a country to attract tourists and to make us earn foreign currency is gone. This is a challenge to us as a country. It is not time for us to apportion blame but honourably we must take responsibility where we have failed in executing our duties as a country. Now is not the time for us to begin pointing fingers that hon. Aggrey Awori, hon. Gabriel, no, we should own and take responsibility because in the first place we owe our country a duty to provide security; security to the people and security to the property. That should be the first starting point that we own and take responsibility for what has happened. I thank you.

3.33
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Indeed, all of us are in shock of our national heritage. Having that cultural site for the last 130 years is really a sign that indeed we treasure cultural sites in our country. Having been taken up by UNESCO, definitely it became one of the world’s attraction centres.

You heard from hon. Nalubega Mariam, as a Vice-Chairperson of Buganda Caucus together with my Chairperson, hon. Rose Namayanja, we mobilised Members who were nearby so that we can go and really sympathise and associate ourselves with all those who were at the site. We were around 12 Members of Parliament but if these Members are given opportunities, everyone to explain what happened, definitely many of us will be forced to shed tears. Apart from what happened that the tombs were burnt to ashes, for us we are looking at the situation and how the Government has handled the security situation at the site. The site has been taken over by military personnel in uniform and those who are not in uniform and making matters worse, the way they are shooting at anyone leaves a lot to be desired.

Hon. Mariam Nalubega put it right that she has never seen a war. Indeed, it was a war whereby many people were being caned including Members of Parliament, they will tell you! The situation there needs urgent attention. I do not know whether we are in control if we cannot handle people who are not armed and everybody was almost very eager to shoot. We were told, “Please, let everybody lie down” and we went down, all of us. I do not know where hon. Kikungwe is. We went down (Laughter)

They were having various commanders - I think they were not co-ordinated. Others were telling us lie down and others came from behind beating all those who were down and those who tried to run were shot. What kind of situation is this? Was this a kinigeria?

I cannot tell what was exactly happening. The way the security has been handled is our greatest concern, as Members of Parliament. The security has not been handled to the expectations of our wishes because if people are mourning, we expected the police, the military personnel to create order that when you come, come there as someone who has gone to mourn. Let everybody look at those who are entering and definitely if there was a kind of screening, they screen them but that is not being done. The reason they were giving was that because the President was coming therefore they must create a situation that the President comes when everything is set. But the President coming to visit a site when many have been killed, when many have been injured! I think that is really unfair and I believe the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Defence should come in otherwise, these are the incidences that make situations grow from bad to worse.

Otherwise, if people are mourning, why is it that police can come in, the military can come in, with force? Those who are not uniformed are just telling people “Shoot here, shoot there, shoot the other side”, today or tomorrow we would be mourning about 12 MPs who would have been killed by what happened today in the morning. I thank you.

3.39
MRS NABILAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank Members of Parliament who have since morning been concerned about the tragedy that has befallen this country over Kasubi Tombs. 

As my colleagues had said, we mobilised each other in the morning and at around 10.00 O’clock we were in Kasubi. When we entered, people were mourning; we were taken around and it was ashes all over and there was nothing much to see. It is only the ex-Katikkiro and hon. Kyanjo who talked to the people.

So, as we were coming out, we started hearing gunshots and we thought they were going to subside but after a while, they became so much that we were all told to take cover. You could imagine between the debris and the grass and the what, how you take cover on each other. We were lumped as Members of Parliament - hon. Nalubega was just below me. I was lying in front of her and trying to take cover as we should. The gunshots started becoming more and more and people were shouting in Luganda, “Oh, our children are not going to see us; we are going to die from here.” One woman was really crying and I think it is hon. Kaddu Mukasa who said, “Don’t really talk about death.” But anybody realised that it was a death situation. 

We were getting out and the people shooting were coming from the gate, telling us to go back. So, we were lying down and wanting to look down so that people know we are not going to fight. The next thing we heard were gunshots. I did not know that my neighbour - because now I had somebody whose legs were on top of me but he was unfortunate that he was lying on a pile of grass and so it was easier to shoot him and he was shot. That is the guy who was carried - but I did not know that he was shot because I did not hear the shot coming near me.

So, when my colleagues were getting up I heard this person saying, “I have been shot, help me.” So, there is no way I could stand up with the orders, “Get up! Run!” So I did not know how to get up. If I get up will I be shot like him or - so my colleagues, the Mariams, managed to run away. I stayed behind still taking cover because I had somebody who was lying next to me who had been shot. So, somebody tells me, “Get up!” And my colleagues tried to tell me, “Nabilah please get up.” But I did not know; I was confused; do I go to the gate, do I go back; to where?

So, after a while I looked up and there was this guy in civilian clothes who had a pistol. So I did not know whether if I got up I would be safe. So, I decided to stay safe. After a while they were beating everybody telling them to get up. So they came to me and they had to cane me like a child. You know, like in secondary school -(Interjections)- yes, I was caned and right now I have just seen a doctor; you know how you feel when you have been caned. So, I thought it was better for me to be caned than to be shot. So, he was caning me and telling me to get up. I was helpless because I thought for me to get up and be shot I would rather lie down and maybe take the cane. So I took the cane and I think one army officer recognised me and said, “Hon. Nabilah please get up.” I said, “I get up and I go where?” He said, “No. There is a security guard to take you to your car.” But you can imagine being flogged with somebody who is shot in front of you because you think he is in a worse situation than you are. That is the situation we went through. 

I am late because when I came here earlier in the morning I already had ashes all over me. This is the dress but the good thing it was a black dress. But that is the situation, Mr Speaker. I was obliged to be there because it is my duty and responsibility as area MP but for me to be caned – well, I do not know!

The officers knew we were in. So, it is not like they did not know that Members of Parliament had come in. But for them to flog us in the tombs, I do not think it is right for people to flog mourners because Kasubi Tombs has been destroyed and for the area it is a mourning period for the destruction. So, for my chief whip to say, “Who is mourning?” I do not know what she meant – no, my former chief whip, National Guidance actually. I do not know if she does not know that we are mourning. For this to be happening, Government needs to come out and really tell us which direction we are going to if we are to handle the tragedy in a very meaningful way. Thank you so much.

3.46
MR NORMAN MUWULIZE (Independent, Buikwe County West, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to extend our condolences, especially as people from Saza Kyaggwe in the newly created district of Buikwe, to the entire Kingdom of Buganda and to the Kabaka of Buganda for what has befallen us as the people of Buganda and indeed the country. It is very sad and absurd and we indeed condemn it in the strongest terms that we can afford to find. 

Having heard from Members who have witnessed and the news that we have read and also the screens we have watched, the situation is indeed very bad. But it is also very disheartening that at such a moment, when I see every Ugandan is very concerned and is really sad over such an incident, we can also find among us Ugandan people who can even afford to want to take the situation - which needs us to come together to console those of us who are sad - and try to maybe derail colleague tribesmen that maybe there are others who want to remove us from the map of Uganda. But I think everybody is concerned and if the cause has been an intention by any detractor, we should join hands and help Government and stop it right now because the Kasubi Tombs are a very important site to the country and indeed in the world. If it can really get one person to end it like this, we should not take it as a joke. We should not turn it around to incite just ordinary minds into what should not really be because what I see is that now others want to make me feel that there is a section of this country that can turn against Buganda, which I think is not true. I know Buganda must stay and we must be brotherly and we should really thank those who are coming in to rescue - I appeal to Government to help us to at least restore what can be restored in terms of the structures at these tombs. Government should come to our rescue and we shall join hands with it. 

At this juncture, I should thank the President for adjusting his busy schedule and at least appearing on the scene. This gives a ray of hope to us and, therefore, we should really advise wherever possible to ensure that we build the minds of fellow Ugandans because we cannot afford to incite anybody but create a situation of mourning, to create a situation of calm and to create a situation of collective reconstruction. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.50
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I heard of this incident of the destruction of our tombs this morning, I was shocked. The question which came to my mind was: who did it and why did he do it? Surely, these Kasubi Tombs have been our pride; they have been the pride of Uganda and a centre of tourism. We were very happy to have something to remember and even compare to the likes of the Egyptian pyramids. But today, our ‘pyramids’ have been reduced to ashes. Surely, who did it? 

To me, whoever did it, if it is a Ugandan or if they are Ugandans, I should say that we are running mad in Uganda; we are very crazy. What is happening? We started with burning children in schools just like animals being hunted. Expensive schools were burnt to nothing, surely are we normal? I think we Ugandans need psychiatrist’s treatment because a normal person cannot behave like that. We are crazy! We have lost these tombs; how shall we replace them? It is the greatest loss I have ever heard of. How shall we recover these tombs?   

The Baganda, we are all mourning together with you for the great loss of these Kasubi Tombs which we are all proud of. Now what is happening is that those who are seated right and left are pouring petrol into the fire so that the fire increases. We are in danger. What will happen if all the Baganda riot now and begin fighting everybody here? I think as sensible Ugandans, we must be sober in this situation. We must identify those lunatics, those terrorists – I consider it terrorism because it is something terrible – who are really responsible and are brought to book otherwise we cannot continue with this. I am really very sorry for our Kabaka, the people of Buganda and the people of Uganda as a whole for the great loss. We are together with you but I urge we come together and solve the situation amicably. I am extremely sorry; my condolences and let us hope that we shall solve it. Thank you very much.

3.54
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to also send my sympathy to the people of Buganda and the people of Uganda. This being a tourist attraction to the people of Uganda, many people who are non-Baganda have been benefiting from its existence. So, although culturally it belongs to the Kingdom of Buganda, there are many people who are in the tourism industry who are going to equally be affected because of this accident.    

It is also going to be an additional cost to many people who will have to amend their websites, who will have to amend their publications, who will have to amend their advertisements about what to come to Uganda to see as a tourist attraction of that magnitude, which is no more. 

But I stand now to seek clarification from the honourable ministers. You will recall that at the opening of this session, the Government Chief Whip did state on the Floor that a joint statement is being prepared by the Minister of Internal Affairs, that of Tourism and the one of Gender. That was the statement made on this Floor in which case we had expected that this statement is going to reflect on the security situation as has been reflected by Members on this Floor. Now that the statement did not do that, may I seek clarification from the Minister of State for Internal Affairs as to what the security situation is around the Kasubi Tombs? Is it true like the Members are saying that some people have died? How many are dead and under what circumstances has it been? Is it a secure place for members of the public to go or it is a no go area so that you could make a declaration and people know how to avoid it? 

These are things that would make the Members of Parliament not to be vulnerable by wishing to commiserate with those people and unfortunately fall into problems. Mr Speaker, those are the issues I would wish to seek clarification about. I thank you.

3.57
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank all Members of Parliament who have expressed sympathy to the people of Buganda and who have said good words in utmost good faith to those who have been directly affected by this act. 

Last night, at around 9.40, I heard news from Kasubi from someone who was going to Wakiso. When he informed me that there was a situation that was unclear at Kasubi, I called my senior colleague, the Minister of Internal Affairs but he was not on phone. I attempted the number of the hon. Minister of State but he was also not on phone. When I called the Inspector-General of Police, his number was on and off. So, in our working relationship, the Inspector-General had advised me that if I attempted to call him and it was not possible, I should send him an SMS. So I did send him an SMS. He replied because I told him, “There was a situation that was unclear at Kasubi could you please verify what it is and we see what we can do together.” He replied and told me that he was out of the country, but he was on the way, in Nairobi.  

Moments later, I called his number and it was on although he had not received specific information from the site but I told him that I was seeing pictures and I was going to go there at night. I had started seeing pictures and captions from the scene with different reports and I felt that it would have been wiser for Government to have a preliminary statement by a senior officer. Because I had called my colleagues and not found them, I discussed with them and thought we had agreed. He told me he was going to consult his senior colleagues so that there could be a statement expressing sorrow so that we can start from there the following morning.

Last night when I went, I was unable to access the site because of the population. This morning when I called the IGP, he didn’t pick the phone so I sent another SMS and I asked him to find a way of keeping the scene safer for successful investigations. 

At around 9.30 p.m., hon. Latif Sebaggala gave me a call and told me that they were assembling to go to Kasubi. I had wanted to go and see it on the sidelines of the cabinet at Mengo just in case there was anything I could do. Hon. Sebaggala Latif advised me that it was better for us to go and add our voices to others and tell the people to keep calm. We gathered -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I just want to inform you that this debate takes about an hour so see how best to curtain your contributions.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that advice. We were ten in number and I think it is necessary to mention them. Hon. Mathias Nsubuga, hon. Latif, hon. Kaddu Mukasa, hon. Issa Kikungwe, hon. Magulumaali, hon. Nalubega, hon. Nabilah, hon. Kaddunabbi, hon. Namayanja Rose and myself. 

When we reached there, we found the police were performing their duty. According to me, they were doing it with reasonable precision. We entered and addressed some of the people and told them to keep calm. We advised them that we had already made a big loss and it would be necessary not to add losses to that loss. 

Moments later, we were informed that the President was coming. It is highly commendable that the President found time to go and visit these tombs but it is exceedingly regretful that he had to go there only if and when some people had been killed.

Moments later when we were attempting to come out, we started hearing gun shots coming from the outside. We took cover and that story has been told by colleagues. My job was to see exactly what was supposed to be happening. I was able to identify three major things: One, that there were people who were not dressed in military uniform but in civilian clothing holding heavy pistols and they were shooting at people. 

When they came closer to us, I thought it was no longer necessary to keep down because I felt it was going to cost more lives. I stood up and went closer to an officer and asked him what was happening and what people should do. I identified him as Kabango and he was the one commanding the team, which was inside. Kabango is an army officer. 

Outside there was another police officer I could identify called Turyagumanawe. I am sure of these two names and I am sure of the people in civilian clothing who were shooting directly at individuals. I was able to count five people being shot at. I couldn’t tell whether they had died or not. When we came out, I saw bodies being carried to a police pickup and it was waiting for others. I pleaded with them to take these ones as we still had other cars and if there was necessity to carry others, we would surrender our own vehicles. That van went and another police patrol was available.

I want to thank the police but they are finding work difficult because of this infiltration by people who come without uniform. They don’t obey orders and nobody is in command of them. Just yesterday, when I stood here to complain about the shootings and the element of compensation, the hon. Minister told me that these were private security guards. This time I don’t know the fashion of his answer because these were military-uniformed men with authorised people in civilian clothing. 

We want Mr Kabango and Turyagumanawe to answer this critical question before we continue to simply mourn the double tragedy. The tombs were loss enough for us then you add on individuals, why? These are sons and daughters of poor people, why do you kill people?

Mr Speaker, it is not pragmatic to apportion blame now because investigations are going on but I think -

THE SPEAKER: I have heard many making contributions on this. The important thing is to find out what happened. I have seen the statement of the Government that they appointed ministers and so forth to constitute a committee. My advice is that we should really get independent technical people to investigate this matter rather than have this group establish this and the other. Personally, I am not supposed to contribute but my guidance here is that all interested parties should constitute an independent technical committee to investigate this matter.

MR KYANJO: I entirely agree with you, Mr Speaker, and as I was saying, it is not right to apportion blame now but this is advice to my colleagues on the front bench. Although it is not correct to apportion blame, it is forgivable if one read through the sequence of events and thought that the one who has been responsible for this sequence of events is part of the things that are happening now including the shootings. The sequence runs from the refusal of Ssabasajja Kabaka to go to Nakasongola and Kayunga, the shootings on the streets, the closure of CBS - if someone thought that the one who did this was responsible for this, it would be forgivable but it is not correct to apportion blame in the meantime.

My second advice to my honourable colleagues, the ministers, is that if there is a statement to be made like the hon. Minister came and made, it should not be one that makes some of us feel exceedingly impotent that you come after the shootings and don’t talk about them at all as if they did not happen. We would have expected the statement from the chairman of the committee to be more inclusive -(Interruption)

MR KIKUNGWE: Thank you, for giving way. I have heard the proposed committee of technical people to investigate this - ministerial, whatever it is. I hope even the ministers are to some level technical. We have heard more than what we can recall in form of investigations and these committees. You remember not long ago we had schools being burnt left right and centre and they instituted committees to investigate. Up to today, Government has failed to come up with -

THE SPEAKER: And therefore we don’t investigate?

MR KIKUNGWE: Mr Speaker, I am not saying we should not investigate, but that the investigators are not the right people. We should get the best group of independent investigators and not Government.

THE SPEAKER: This is what I am saying. They should be investigators that would satisfy all the sides. They should start by the sequence of events. What happened at 8.00 p.m. when this incident took place? When it happened, what followed? You do not investigate what happened today. You must investigate how the things started and when they started. Who did this and who did the other? But in my view, it should be an independent technical team. 

THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gabriel Opio): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The line you are taking is the line that Cabinet has taken. We are going to have an independent team, but it will be Cabinet to get it. So we are taking an independent professional investigation –(Interjections)- no, I am just telling you. You just wait. I am saying that the Government is going to have independent investigations which will be –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Yes, just because you are now saying that makes some of us excited that you are doing something good. Thirty minutes ago, you read to us a team of ministers who are going to investigate this; now you are saying Cabinet is bringing an independent technical group to investigate this. Can you elucidate a little more? You are not just going to talk and then say you have said it and we all go home. Can you give us the details of how technical and what the timeframe is? Otherwise, those of us in politics know that commissions of inquiry are just a waste of time. If you have any urgent political crisis, and you put a commission of inquiry, after two to three weeks, people will forget. So, can you give us those specific details of these independent good ideas that you are talking about, honourable minister? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kyanjo, please wind up. 

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, in conclusion, I want to remind this House that our people were shot in September and an investigation was instituted. It has not yielded results. We hope that this will not follow others like Budo and other fires. 

Allow me also to pass a word to the people that as we mourn this tragic incident, let us accept the sympathies from other people - the sympathies from people who are not specifically from Buganda because this is a matter that touches everyone of us. In the meantime, the killing of unarmed civilians must stop. We are not going to accept the killing of our people for whatever reason when they are unarmed. This should go to the Ministry of Internal Affairs and to the Ministry of Defence. If it is not possible to stop these killings by Government action, we shall take it upon ourselves to defend our people. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please allow me to make this comment. That this team should be set up as soon as possible, and should be given the timeframe when evidence has not been eroded from people’s minds. And, it should be something national, not regional. 

4.14 
MS SUZAN NAKAWUKI (FDC, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to contribute. Today, it is really evident in this country that we are operating under a military regime. Uganda is one of the countries as of now which has no respect for human rights – 

THE SPEAKER: You are part of the system governing the country; are you military? 

MS NAKAWUKI: Mr Speaker, the Legislature is part of it, but some of us are like idols in this Parliament, because even when we give advice, it is not taken. This government has utterly failed in its duty to protect the lives of Ugandans and their properties. It is absurd that today, even after the shooting - including the shootings of yesterday - the minister did not see it important to discuss this particular issue, or to even inform this House of the number of people who had been injured, and those who had been killed. 

Last night, I narrowly survived caning, just because I was fit enough to run for my dear life -(Laughter)– and I was being caned only because I was inquiring about what had happened, since we had been prevented from accessing the tombs. It is really important that this government starts taking the lives of Ugandans as important, because it is the duty of this government. 

On a sad note, Buganda Kingdom has lost a source of revenue, even after the closure of CBS where it was deriving some income. I am wondering whether there are any plans to help out Buganda, because this has been a tourist attraction. 

It is typical of the Uganda Police on every incident, to make statements saying that they are going to investigate the matter. They keep investigating, but they never yield results. The eye witnesses by the time of the fire said that there was a blast behind the tombs, and there was a double cabin vehicle that had no number plates that was driven from the tombs and –(Interjections)– Mr Speaker, I seek your protection from the minister with dreadlocks, because she is interfering with important business. (Laughter) I am talking about hon. Kabakumba. Please, give me chance. [MS KABAKUMBA: “Order”.] But for sure you have the dreadlocks and you are interfering with serious business. 

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, is hon. Nakawuki in order to get overexcited about my hairstyle, and she fails to differentiate between dreadlocks and my new look? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, many times - even yesterday - I pointed out that this point of order thing is sometimes being misused. I am not saying she is out of order, but in future, we shall be asking a Member raising a point of order to point out the Rule of Procedure against which s/he is raising it. Whenever you raise a point of order, you will be required to point out which Rule of Procedure has been contravened. Therefore, since this is the announcement we are making today, let us proceed. 

MS NAKAWUKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the ruling. Before my honourable colleague misused the point of order, I was talking about the double cabin truck that had no number plate. This is typical – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, this is one of the facts that will have to be verified by the investigating committee, because what you are quoting are the newspapers, and if you read that story, you will find another contradiction. This is talking about an unnumbered vehicle, but when you follow through, there will be a different story which contradicts the one you have now.

MS NAKAWUKI: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, but this is typical of CMI and ESO; they always have multiple number plates.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe it was not there. Why do you think it is accurate? I am telling you that if you read the story, you will see the contradiction.

MS NAKAWUKI: Finally, my constituency, Busiro East, houses a number of ancestral grounds for Buganda, and following the trend of events in this country, we are not so sure whether we are secure. I do not know whether the minister can try to provide some security there. This is because another fire may come up in this era of fires.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are talking about the loss of our people, and as a method in the work of this Parliament, we always observe a moment of silence for our dear departed people. Would it not be procedurally right, having known that we have lost our people in the tragedy of Kasubi, to observe a moment of silence? I want to be guided.

THE SPEAKER: Who are these? Do you have their particulars?

MS ANYWAR: As I was coming from my home on Entebbe Road, I received phone calls indicating to me that there was a problem in Kasubi and that both children and elders had died. You cannot rubbish a dead person; we have our colleagues who have gone there and they told us that they saw people who had died. Do we really observe a moment of silence for only those who are named or confirmed already dead?

THE SPEAKER: I think what we can do is to observe a minute of silence for all people in Uganda who have died a violent death since yesterday.

(The Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Maj. Rtd Bright Rwamirama): Mr Speaker, the fire at Kasubi is very sad and regrettable. Uganda as a whole and particularly Buganda, is very sad that we had this site burnt. I have been quiet and listening and I have very few things to say.

The first one is that experience is not what happens to man, but what man does with what happens to him. We have a misfortune of losing one of our ancient sites, but the way we are handling it is absurd. I would appeal to leaders to handle it in a mature way. We are now receiving information that people have died, but we are not saying under what circumstances. 

We need to tackle these misfortunes when they befall this country, regardless of which political party we belong to. I agree with hon. Kyanjo that we should not start apportioning blame. I would also like to tell leaders that we should encourage the population to respect the Police. We need Police today; we need Police tomorrow; and it is not good for civilians to pelt stones on Police. We have seen many incidents where Police is being pelted with stones. That is my advice, and I repeat, that is my advice.

4.26
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): On behalf of the people of Obongi whom I represent here, I would like to send my sincere condolences to the people and the kingdom of Buganda, over this moment of bereavement. Disasters occur and pass, but what should not be lost is the constant desire to survive and to prevent the reoccurrence of the same.

At this very moment, our concerns should have been directed to two things; one, the cause of the disaster; and two, the status to determine whether it is spreading or not. The question which comes to mind again and again is, “How did the fire turn into violence?” This has not been reflected in the statement of the minister. What triggered off the violence? Is the violence spreading or it is contained?

THE SPEAKER: Last night, when this was happening, there were reports from various radios that the fire brigade vehicle which had gone to the site to salvage the situation was being attacked by people throwing stones at it. Is that not the time the violence started?

4.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kassaija): I had kept quiet, but let me give this information to this House. We are faced with two situations; One, is the attempt by Government to save our monument. I call it our monument because it is of historical significance. 

I want to convey my personal sympathy, but also as a person who comes from a kingdom area, our heartfelt condolences and our sympathy to the people of Buganda and Uganda. This site is not only for Baganda, it is for us all. We should look at this from this point of view. The Baganda may be the ones feeling this more, but the pain is all over the country. So, my sympathies!

I came to know about this fire yesterday at 8.45 p.m. and I am very surprised, hon. Kyanjo, that you were not able to get me because my two phone numbers that you have, were on. The Police moved very fast - by 10 minutes to nine – the fire actually started at 8.30 p.m. and by 10 minutes to nine, three fire engines were on site –(Interjections)- no, they were with water, but the fire was extremely big that we had to even order for a third and a fourth from Entebbe. 

But what happened? This is the information I want to give this House; people – I do not want to use derogatory language, but people of bad will literally prevented these vehicles from accessing the site. Two of them were so badly damaged and a number of Police officers were injured. As we speak now, they are lying in hospital –(Interjections)- yes, and at an appropriate time I will bring the full details of what took place yesterday night. That is point number one – that actually the Police tried to do everything possible within their power to prevent that historic site from being destroyed, but could not do it as quickly as possible because there were people of bad will who prevented them from going there.

The second piece of information which I should give is about this unfortunate incident that has happened; the killing. For this one, I do not have much to comment now, but I promise this House as I normally do –(Interjections)- yes, I assure this House that a full detailed report of how things have moved is being compiled. 

We had to ask our colleague in Cabinet, hon. Opio, to come and give you preliminary information. A full detailed report of events as they took place is coming and we should be able to present it -(Interjections)- well, that will depend on the Speaker, if he allows us to do it tomorrow. I am told it is ready right now, and if you want, I will present it tomorrow. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: A report for tomorrow? Okay, we are going to proceed, but we shall start tomorrow’s sitting at 10.00 a.m. I think you conclude and then we leave this matter.

MR FUNGAROO: I thank you. I am the shadow minister in charge of the presidency. I am concerned about the presidency and the security of our President. When a situation is huge like this, the President, being the Commander–in-Chief notwithstanding - even if it was a real battle - I expected that the first commander to go to the battle field could not be the Commander–in-Chief. What was happening with other commanders that necessitated the Commander–in-Chief to go to the battle field himself? I would, therefore, like to request the Minister of Defence to come with an explanation as to why the life of the President and the life of other Ugandans should be put at a great risk, because wherever the President goes, the security of the President takes precedence over the security of other people. Could I say that the other people who were killed there were killed in an attempt to protect the President’s life? I rest my case and I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I want to thank the honourable members for the contributions made. Again as we expect another statement, we shall continue with the debate. 

4.34
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Nasasira): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Normally, when a colleague makes a statement, he makes it on behalf of Cabinet, and some of us do not want to interfere. But we sometimes have to come in and supplement colleagues. 

Let me first join others in expressing sadness at this loss of the tombs, and whatever was in that hut, which indeed was the tomb of the four kings of Buganda, a cultural site and a national heritage. 

As my colleague said, we are all indeed saddened for such a loss and any loss of life or even injuries of people. I have watched over years when such disasters happen and in many countries, the first thing is for all of us to have collective grief. I appeal to colleagues that we all have collective grief so that all those who are tasked to keep security and find out what happened, have time to investigate and find out before - as hon. Kyanjo said - we start pointing fingers and blame. Indeed, this should be a day of grief and not finger pointing and exchange of accusations. 

We come to this Parliament and normally there are policemen at the gates, and sometimes, soldiers. I do not think anybody is shot at, and yet we have been coming here for years. As you heard form hon. Kasaija, when a fire breaks out and the Police rush there to put out the fire, and on the way, the fire tender is stoned and blocked, we as leaders must study deep into the situation of our society and try to find out what the problem is. I would like to thank the Police for the efforts they put in and indeed when Members of Parliament went there, the Police were there and they passed; they were not shot at. But what do you expect of a security person, if the situation changes and threatens to be violent, and yet you have to keep the peace? If any area is cordoned off and only people are allowed –

MS KAMYA: Point of order.

THE SPEAKER: Against which Rule of Procedure?  (Laughter)

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, I assumed that the rule was going to begin tomorrow –(Laughter)- but you ruled that this debate should be resumed tomorrow at 10 O’clock. When the minister stood up, the impression he gave was that he was going to clarify on something else. But now he is debating on a subject that we have already agreed we are going to debate tomorrow. Is the minister in order to debate after you have said we shall debate this tomorrow?

THE SPEAKER: I think you are clarifying in view of what he had said. You are guiding and clarifying, but not out of order.

MR NASASIRA: I was now coming to that. When a situation like this happens, apart from collective grief, of course the relevant forces must ensure that there is crowd control; the place is cordoned off for investigations and there is consolation. Indeed, none other than the President and other people like members of parliament have been on site to console people, institutions and Buganda. 

As you heard, Cabinet sat – now this team that has been put up is a Cabinet committee and not an investigative committee. As you heard from the statement, even UNESCO is going to be invited because UNESCO had a role in this national site. Independent people will be put there to investigate as the Speaker was saying. 

So, this Cabinet committee is a committee to oversee like it happens in any government, but it is not going to be the actual technical investigation committee. The investigation will be done by an independent committee that will be selected and will hold consultations even with Mengo. 

As we talk now, this Cabinet committee is contacting the Katikkiro’s office. So, there is collective grief and interest that this disaster is investigated to know the truth about what happened. I thought that when it comes to that, it may be extremely difficult to have a detailed statement tomorrow morning. I propose that we wait for Government to give a detailed statement at an appropriate date. That is what I thought I would tell my colleagues to request for.

THE SPEAKER: Next item!

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE INSURANCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
  
THE SPEAKER: No, we gave the Bill an opportunity and the Minister was not there. Let us have the Bill of the Minister of Public Service.

Yesterday, there was a Bill and the Minister of Agriculture was not here. Now there is a Bill on plant variety protection, but the Minister of Finance is not here. 

4.40
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, it is true yesterday we had a Bill, which was supposed to be brought here. Arrangements are being made to re-table this.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us deal with the Minister of Public Service.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE EMOLUMENTS OF THE PRESIDENT, VICE-PRESIDENT 
AND PRIME MINISTER BILL, 2009

4.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Mbaguta Sezi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, Parliament did stand on a number of issues concerning the Emoluments of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister Bill, 2009. I am going to go through those issues and give the response. 

The first item was whether the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Parliament should be included in the Bill. After consultation with the Attorney-General, we have been advised that we should develop the principles and objectives for the Speaker and Deputy Speaker’s terminal benefits and retirement benefits, and amend the Parliamentary Pensions Act. 

I want to inform Parliament that the drafting has been completed and procedurally, my ministry has asked for a waiver of the standing orders, to enable us proceed faster on amendment of the Pensions Act of Parliament. We have already written to the Solicitor-General to apply that waiver so that we can come directly to Parliament over that amendment.

The second issue that was raised was whether the retired president should have an official retirement house. We discussed with the committee and the committee reviewed practices within the region and other countries. I want to agree with the committee that it is vital to provide a retirement house for a retired president. That is what the committee has agreed to and I am reporting.

Issue number three was whether Mr Moses Kigongo who played a role as a Speaker, and as a vice-chairperson of the NRC, deserves terminal benefits and should be considered under emoluments and benefits of the President.

After consultation, we have been guided that Mr Moses Kigongo acted as a vice-chairperson of a political organisation and chaired the NRC as a vice-chairperson, which was outside the Executive Arm of Government. It was part of the Legislature.

It has been concluded that Mr Kigongo will be considered along with past leaders under this Bill. What is recommended is that past leaders will be considered for an ex-gratia package to be determined by the President –(Interjections)- since there was no provision and no law covering that period. Progress has been made in this direction. 

Those were the issues that we were asked to clarify during the debate about the Bill. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to remind you that proceedings in respect of this Bill were suspended when the general debate had started.  So, we are continuing with the general debate if necessary. I know those who had made their contributions.

4.47
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When the general debate on this Bill commenced, unfortunately, I was not around and I thought I would be left behind if you had ended that debate. Thank you for this opportunity.

First, I must say I was developing conflict of interest, because the general consensus of this institution which I serve is that the Speaker and his Deputy should be beneficiaries under this Bill. I would have found it exceedingly difficult to oppose the Bill. Now that you are coming as bosses of the institution under a different arrangement, I want to oppose this Bill in its entirety. 

This is a very big burden we are about to legislate on our small economy. We have many sectors that are under-funded. Legislating this Bill is going to bring our patriotism to doubt. 

His Excellency the President has always told the country that he is making personal sacrifice. This legislation does not look to be a sacrifice to me. On the African Continent, a price has already been instituted by Mo Ibrahim Foundation for good leadership in Africa, with an initial payment of US $5 million, followed by US $200,000 per annum until death. There cannot be anything better than this. Our leaders should strive to get this prize instead of burdening the peasants. 

When this prize was instituted, it was debated on BBC and I listened to it. The comments therein were very interesting; that this prize alone is not enough to entice African presidents to relinquish power, because in a year, our leaders gather more than this from the public purse. So, here we are trying to legislate the biblical saying that those who have more will be added.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, under Article 106, Terms and Conditions of Service of the President: “Parliament shall by law, make provision for the grant of benefits for a President who ceases to hold the Office ….” So, the Constitution here envisages giving benefits to a retiring President. We are not inventing something new, but the Constitution itself provides for that. 

Our neighbouring countries, Kenya, Tanzania and others like Nigeria and Ghana give benefits to a retiring president. So, it is not a question of the president saying this or the other. We are dealing with a president without personalising the issue. It is provided for here. 

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Speaker, the Constitution notwithstanding, I have to speak for those who are going to carry this burden. Perhaps the framers of the Constitution overstepped their boundaries and tried to package something which was unpalatable to the ordinary citizenry. I was here in the Seventh Parliament when we amended this Constitution in the twinkle of an eye –(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Thank you, my colleague. I have been prompted to ask for clarification following the guidance from the Speaker as to what should accompany a retiring president. Can we consider a president who has lost an election as somebody who has retired? This is something which has been lingering in my mind.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, the moment he ceases to hold the office of the President, he is retired. 

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Speaker, we can still salvage something from the command of the Constitution, but after computing all the schedules of this Bill, you will be very shocked that the figures therein are much bigger than the annual budgets of some ministries. This is not a small thing we are toying with. As soon as it is through, I have no doubt that it will be assented to that same evening and we shall be saddled with a burdened that we will have difficulty to offload. 

Let us prune what is contained in this Bill so that it becomes manageable. This is my plea, because I do not want to offend the Constitution, but the Constitution should also have a human face and notice that the people are over-burdened. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.56
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just have a few issues to raise. I do not want to disagree with the framers of the Constitution. But when the framers of the Constitution came up with this wisdom, the idea was that there was a two term limit. Today, the two term limit is no more. The idea is that in Uganda, the Presidency is the most facilitated office to the extent that they do not even use their salary. They should be able to accumulate enough resources to keep themselves after the presidency. They will even accumulate more after the two term limit. 

My appeal to Members of Parliament is that if we would like to pass these privileges, we should restore the term limits for the presidency. (Applause) We sat in this House and we allowed it to be opened, and yet the framers in their wisdom had that idea to encourage presidents to leave power; but that is no more. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the fact that the Constitution opened the term limits does not mean that a president cannot serve for more than one term. It is just open; he can serve one term or two or three. It is not mandatory that a president shall go on and on. 

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I say that because the framers of the Constitution might have been looking at that because the culture in Africa has been for presidents lingering around; even using rigging of elections to cling to power. So, the idea is to encourage democracy and the free will to leave power. That is why there was that provision saying, “Please, there will be this facilitation even when you are out of office” - but as we speak now -(Interruption)

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. The information I would like to provide is that if we have term limits for the President, you will find that every ten years we have retired presidents. Supposing we have a young President like Obama, that means every ten years we shall be having presidents who are retired and we shall have all the burden to pay them. So, the fact that we have indefinite term limits, that president will serve until he is too old, by the time he retires he will be dead so I think it is better to have no term limits. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

MR OKUMU: I appreciate the information given by hon. Baba Diri but she should know that there is an age limit for one to become a President of Uganda and it is Constitutional. But also when we look at the average living age in a country like ours, it is really around 48. If one becomes a president at 35 and rules for ten years, he will have lived his usefulness. This is the average but the idea is that the term limit is very useful and therefore this privilege will be an incentive to encourage presidents to surrender power and allow democratisation process. It would also allow presidents not to become senile because when you stay long with all the hard work, I tell you the brain also gets worked up and they will reach a point of diminishing returns where decision making will not be as effect as it should have been.

Secondly, when we talk about the speakers and the deputy speakers getting theirs from the Parliamentary bill, I also think that we should realise there are three pillars of Government and when we are focusing at the heads of these various pillars of Government, we should not forget the Judiciary. We make the laws -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the Judiciary is well catered for. They have their scheme which is detailed. Maybe, the Minister of Public Service should bring it but they have one already.

MR OKUMU: I am talking about the Chief Justice, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The Chief Justice is there. All judges have.

MR OKUMU: But they would also argue that Parliament is catered for by the Parliamentary Commission.

THE SPEAKER: No, I am telling you they have it. They recently took time to think about it and it is out. A judge retiring has what he takes and a pension is there.

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, my concern is that we should not go for more public burden because the more people we put on retirement package, the more our people would get this burden. We should rather look at facilitating these offices while they are in office and giving them their packages immediately they leave so that they can go out and know what to do with it, rather than putting in place a sustained process that will take many years as hon. Baba Diri says. If one is young and he became a speaker or deputy speaker, definitely it will take a long time to sustain that process.

Thirdly, I think let us be honest when we are talking about supporting leaders who have held offices in Government. I think to bring the NRM Vice Chairperson really, it is an abuse. Let us be honest to ourselves. I think if NRM as a party would like to package something, they can do that because if you are to go back and start looking back and say what about Moses Kigongo as an individual - we are now personalising issues. Here we are talking about the presidency without personalising anything and when it comes to the vice-chairman, we would like to personalise. Why? Why must we focus on –(Interjections)- then we should cater for all historicals because I think it is not fair. It loses meaning because if you start looking at some individuals and personalising them, I think then the focus is lost. 

If you are looking at the presidency, let us look at the presidency but if we now start mentioning names, I have difficulties in believing that the motive of the front bench is sincere and that it is sustainable -(Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: Thank you very much, Mr speaker and thank you very much hon. Okumu for giving way. I thought I should inform hon. Okumu of the role of the Vice-Chairman of the Movement then, not NRM as a party but of the Movement who was also the Vice-Chairman of NRC here. You will recall even during NRC I think or the Sixth Parliament when we considered former leaders for their benefits, there was a big debate as to whether we should give the benefits to late hon. Col Toko when he was a Vice-Chairman of the Military Commission because there was that debate and we debated here and agreed that we should classify past or former leaders in their ranks irrespective of what title they were called. Parliament in its wisdom passed the benefits for the Vice Chairman of the Military Commission then and by the time the late Col Toko died, he was getting those benefits. The position of hon. Kigongo is seen in his capacity as the Vice-Chairman of the Movement then but more importantly as the Vice-Chairman of NRC which he led and sat here for seven years and we think he deserves that respect and praise.

MR OKUMU: I thank the hon. Minister but I think you should not confuse people with your information. Col Toko was the equivalent of the Vice-President of this country; he was not a vice-chairman of a political party. He was the Vice-President of Uganda; that is what the equivalent was. Vice-Chairman Kigongo was Deputy Speaker; that is the equivalent. Let us not beat about the bush, that is the truth and that is the fact. That is what this House knows, that is what the record of this country knows. Kigongo has been a Deputy Speaker, that is the equivalent -(Interjections)- yes he has been a Deputy Speaker.

The President at that time was holding both the legislative and the executive power; he was both the Speaker and the President of Uganda. He was! That is why he was the Chairman of this council, of NRC -(Interjections)- please, let us not confuse people for convenience of debate. Col Toko was equivalent of a Vice-President; so, if you are looking in terms of Vice-President, Col Toko would fit there. At that time Uganda had a vice president. We had a Vice-President who was not Moses kigongo, Kisekka was the Vice-President –(Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: The late Samson Kisekka became the Vice-President later. You can check. Initially, we had the Chairman of NRM who was the President and the Chairman of NRC and the Vice-Chairman.

MR OKUMU: For the information of the hon. Minister, I would like to inform you that the position of the Vice-President at that time was vacant. It was not filled and that is the fact. So, you cannot shift goalposts now and say that Moses Kigongo occupied both the position of the Vice-President and Vice-Chairman of the NRC. The position of the Vice-President at that time was vacant. You should go and read your historical books properly. Please, let us not beat about the bush.  That is a fact.

I want to conclude, Mr Speaker, by really appealing that when we bring some of these issues here - I personally would support the presidential emoluments but let us not personalise them. My support would be tied to the amendment of the Constitution so that we have a two-term limit. Thank you.

5.10
MR ISHAA OTTO (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for giving us this report, which will aid our debate for the subsequent law to be put in place. I would have had no problem with this particular Bill if indeed we had brought it with all intent of addressing a national factor, as a nation and as a country, without trying to be specific to particular individuals.

We have a very big challenge as a nation especially when we make laws as Parliament. I was reading some other laws including areas related to retirement age. In Uganda today, the retirement age is 60 years. I considered myself who is now 32 becoming 35 and having the ambition and the support to become the president and I get into power and serve for 20 years. I would have only made 55. In this case, I would have not yet reached the mandatory retirement age of 60 years. In this scenario how do we go about it? I see a constitutional conflict -(Interjections) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you should differentiate two situations. Here we are not talking about retirement in Public Service. That is different and it is controlled by a different law. These are political leaders; there is no time for retirement. Maybe the ceiling is the age of 75 in that somebody who is 75 cannot stand to be elected for president. But do not compare age in Civil Service and retirement in the - 

MR ISHAA OTTO: But, Mr Speaker, that is the unfairness that I am talking about. I gave an example; if I started from 35, that means I will go for more 40 years to retire and for 40 years if I am the President of Uganda -

THE SPEAKER: It is the election that will retire you. (Laughter)  

MR ISHAA OTTO: But if I have been moving on like the current President who has ruled for 24 years and elections cannot stop him, what happens? (Laughter) In all fairness and justice, I think we should be very considerate of some of these things. You see if I stay in power for 29 years and I retire, I strongly believe that I would have even accumulated enough wealth through my own payment and I would be able, for instance, to build a house for myself. So, if we come in, even in this report of the committee, that we should have a retirement -

THE SPEAKER: Becoming rich or not does not depend on how much or how many years we spend or what position. You can work for 20 years and you accumulate nothing and somebody works in the same position and becomes - So, it is not a question of the number of years you have spent and therefore you become rich. (Laughter)

MR ISHAA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I thank you for the guidance you are giving me, this House and the whole country because everybody is concerned about this. I even see a problem in our Constitution which we should talk about and the only person who is mandated to talk about it is actually a Member of Parliament like me. 

I still want to appreciate what we are trying to pass and we are insisting with all interest to pass it the way it is, putting a very big burden to the tax payers of Uganda. Whenever we move out of this House, the implications of decisions that we make have always ended up directly affecting the citizens. And I think this particular Bill has a good intention but the drafting still lacks many things. It was not researched -(Ms Sezi rose_) Mr Speaker, I am not going to allow this information because the rules of procedure are -(Interjections)- no she will respond at the appropriate time.

MRS SEZI: I want to give information not by force but to help the debate. This Bill is repealing the existing Bill, the Emoluments and Benefits of the Presidents, 1998. And we have been implementing it. During the implementation of this Bill, we must go back to the Constitution, Article 106(7) which says, “The retirement benefits granted to a President under this article shall not be varied to the disadvantage of the President.” We already have a law that provides for the benefits of the President. And I want to say that we are not looking at individual presidents. We are looking at the Office of the President today, tomorrow and in the future. 

So, that is what we are providing for. We are not looking at individual presidents. So, I also want to draw your attention to that provision in the Constitution. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR ISHAA OTTO: Mr Speaker, as I was rising up to debate this Bill and the report, I had read the Constitution and I had understood it well. But I feel that there are things which we must understand and admit because while we make this law and after just five years another Government comes in, this Constitution may be amended. So, what I am saying now is an open way for the future but I feel that these are things, which we should actually think of now instead of waiting for that time for a Constitutional amendment.

I want to emphasise what my brother, hon. Reagan Okumu put before this House as to why we should be careful while considering giving a term limit in this country because it defines how we should operate and move. It would help us to know where to start and where to end and therefore know how one can benefit. But if you leave the term limits to the wish of the so called people or what we call the people, and yet in the actual sense it is in the interests of the  beneficiary –(Interjection)– Mr Speaker, I am about to end. 

I think that as Parliament we should think very seriously and consider the restoration of the two term limits so that we are able to make laws that will benefit the whole nation. And we should be able to limit some of these deficiencies that we are going through. 

Lastly, I want to clearly and openly oppose the amendment by the committee to this Bill recommending for the construction of a house of Shs 400 million for any retiring president and I think the committee –(Interruption)  

MR BIHANDE: I am seeking clarification, Mr Speaker. In a situation where the President appoints his wife as the vice-president and the vice-president who is his wife serves for one year, she will be a vice-president in retirement. And then he appoints his son as vice-president or prime minister, and he retires him after one year and then picks on his daughter and makes her vice-president, what surety do you have as Ugandans that such a situation may not arise? (Applause) And can the Bill provide any security for Ugandans as to how we can ensure that such a scenario does not happen? I want clarification on that.

MR NASASIRA: That the president will appoint his wife as the vice-president and then appoint his son as the vice-president and the co-wife as the vice-president? But all this will be done with the approval of Parliament! 

MR ISHAA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I was actually just winding up. What the honourable member is raising is a very serious matter and it can easily happen. It has happened in other countries and in Uganda, if you see the trend that we are moving, it shows that we are likely to land into that.

I want to know: under the circumstances where a president dies or he is overthrown by the might of the military or the army, what happens? Is he entitled to any benefits or not? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I think you were very clear in your understanding of Article 106. The only exception to giving benefits to a president who ceases to hold office is under the circumstances provided under Article 107 of the Constitution and that is removal of the president from office and the circumstances of such removal are clearly spelt out and include misconduct, misbehaviour, dishonesty, physical and/or mental incapacity. They don’t for instance include a president who is toppled from power by a coup or through other means so such situations are saved. In other words, you can still provide the benefits to such a president.

MR JOSEPH KASOZI: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I wanted to follow up on what the AG has clarified. In circumstances where the prime minister or the vice-president is removed or kicked out of office by the president after a month or two, does that person deserve benefits under this bill?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I thought we would think in terms of institutions. We are talking about institutions and not individuals. Once it is institutionalised, it is done.

5.26
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. From what the minister stated that the Speaker and Deputy Speaker will be catered for under the Parliamentary Pensions Act, if it is now the Pensions Act, it would be better for us to deal with this at once. We should see the objectives of that Pensions Act concerning the Speaker and Deputy Speaker. This is because when you pass this, the Executive may never come maybe until the other Parliament –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: The other time this Bill was debated, I was one of those who contributed and it was the Deputy Speaker in the Chair. We suspended debate on this and you can check in the Hansard because we wanted the Parliamentary Pensions Act to cater for the Speaker and that of the Executive to come concurrently. In fact we registered on the Floor of this House that we don’t trust that the Government would bring the Bill to cater for the welfare of the Speaker fast enough. Unfortunately once we have any Speaker in the Chair, it becomes difficult for them to rule on that matter because of alleged conflict of interest but I think that is our position as Parliament. They should bring these laws together and we pass them once and for all. I think that is what we had resolved in the earlier discussion if we can check in the Hansard.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, it is true if you ruled on this it would be difficult and I think when we were debating the pensions for the Speaker and the deputy, I don’t know who will chair because they could assume something but we know you are above that.

Given that fact, I don’t think we should continue with this Bill. We agreed long ago why we should not continue. Under clause 31, there is already a Presidential Emoluments and Benefits Act in existence so our current president is not disadvantaged anywhere even if he retired now so we should not be in a hurry. We should first and foremost get that Bill then we can move. 

Mr Speaker, if you allow this to go, it will look as if you have coerced us to do a wrong thing yet that is what we had agreed at that time -(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, hon. Nandala for giving way. As the Pensions Board of Trustees, we have been working on some amendments that should have been brought into the House. On one occasion, however, the minister actually stood here and said she was bringing a comprehensive Bill to govern matters of pension in the whole country. She indicated that any amendments to the Pensions Act for Parliament would have to be in tandem with the proposed amendments of the comprehensive Pensions Bill. 

Given that type of scenario, I see that the amendments to the Pensions’ Act, as it is, will have to wait longer until the minister brings the comprehensive Pensions’ Bill that she promised to the House. So, if we want to deal with this matter and we want to tie it up with the Pensions’ Act, then we are in trouble. 

It might really be helpful if the House waited and both Bills waited because the minister seems to have lots of interest in the President and Vice-President’s emoluments and we could capitalise on that as a motivation to make her bring in this other proposal of the Speaker. I am sure that it will work and do so very fast. If we let it go, hon. Nandala you are right, they will be in trouble.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much. We should not look selfish. We should also look at the pensions for the entire Civil Service and for this to sail through and if we are really the MPs that we are, we need the whole law. If we are amending the presidency law, we should come with amendments of all the pension laws and deal with them. Even our public servants need the Pensions’ Amendment Bill because they - in fact we have discovered that the reason civil servants are trying to steal public resources is because they are trying to prepare for retirement. If we plan for them now and we get somebody stealing then we will deal with him. I think –(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I want to thank hon. Nandala for giving me an opportunity to add on to what the Minister of State for Public Service had said earlier. I beg colleagues, let us not put the Speaker in an uncomfortable position. As I speak - in any case even if the two Bills were ready, there is no way you would debate them on the Floor of the House together. You would certainly debate one Bill after another. 

I want to comfort the Members that as I speak, a waiver has already been granted by the Attorney-General for the Minister of State for Public Service to present the Bill for final approval because the principles had already been approved by Cabinet. The Bill will be printed and expeditiously presented to this House for first reading shortly hereafter.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it seems there is lack of trust in this. Why don’t we conclude the general debate? There are stages when we go into details and this is the Committee Stage. Let us at least conclude the general debate and stop there. We will go to the Committee Stage as they process the others.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we know why you are saying so. You are worried of the public but as Members of Parliament, we believe that the Judiciary has the law, Parliament must have the law and the Executive must have the law. For us to bring – you know under our Constitution, we cannot bring something, which has a charge on the Consolidated Fund. This is the time to get them. Mr Speaker, we plead with you. If you are worried, I can sit in that chair for a few minutes to do the ruling. (Laughter)

MRS SEZI: Let me give clarification. We developed the principles for the Bill for the benefits of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker and in developing those objectives to take them to Cabinet, we had to get a Certificate of Financial Implications. That was given, our Cabinet approved it and the drafting has taken place. We have gone through what I would call the shortcut, which is getting the approval to expedite the process. 

As we stay the completion of the Emoluments Bill, there is a former vice president whose benefits are still in abeyance because these emoluments and benefits have not been approved.

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, part of the reason why Parliament is also concerned is about strengthening the various arms of Government. If our Speakers and Deputy Speakers are as secure as the Executive, this arm will be equally strong for purposes of good governance. 

I would like to propose that since it is argued that last time we debated this matter and it was ruled that the Executive brings the other Bill and if there is dispute on the Executive’s side, we can go back to the Hansard to find out if it is true. However, I doubt there would be dispute from the Executive side. We can stay this until the Bills have been brought on the Table of Parliament and given to a committee to handle. Then we can even pass that in five minutes because we know it is now within the precincts of Parliament and we can have control over it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, this law came here in April last year and I think we stopped the debate around May or June. If the Executive were serious, we would have had this Bill here. I want to give you live examples of how the Executive behaves. In 2002, in the Budget Speech, they told us that the Bill on money laundering would be in before the end of December that year. It never came until recently. It took eight years to bring the Money Laundering Bill. If we try this also, it might come in 2016. 

So, these people have promised and gone away without doing what we want. We want them to go back and I think I am about to move a motion. Before they bring the Presidential Emoluments Bill, we want the one of the speakers and deputies as well as the one of the civil servants and even the judges. We are bringing this to help us to move. The former vice-president they are talking about is currently employed in micro finance and she is being paid. We know what they are doing there and they get emoluments. Does she have a shop where she is getting free money from? She is being paid. 

Mr Speaker, I want to move that we suspend the debate until those three Bills are brought.

THE SPEAKER: Don’t we have a time frame? Can we say within two weeks? One month is a long time. I think let us give it three weeks. We shall resume the debate within three weeks. We should give them sufficient time. 

I think we should do the next business tomorrow. We should convene here at 10.00 a.m. I have a programme later in the afternoon. Tomorrow, we shall transact business up to 1.00 p.m. So, the House is adjourned to tomorrow to deal with the two loans. The House is adjourned to 10.00 a.m. tomorrow. 

(The House rose at 5.40 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 18 March 2010 at 10.00 a.m.)
