


Thursday, 11 March 2021

Parliament met at 2.48 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I just have one issue to communicate. This morning, I launched the Exit Module to the Inspectorate of Government Online Declaration System, which enables leaders ceasing to serve to declare their income, assets and liabilities within six months from the end of their service period, so as to comply. 

I also thanked the Inspectorate of Government for conducting the National Integrity Survey. I am happy to announce that Parliament was recognised as the fourth most compliant institution in submission of declarations at 94 per cent. I understand the six per cent are probably the Members who left during by-elections and did not make their exit declarations. Therefore, I request the Members leaving service for now to fill in the exit declarations before they go.

I also declared my income, assets and liabilities using the same online system. I would like to remind the Members that the deadline is 31 March 2021. As you are aware, failure by a leader to declare his income, assets and liabilities is a breach of the Leadership Code Act, which attracts prosecution. I urge you to comply with this requirement during this time before the deadline. 

There is just one issue of national concern by hon. Gutomoi.

2.52
MR CHARLES ABACACON (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter, which has already qualified to be a matter of very serious national importance because of the status of our road. 

It has become very difficult to travel from Kamdini to Lira. This morning, I travelled on the road and my car has been towed to a garage at Kigumba. Along the road, some trailers could not move because they are all stuck on the road. There are over one million potholes on that road. I wonder whether Parliament cannot take action to help the situation so that the relevant committee goes and inspects to give a perfect report. 

We were with our committee this morning, expecting the minister to show up. Unfortunately, he had other engagements and he did not come. 

Madam Speaker, the Lira business community is already concerned and is going to demonstrate next week. We have been told that we are just waiting for nothing since the World Bank stopped giving us money to fix the road two years ago. You can imagine the status of this road. 

I have been on this Floor over 10 times, now talking about this issue but nothing has been done to address the situation. Many of the vehicles belonging to the Kenyans, Acholi, Iteso and Langi have broken down on that road. Their prayer is to be compensated for the expenses they have incurred in repairing them. I am one of those seeking this compensation. 

The people also demand to know when that road will be fixed. They have been neglected and many of them have gone out of business because their lorries and other cars have been damaged. They request to peacefully demonstrate next week to show their concern. Why has the road between Kamdini and Lira City been completely neglected? 

My presentation this afternoon is to ask Government to look at the people of this subregion with sympathy and take this matter seriously because it is going to be on record that they are going to demonstrate. They said that they are going to block the road. They will move between Lira to Kamdini and they do not know how long it will take them. If it takes them one month, they will move to show their seriousness on why that road has not been fixed and yet, they pay taxes. They expect the Government to contribute in one way or the other by fixing that road so that they can travel to Kampala, the capital city, where majority of them come for merchandise and produce. 

Lira is the best produce dealer in this country. By the roadside, you will see almost 200 metres of produce dealers. They get a huge supply of food, which goes beyond Masaka and sometimes stretches up to Rwanda but now, they era unable to do this successfully because of the state of the road. 

My prayer is that Government immediately acts. If not, they have a right to demonstrate peacefully to show their concern over this neglected part of the country. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Gutomoi. This matter has been raised severally on this Floor. I remember even His Excellency, the President, commented on this condition when he last used that road. I do not know whether the Works team is here. Minister of State for Works and Transport, what do you say about the Kamdini-Lira Road? 

2.57 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Madam Speaker, we shall give an answer to this next week. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Come with some hope for the people of Lira-Kamdini and other passengers that use that road.

2.57
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter of national importance I would like to raise concerns the rollout plan for the COVID-19 vaccination. There is quite a lot of information outside there. The Ministry of Health is engaging many people right now for the vaccination of COVID-19.

Madam Speaker, you may recall that quite often, we have had situations where COVID-19 related issues begin and end with Kampala. We have so many people asking - just like members of Parliament are asking - is that vaccination for only the people in Kampala? 

My prayer is that the Minister of Health explains to this House the plans they have not only to vaccinate the people in Kampala but also those from where we come from. Our people keep asking similar questions –(Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, hon. Nsamba. This is still about the issue that the Member has raised in regard to the people who are upcountry. 

Madam Speaker, you realise, from the daily reports of the Ministry of Health, that the number of COVID-19 patients in Uganda is dropping. However, a lot of businesses have been affected, especially the businesses that operate in the evening. It would be good, and in the interest of the people, for the Ministry of Health to revise the guidelines so that at least curfew hours are adjusted. 

As far as I am concerned, the situation is terrible upcountry. Most prisons are full because of curfew. Some people cannot even explain to the police because when they do, the police do not understand. Madam Speaker, would it not be good for us as a country, for the Ministry of Health to look at adjusting curfew probably to 2.00 a.m. so that people can proceed with their businesses?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on Tuesday when we commenced work here, I informed the House about my interaction with the office of the Director of Public Persecutions (DPP) and their concern about the prisoners who are no longer able to go to court because of the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) still in place one year after the pandemic. 

We also talked about the need to revise the curfew. We are waiting for a response from the national taskforce and the Minister of Health. The minister is here.

MR NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, before the minister comes up, I wanted to stress that we also have health workers from where we come from. Most importantly, the information that is going on is that COVID is no longer in Uganda. People no longer put on masks or sanitise. The minister should try to explain the rollout plan for the vaccination so that the Members of Parliament –

THE SPEAKER: I think let us allow the Minister to answer. However, on behalf of Parliament and the people of Uganda, I want to express our appreciation to the Minister of Health and her team and Government for the facilitation in the procurement of the vaccines so that our people can be assisted. I do not know whether the Minister is ready to talk briefly about her plan and what she is doing.

3.02
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to start by appreciating this august House for the support to the health sector during this time of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Madams Speaker, we have so far received 964,000 doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine and these are a donation from the COVAX Facility and from the Government of India. We worked out a national vaccine deployment plan. Right now, as I speak, vaccines have been distributed to the entire country. From the district, they will be taken to the lower level facilities, health centres III and general hospitals.

The plan is to start with the most-at-risk population, which are the health workers, followed by the teachers. The 964,000 doses are not adequate because we have 150,000 health workers in public, public not-for-profit and private facilities, and we have over 550,000 teachers.

Government is still in the process of procuring vaccines. We delayed a little because there is a global scramble for vaccines. We are now nearly at the bottom of the list. If we pay, then we shall move higher up and then we can bring other people on board.

However, the plan is that after the teachers, we will consider security personnel and then persons of 50 years and above, who are most at risk, and those with comorbidities like high blood pressure, diabetes and other organ diseases. However, all these depend on the availability of vaccines.

Madam Speaker, it is true that we reached the plateau of our first wave. Many of you are aware that COVID-19 occurs in waves. When you reach the peak, you plateau and deep and then you may go into a second wave if the population is not complying to the SOPs. From our observation, Uganda may not be far from this. Therefore, we are preparing for whatever may happen. 

I would like to appeal to the leaders in this august House to continuously stress the issue of SOPs to the population. Even after vaccination, it is still important to know that we shall still continue putting on masks, sanitizing, washing hands and social distancing. The vaccines will protect you from severe disease and death and also ensure that our hospitals are not congested as it was during the months of October, November and December, so that the numbers are manageable and we do not have so many deaths.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, on the revision of the SOPs, allow me to thank you once again for engaging with the DPP and others. The national task force is set to consider these issues. They are not under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Health. We only give guidance. Curfew is handled by security and as soon as the national task force has considered it, I am sure that it will be brought to the attention of the august House. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR NSAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister because at least she has information for the Members of Parliament at hand. 

I need two clarifications. One, she was seen in a video receiving her vaccination, but the person who was doing the vaccination did not even have gloves to begin with. The video is making rounds on social media. 

I would like to ask, honourable minister, is it a new Standard Operating Procedure (SOP)? Is that picture that was shown what is going to happen as COVID-19 vaccination is going on? Are we not going to transmit the disease further? I need clarification on that. 

Secondly, worldwide, there is a negative comment on AstraZeneca as a vaccine. We need you to allay our fears. It looks like Uganda is concentrating on AstraZeneca when other countries are rejecting the same. Kindly guide us on how your scientists zeroed in on AstraZeneca. Thank you very much. 

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I would like to seek from the minister pertains to the huge sum of money that this Parliament approved in a supplementary budget request to procure vaccines. 

In your submission, you have vividly put it that this consignment of vaccines was a donation. Could you please furnish us with the whereabouts of the money that was approved by this House? Thank you. 

MR CENTENARY: The other clarification I would like to seek from the honourable Minister of Health is, she knows the population of Uganda. In their procurement plan, they know the target of Ugandans that Government wishes to support to access the vaccines. You said we are down on the queue because of competition for the vaccine. 

May I know from you how many vaccines you have requested for? Could we know a bit of your procurement plan? How many doses have you procured and has the money that Hon. Nambeshe is talking about been disbursed to your ministry already? How much is it that you have so far received? This is so that we know if there is any deficit so that Parliament can also play its role of appropriating more funds to your ministry. I beg to move. 

3.11
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate our honourable ministers. The clarification I would like to seek is, as you are aware, this year, the Olympics are going to take place and our team, Uganda, is gearing towards this. 

I would like to know what else we can do for them, honourable minister. Thank you. 

3.12
MR GORDON BAFAKI (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the clarification she has made here. She said that curfew is under the jurisdiction of security. 

Madam Minister, ever since the outbreak of COVID-19, people’s businesses have gone down and Ugandans have since died of stress and depression and not COVID-19. I come from an area which is right now suffering from Foot and Mouth Disease. Security, through the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, have instituted quarantine and no animal product is supposed to cross from one area to another. 

While we are still dealing with that, we also face the curfew of COVID-19. Where do you want the people of Uganda to go? Do you want, by the time you declare Uganda COVID-19 free, to find that you do not have any population? I understand security moves by your directive and guidance. You guided them. Could you kindly still guide the COVID-19 national taskforce about the curfew? 

I can tell you, honourable Minister of Health, that you are going to begin burying people that have not died of COVID-19 but of other illnesses resulting from curfew, beatings and extortions. Please clarify that. Thank you. 

DR JANE ACENG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the issue of the AstraZeneca vaccines, take note that the technology used to manufacture this vaccine is the kind of technology that has been used for many of our traditional vaccines. When I say “traditional”, I mean the ones that we give to our children here in Uganda. Therefore, it is technology that we are conversant with. 

Secondly, it is a vaccine that can be stored comfortably within our cold chain of 2-8 degrees. Many of the other vaccines are using newer technologies that have been developed and they also require ultra-cold temperatures. Our scientists guided that it is safer to use vaccines whose technology we know and that we can store within our temperatures. This, however, does not mean that we are only going to use the AstraZeneca vaccines. 

Other vaccines are still undergoing WHO approval; AstraZeneca was approved by WHO and because we are signatory to the WHO Convention and we want to be sure that whatever WHO is providing is safe, we wait for those that have been approved and then the National Drug Authority has to go through its rigorous procedures to ensure that it is safe and efficacious. That is why we have AstraZeneca in the country. We are waiting for others that will be duly approved by the WHO and we evaluate them. 

The procedure that was used to vaccinate the Minister of Health is acceptable and there is nothing wrong with it. 

Where is the money? Madam Speaker, allow me to appreciate you and this august House for providing money not only for vaccines but for the COVID-19 response. Indeed, for the procurement of vaccines, $5 million provided. However, because of some technicalities, we have not yet accessed it and that is why we have not yet paid for vaccines but we have an assurance from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that this money will be available and we shall duly pay for the vaccines.

Uganda targets to vaccinate 22 million people, including refugees. We need about 45 million doses of the vaccines because each individual receives two doses, which means 49.6 per cent of our population. Our donors, though, communicated that they will be providing to Uganda 18 million doses, meaning that the Government of Uganda has to procure 27 million doses.

The total amount of money that we calculated together with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that is required for the vaccination programme is $162 million. Madam Speaker, this august House has provided $5 million. All that we need has been calculated and discussed with the ministry and we are waiting for a communication on what to do.

This includes the costs of deployment of the vaccines from the National Medical Stores to the different districts up to the beneficiaries. On the issue of the Olympics, this is an international game and the World Health Organisation will guide accordingly.

Lastly, on curfew, again, I humbly request that we wait for information from the national task force. I will definitely contribute during the discussions and give guidance accordingly. 

I take note and I am well aware of the different sectors that are not yet opened and the challenges they are facing. If we can speed up the vaccination exercise, it will go a long way in facilitating us to open up those sectors. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me permit hon. Kyagulanyi to make a statement under rule 54 of our Rules of Procedure.

3.21
MR ROBERT KYAGULANYI (Independent, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to convey my condolences for the loss of your daughter and to commend you for being strong in those very hard times.

I am addressing this Parliament for the first time since the 14th January Presidential elections, which were marred by massive rigging. The campaigns were filled with unprecedented levels of state inspired violence and brutality, where very many of our supporters were murdered, maimed and others sustained grave injuries. That happened before, during and after the elections. I have given this background to speak to the danger that we face as a nation.

Government institutions have been reduced to serving the interest of an individual instead of serving the people. This Parliament, therefore, has the opportunity to present itself to the people of Uganda as a Parliament that has the interests of the people of Uganda.

As we comfortably sit in this august House, I want to remind all of us that Ugandans are being abducted on a daily basis by security operatives in notorious vans called “drones.” They are being held in unknown detention centres, military barracks and in many unknown torture chambers across the country.

Just yesterday, a 24 year old Kiweewa Tonny also known as Neto who is our cameraman and the National Unity Platform (NUP) youth chairperson for Mosque Zone in Kibuli, and a one Busonga Najib were brutally abducted by heavily armed security men in plain clothes. The abductions were on camera. Those that have been lucky to come out alive have spoken of how they were subjected to unspeakable torture and brutality while in detention.

Some of our people have been castrated; others had their eyes and finger nails plucked out, their limbs broken and they have been subjected to advanced forms of torture like water and electrocution. Several of our female supporters have been raped in detention.

Many of our supporters like Rogers Ssemakula from Mukono District were murdered by the state. Only yesterday, a man called Luka Fabian, who was kidnapped from Arua, was badly tortured and dumped in Nakawa. He passed away and he will be buried in Arua tomorrow.

We wonder if we have a Constitution in this country. What happened to the requirement to have arrested persons presented before the courts of law within 48 hours? What happened to the prohibition against torture, which is a non-derogable right? Why are our civilians being tried in military courts and charged in the absence of their lawyers and relatives? 

Today marks 71 days since my entire campaign team was arrested and imprisoned in Kitalya on bogus charges and they are being tried in military courts. After being granted bail, they were again re-arrested by the military and taken through grave torture sessions.

Gen. Museveni acknowledges that it is, indeed, on his orders that our supporters have gone missing. No matter what political party you support in this House or political persuasion you belong to, I want to believe that we all understand that the Constitution provides for the presumption of innocence before being proven guilty.

President Museveni has convicted our people and sentenced them to grave torture and long periods of detention without fair trial. How long will this continue while we are comfortably sitting here?

Last week, the Deputy President of NUP Central region, Hon. Matthias Mpuuga laid before this House a list of 423 NUP supporters who were abducted and are still missing. The list has since grown.

Once again, I want to request this Parliament to order for the immediate release of the abducted people and all political prisoners. Ugandans are demanding that the security forces return our people, dead or alive; and they also demand that civilians should stop being tried in military courts.

Secondly, I know that Gen. Museveni might ignore this resolution if it is passed in this Parliament just like he has ignored very many other resolutions in the past; but at least, let this Parliament go on record and be known to stand with the people of Uganda in very hard and humiliating times like these.

Honourable members, it is in the interest of this Parliament to take lessons from our own history as Uganda because this country has been in a similar situation before. In 1980, an election was rigged using the army and other security forces. President Museveni castigated the courts of law of the time and said they were being used by President Obote to give a semblance of legitimacy to the unpopular regime.

Ugandans were disappearing after being kidnapped in an operation called “panda gari.” Today, Madam Speaker, 40 years later, we are back to that point or even worse. We all know it. Even peaceful demonstrations are not allowed; they are criminalised. Peaceful demonstrators are being treated like armed rebels.

Therefore, this Parliament under you, Madam Speaker, can rise to the occasion and distinguish itself by standing with the people of Uganda. We have the opportunity to stand on the right side of history. If this Parliament does not, then we should not be surprised when the people of Uganda rise to the occasion and evoke Article 3 of this Constitution to restore constitutionalism.

Madam Speaker, I am not sure how many more times I will have the opportunity to address this Parliament as a Member of Parliament. Hopefully, the next time I address this Parliament, I will be President. (Laughter) However, I would like to remind all of us, honourable members, that we can choose either to be seen as a Parliament that does not care about the people or a Parliament that is indeed elected to stand and protect the rights of our people. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member. As far as your being in the House is concerned, you are a Member until the Tenth Parliament expires. 

Concerning the other issue, I have no idea but the statement will be sent to the Committee on Human Rights, which is already investigating issues concerning the elections. Thank you very much.

LAYING OF MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite the ministries that are ready to lay their policy statements on the Table?

3.30
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Ruth Aceng): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Ministerial Policy Statement for the health sector for the Financial Year 2021/2022 for consideration and approval by this august House.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (COOPERATIVES) (Mr Fredrick Gume): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Ministerial Policy Statement of the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives for the Financial Year 2021/2022 for consideration.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Ministerial Policy Statement and budget estimates for the Integrated Transport Infrastructure and Services Programme for Financial Year 2021/2022, Ministry of Works and Transport.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Are there any other statements? The statement from the Ministry of Works and Transport is sent to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. The one from the Ministry of Health is sent to the Committee on Health. The one from the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is sent to the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry.

As the others come in, we shall acknowledge them. Thank you very much. Let us go to the next item

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA RED CROSS SOCIETY BILL, 2019

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we had received the report. We were waiting for the minister. Is the minister here today? I think our chairperson is here; she can read our report. Hon. Ssempala is representing the mover. 

3.33
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Ms Jesca Ababiku): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity given to the committee. We apologise for our absence last week. Both of us in the committee leadership were in our districts celebrating International Women’s Day. We really apologise to the House.

This is our report on the Uganda Red Cross Society Bill, 2019. Madam Speaker, we uploaded this report two weeks ago.

The Uganda Red Cross Society Bill, 2019, was read for the first time on 4 December 2019 by hon. Alex Byarugaba Bakunda, MP Isingiro County South. It was grounded on the authority of Section 76(4) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, which states, “…a certificate of financial implication shall be deemed to have been issued after 60 days from the date of request for the certificate.”

Consequently, the Bill was referred to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for consideration. However, after realising that some provisions of the Bill had cross-cutting effects on several sectors of Government, the Rt Hon. Speaker, during the sitting held on Tuesday, 3 March 2020, referred the Bill to the Committee on Presidential Affairs for scrutiny. The committee now reports as follows:

Background 

Originally, Red Cross societies were established to operate in times of war. Henry Dunant, the founder of the Red Cross Movement, fronted two proposals - the inviolability of the armed forces medical personnel to be guaranteed; and the formation of relief societies to bring care to the wounded and sick soldiers in the field.

The first proposal has been a landmark in the development of modern international humanitarian law, with the 1864 Geneva Convention and its successive versions. The second proposal led to the creation of the Red Cross Societies, which later on became the Red Crescent Societies or the National Red Cross Societies.

The Uganda Red Cross Society was established in 1939, as a small women’s emergency organisation. However, over the years, Uganda Red Cross Society has developed into a formidable and well-respected humanitarian agency. The Uganda Red Cross Society was established by an Act of Parliament in 1964 and admitted as a member of International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent in 1965. 

The vision of the Uganda Red Cross Society is to fulfil the Uganda Red Cross Society’s mandate and obligation in delivering quality and sustainable humanitarian assistance. The Society purposes to be a partner of choice in Uganda in saving lives, supporting livelihoods and promoting human dignity.

Uganda ratified and domesticated the Geneva Conventions in 1964, while the additional protocols were endorsed in 2008. The ratification and domestication of the Geneva Conventions gave them the force of law in Uganda, leading to the Uganda Red Cross Society becoming a medium through which the Government of Uganda, as a signatory to the Geneva Conventions, fulfils its international law obligations. 

The national society has over one-and-a-half million beneficiaries of its interventions. The society works through 51 branch offices covering the whole of Uganda as a member of the International Red Cross and the Red Crescent Movement, comprising the International Federation and the International Committee of the Red Cross Society. 

The Uganda Red Cross Society (URCS) works with several partners in the execution of its mission. These include, but are not limited to, the Government of Uganda, corporate bodies, United Nations agencies, non-governmental organisations and other sister Red Cross national societies. 

Over the years, the society has witnessed an increase in the number of partners and partnerships not only nationally but internationally, including private and civil society organisations. The number of communities served by the society has also tremendously increased, as well as the scope of activities.

Madam Speaker, I request that I leave out the methodology content. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MS ABABIKU: Let me go to the object of the Bill.

Object of the Bill 

The object of the Bill is to repeal and replace the existing Uganda Red Cross Act, Cap. 57 by providing for the:

    a) continued existence of the Uganda Red Cross Society as the sole National Red Cross Society of Uganda;
    b) management and operations of Uganda Red Cross Society;
    c) regulation of the use and protection of the name or emblem of the Uganda Red Cross Society;
    d) finances of the Uganda Red Cross Society.

General observations 

The committee noted that over the years, the demand for humanitarian services from the Government and subsequently the Uganda Red Cross Society, as an auxiliary body to the Government, has increased and the Red Cross Act in its current state limits or hinders the society in the execution of its mandate. 

Therefore, there is need for new legislation that is alive to or recognises the current economic, social, institutional and technological developments in the world today and a law that is aligned with the evolving humanitarian mandates of the Red Cross Society.

The primary role of any Red Cross Society, as an auxiliary body to the government ministries, departments and agencies, is to provide services as assigned by their governments in disaster response. It may involve search and rescue operations, evacuating the injured or people endangered by the disaster, managing shelters, restoring family links, running ambulance services or retrieving and evacuating dead bodies.  

The committee noted that at the time of establishing the society in the 1960s, the society was mandated to:

i) 	furnish aid to the sick and wounded in time of war and to non-belligerents and to prisoners of war and civilian sufferers from the effects of war;
ii) 	improve health, the prevention of disease; and 
iii) 	mitigate suffering throughout the world without any distinction based on race, nationality, class, religion or political opinions.

The objects of the society, as stated in section 2 of the current Act are too general and do not specifically speak to the most critical objects of the society today. The society was recognised as a voluntary aid society and an auxiliary to public authorities exercising their obligations by virtue of the Geneva Conventions for the amelioration of the condition of the wounded and the sick of armed forces in the field, for the amelioration of the condition of sick and shipwrecked members of armed forces at sea, relative, to the treatment of prisoners of war and to the protection of civilian persons in time of war. 

The society was not engaging in extra activities to generate extra income since the scope of work was by then limited. The society, to exist and support its core structures and functions, needs funds which cannot be hinged on donations which are not predictable and irregular. 

More so, the society needs steady funding support to fulfil its mandates, for example, disaster management, which does not wait for appealing to donors if we are to respond timely to save lives and property. 

Therefore, the legislation seeks to ensure smooth operation of the Red Cross Society as well as enabling it to invest and generate resources. A number of other national societies like the Kenya Red Cross Society currently have investments like hotels and training institutions whose proceeds fund its humanitarian work.

It is believed that with the revision of the Red Cross Act, the Uganda Red Cross Society will be more self-sustaining and efficient through-

    a) strengthened collaboration and partnerships;
    b) enhanced financing;
    c) better coordination; 
    d) streamlining governance issues using the law.

The revision of the Red Cross Act will go further in augmenting -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, I do not know whether you are going to read the entire report.

MS ABABIKU: Can we go to the alignment of the Bill? 

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Page 9, we have the Bill’s compliance with Sustainable Development Goals (SDG). We are starting from page 10. 

SDG 1: No poverty in all its forms

The society, through this Bill, seeks to continue working towards improving the socio-economic impacts of disasters all over the country that affect the vulnerable communities. This effort is reflected in clause 6(f) which provides for offering community services to support the general population through the society’s own programmes in fields such as health, education, agriculture, disaster management and social welfare, among other activities in the humanitarian response. 

The efforts which shall be effected through collaboration and partnerships will play a significant role in the fight against poverty. Therefore, this Bill will greatly contribute in accelerating the socio-economic growth in the communities, thus responding to the SDG.

SDG 2: Reduction of hunger, increased food security and improved nutrition and promotion of sustainable agriculture

The Bill seeks to strengthen the society’s ability of providing emergency food relief and involvement in Climate Smart Agricultural (CSA) innovations, food security and nutrition interventions. 

The initiatives of introducing a food security and livelihoods strategy through Climate Smart Agricultural innovations, is a commendable effort because it is a self-sustaining strategy as compared to food reliefs. Therefore, the focus of this Bill is in line with the target of this SDG.

SDG 3: Ensuring healthy lives and promotion of well-being for all at all ages

The Bill seeks to provide for a better management and operations of the society in order to achieve its mandate and obligations, in delivering quality and sustainable humanitarian services for the wellbeing of mankind. 

The committee noted that the society participates in saving lives through delivering health care related services like first aid and other pandemic preparedness activities across all fields, which impacts on the wellbeing of all mankind. 

The society is currently functioning in 51 districts, providing health related support tapping from its presence at the lower local administrative levels, Ministries of Health, Education and Sports and the Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees in many instances work in partnership with the society. It is attached in Annex 1. The Bill seeks to strengthen this relationship in service delivery in health, among others.

SDG 4: Ensuring inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all 

Objective 6(d) in the Bill seeks to provide for training and skilling in areas related to emergency services and pre-and post-hospital care, first aid humanitarian services and disaster management. 

The above objective augments the enhancement of society’s auxiliary role through the Minister of Education and Sports to promote inclusive and equitable education and lifelong opportunities for all. 

The Bill seeks to strengthen the collaboration and partnership with the Ministry of Education and Sports in promotion of education for all, through participation in the implementation of the Government programmes that ensure and promote inclusive and equitable education to the disadvantaged learners and families in the country. The best example is the “Keep a Girl in School” aimed at retention of children in schools through improved menstrual health management among adolescent girls and young women. 

Furthermore, the committee learnt that the society has a national first aid training centre with branches in the different parts of the country providing programmes for skilling volunteers in offering humanitarian services. The training centres in partnership with the Ministry of Education and Sports aims at providing first aid emergency health and road safety education to all school going children in Uganda. 

Therefore, the Bill is well aligned to the SDG of ensuring inclusive and equitable quality education and promotion of lifelong learning opportunities for all. 

SDG 5: Achieving gender equality and empowering all women and girls 

The committee was informed that gender is a very strong core value of the Uganda Red Cross Society. Therefore, gender, equity and equality is on top of Uganda Red Cross Society’s agenda. 

This can be exemplified by the “Keep a Girl in School” campaign, as mentioned above, and the women economic empowerment programmes implemented in Mayuge and Kampala Districts, in order to support the disadvantaged basing on their assessment. 

The committee noted that the society fights against all forms of discrimination, including discrimination based on gender. The emphasis on women and girls is because of the higher vulnerabilities they face in fragile context. For example, in refugees or internally displaced persons settings, where the females are at a higher risk compared to their male counterparts. 

Some vulnerability is derived from the different challenges in managing menstrual health, reproductive health, nutrition requirements and sexual gender based violence. The society involves both sexes as volunteers, beneficiaries and staff of the Uganda Red Cross Society. Therefore, the enactment of this Bill will enhance the society’s ability to mention gender equality and empowerment of women and girls.

SDG 6: Ensuring availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all
The Bill, under clause 6 (f), seeks to reinforce its mandate as an auxiliary body that supports community services of the general population, through the society's own programmes in areas of water, sanitation and hygiene. This mandate is further strengthened by the obligations from the International Protocols of the International Federation of Red Cross (IFRC) and United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR). Hence, reinforcing Uganda's fulfilment of its obligations under International Humanitarian Law; accordingly, the Bill is in line with the focus of this SDG.

SDG 7: Accessibility to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all

The committee noted that the society, through its auxiliary role, provides affordable energy in both refugees and internally displaced persons settlements. For example, energy saving stoves and briquettes are the key approaches that are being promoted. This effort improves the standard of living of the population through increased income, better environmental conservation and provision of affordable, reliable and sustainable modern energy for all, which is in line with this SDG. 

SDG 8: Promotion of sustained economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all

Clause 6(f) of this Bill seeks to reinforce the mandate of the society as an auxiliary body that supports community services to the general population. 

Additionally, the Bill seeks to strengthen the collaboration and partnership with the lead agencies, as this will facilitate more recruitment and engagement of volunteers and staff, which will in turn contribute in improving the economic and social welfare of the population. Therefore, it is in conformity with this SDG. 

SDG 13: Urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts 

Clause 6(k), provides for other things incidental to or in furtherance of the above objects. Through this legal provision and in collaboration with other stakeholders, the society will contribute in addressing issues of climate change, which are greatly affecting the country. 

The committee noted that the disaster issues the Red Cross is addressing today have transcended in dimension and occurrence to include climate change and other forms of disasters. The Bill will enable the society to actively contribute in the management of climate change impacts through the relevant agencies.

SDG 15: Protection, restoring and promoting sustainable use of global ecosystems, sustainable manage forests, combat desertification, halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss. 

The Bill holistically seeks to strengthen the collaboration and partnership with all the relevant Ministries, Government Departments and Agencies (MDAs) in the implementation of its mandate. 

The committee noted that the society is highly involved in environmental conservation efforts in 15 districts, which are listed. Therefore, the Bill is well aligned with the targets of this SDG in protecting, restoring and promoting sustainable use of global eco-systems in conserving the environment. 

In general terms, this Bill presents an opportunity for achieving most of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 agenda for sustainable development. 

Gender and equity compliance 
The committee observed that the current Act does not provide for this thing and streamlined governance and management roles between Government and the society, which should have facilitated the society’s assessment. 
Consequently, the Bill seeks to cure the above gap and strengthen the relationship between the society and Government agencies to enhance the assessment of the society on gender and equity compliance through the leading agencies. 

The committee recommends that this Bill be enacted to facilitate the smooth assessment of the society on gender and equity compliance. 

General Observations and Recommendations

Clause 6(c) seeks to -

THE SPEAKER: We will do that at committee stage.

MS ABABIKU: Okay. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I now request to lay a copy of our committee report and minutes on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson and members of the Committee on Presidential Affairs. Honourable members, you have heard the report. The necessary minimum number of Members has signed it. It is eligible for debate.

3.58
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to make my contribution to this Bill. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee for the tremendous work and the input they have endeavoured to make, to ensure that they present to us a good report.

I have two issues I would like to comment on concerning the position of the committee. On page 18, the committee summarises the four major areas of this Bill and they include strengthening the collaboration of the Uganda Red Cross Society with other MDAs and also enhancing funding of the Society’s activities. Those are the two areas where I have concerns.

The Red Cross I know is supposed to be a neutral organ that helps in situations of difficulty; it could be in times of war, disaster or any other emergency. Now, that is where I have a problem. On page 6, the committee rightly observes that the Uganda Red Cross Society is supposed to be an auxiliary body - a body that provides support. I have no problem with that one. 

However, when we go to page 17, the committee seems to be putting its weight behind making Uganda Red Cross Society part and parcel of the function of the State or Government. That is where the problem comes in.  Let us take a situation where there is war, the moment the flag of the Red Cross is seen with that emblem, all the belligerent forces are supposed to give them way. They are not supposed to be disturbed because they are supposed to be neutral.

However, you start by saying that in the governing council of Uganda Red Cross Society, Government must be effectively represented. You say that Government is the one that must assign Uganda Red Cross Society what it should do and that the activities of the Uganda Red Cross Society must be directly reported to the Minister of General Duties in the Office of the Prime Minister. That way, we shall be diluting and endangering the work of Uganda Red Cross Society.

Imagine a situation where there is a civil war in this country and Government forces are on one side and the opposing side on the other side. How will the Uganda Red Cross Society intervene? The other side will see Uganda Red Cross Society as part of the Government.

Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate the work of the committee but I find the trend they are taking extremely dangerous. If this is the spirit of this amendment, then it is taking a very dangerous trend making Uganda Red Cross Society part of the operations of Government, yet in actual sense it is supposed to be a neutral body. That is why in situations of war, all belligerent forces are supposed to respect that emblem because they know it is a neutral body. 

Appending it as an auxiliary body of the MDAs and the activities directly overseen by the Office of the Prime Minister will be endangering the operations of the Uganda Red Cross Society. I think the intention for which the International Red Cross Society was founded, and we are signatories, will be lost. That provision of trying to link the Uganda Red Cross Society with Government should be removed. We should try as much as possible to delink the Uganda Red Cross Society from the operations of Government.

We have just seen the President of the National Unity Platform giving a report here. Supposing it is UPDF soldiers beating up people, how will the Uganda Red Cross Society go and rescue people being beaten up when they must take instructions to go and rescue them from MDAs? Do you think Uganda Red Cross Society will have the mandate to intervene when soldiers or the police are beating some civilians or when there is a riot? 

If the army is on one side as civilians are being tortured, how will Uganda Red Cross Society now intervene in such a situation? We need to delink Uganda Red Cross Society from the operations of Government. Let it remain a neutral body, which can serve neutrally - (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Conclude.

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The other point I would like to make, briefly, is on the finances of the Uganda Red Cross Society. It is true that all Red Cross societies world over engage in business, but we have a history here which is very bad. Not long ago, officials of the Uganda Red Cross were arrested because they were using the Red Cross to smuggle goods for building their personal hotels. This is because Red Cross goods are non-taxable.

Madam Speaker, I want safeguards. If we say that the Uganda Red Cross Society should go into business, how are we going to safeguard it from the previous occurrences of abuse of office? We know that Uganda Red Cross officials are good at abusing the goodwill of the Society and they turn it into a way of benefiting themselves. We need safeguards, so that no one abuses this. 

They will start importing materials under the pretext of aiding Red Cross, when actually they are meant for their personal use. Some of the imported materials will even be found in shops. Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this time.

4.05
MR EDWARD MAKMOT (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to make this contribution. On the same note, allow me thank the private Member who moved this Bill and the committee for concluding this work and giving us a good report to deliberate on.

Madam Speaker, I thought I knew the Red Cross Society. However, I have just realised that I only know a small component of the Red Cross Society. I knew the Red Cross Society sign and that in times of war, the Red Cross Society is the body that will come as a saviour. It is a body that is recognised internationally for its contribution and it is well respected. 

I see that this is a repeal of the Act and this is a Bill that we need to support. I rise to support the committee on its recommendation. I look forward to having the necessary amendments or modifications where necessary. Otherwise, in totality, I support this Bill. 

I was actually amazed that the Red Cross is a vehicle that is in line with the 17 SDG points. To come with a Bill that is current with the SDGs like this is not something easy to come by; it is not a usual occurrence here.

The fact that the Red Cross is intervening in the areas – I thought it was more about disaster and war but I have now seen that it is in areas of gender disparity, in the areas of education, environment, among other things. 

This is a great vehicle that this country needs at this point in time. I have heard the sentiments of my colleague in respect to what happened with the Red Cross in the past but I think that is in the past. There have been changes. Whoever did that has been reprimanded. Maybe it is time to tie those loopholes. 

We also know that the role of the Red Cross includes some of the core mandates of Government. There is need to balance these interests but you cannot completely delink Government from some of these roles. For example, collection of blood; this is our responsibility as a nation. At the end of the day, Government has a responsibility but how do we give that independence? 

The concern about the autonomy of the Red Cross is a valid concern. What we need to do is give them that power; it can be done in the law. Once it is in the law, it can be done. More so, the Red Cross is not just about Government. There is the Uganda Red Cross, the International Red Cross Society; there are many other bodies and conventions that they must comply with. 

This is a great development. I have heard a lot of impressive proposals that I look forward to looking into to modify or change. It is a vehicle we need. 

I understand they are only in 15 districts. I look forward to seeing Red Cross in Agago where I come from. Many of the problems we have had as MPs can be answered by passing this Bill into law. Thank you. 

4.10
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to contribute to this report and to commend the committee for the report. 

I stand to support the amendment to the Uganda Red Cross Act - the Bill which is now before this House. 
The Uganda Red Cross - we are just domesticating our international obligations under the Geneva Conventions. 

On reading and internalising this report, I see a temptation by the committee to deviate from the provisions of the Geneva Conventions. I would rather that we try as much as possible in this report and Bill to reflect our obligations under the Geneva Conventions. That is why it is important for us to try as much as possible to make this body neutral and impartial. 

Any attempt to create a relationship between the Uganda Red Cross and Government, will make it a legitimate target, especially in times of war and in times of conflict. 

The Red Cross and the Red Crescent societies globally are voluntary organisations. They receive funds from well-wishers and that is how they operate. The reason they have remained relevant is because they are non-aligned. They can go to conflict areas without fear that they will be legitimate targets. 

I would rather we focus our attention on parading this Bill under the auspices of the treaty. 

Finally, I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson as to why we are seeking to protect the Red Cross and not necessarily the Red Crescent. I say so because you are likely to have a situation where people will abuse the Red Crescent. I know that the Red Cross is very specific but the functions of the Red Cross and the Red Crescent are similar. 

Is it possible under this law to also seek to protect the Red Crescent, so that it is not abused by anybody in our country if that protection is not specifically provided for under our law? Thank you. 

4.14
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. 

I would like to state that the idea of the Uganda Red Cross is something as old as 1964. When I was in school, I was a member of the Red Cross. The Red Cross used to come and teach us issues of voluntarism, issues of patriotism – loving your country and doing everything. I am not very sure that I see this coming out these days. We would do blood donations, we would go and help people in the communities and other activities.

I knew the Red Cross was independent in operating its activities. They taught us that when you see that flag or that car, it means they are going to help people. 

I have a problem with bringing a government body into it now. Why would we want a government body on its board? Something should be explained. 

At the end of the day, it is most likely that the services of a voluntary organisation might be affected by that kind of operation. 

My other concern is under the gender and equity, I am not very sure that the chairperson brought out the issues. In humanitarian challenges, the women suffer; it is worse for people with disabilities. If you do not target these characters that are underprivileged, even if you are giving them privileges during situations which are bad, they tend to be left behind. 

I would think that the report in the Bill should be able to explain whether the humanitarian services are going to target the most vulnerable within that gender and equity area. 

I would like to conclude with the matter of having it in the Ministry of General Duties. I have a problem with “general” in that it is not specific because that ministry does a lot of things. I would have preferred it to be under the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, as has been the practice. That way, then they would work side by side. Maybe the chairperson will explain to us why. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.16
MS MARGARET BABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee for a well-presented report. The Uganda Red Cross Society derived its existence from the International Red Cross and it is domesticated. It includes the peculiar problems of Uganda.

It is very important to have a Government board because it is in Uganda and Government must contribute towards the existence and the finances of the Red Cross. If you depend entirely of voluntarism, it may not work.

That is why it is under the Uganda Red Cross Society and I am very happy that it has widened its scope to consider disaster caused by environment, domestic violence, which were left out before. I am happy that you included them.

Another important reason for amending the Uganda Red Cross Society Bill is the use of the Red Cross sign. Some people are now misusing the Red Cross. You just put a small clinic and get a red cross. Some people do their own work with the sign of the Red Cross. It is being misused. This law will protect the Red Cross so that it is used for its purpose.

The issue of saying that Government may interfere; I think Government loves all its people whether in the Opposition or in Government; they want to see that everybody is alive and is assisted. There should not be any fear of a Government representative being there. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.19
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I commend the chairperson and the committee for the comprehensive report. I highly appreciate the Red Cross Society for the impressive record especially for not tainting itself with a bad image like some of the organisations that we have been reading about in the media.

I am very impressed that the Bill outlines the path towards achievement of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals. These are very crucial for accelerating our economic growth and they strongly emphasise the issue of gender equity and equality, which is one of the goals at the African Union charter 2016-2030.

Much emphasis has been put forward to ensure this; for Sustainable Development Goals to be achieved, there must be very critical observance of the gender issue. The Bill advocates for a charter that is all inclusive, which brings all the gender aspects on board. 

The operations of its activities do not leave anyone behind. However, I am not comfortable, like other colleagues said, that this Red Cross should be a Government entity. We know what happened to most of them and we would not want this organisation to fall into the same track. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.22
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the Chairperson and the committee for this report. I know a little bit about the history of the Red Cross societies across the world and most of them started with support of Governments but with time, Governments weaned them after realising that they could perform on their own in terms of finances and governance.

We can agree that probably, our society is still weak and is reflected in what Hon. Asamo said; that at some point, the society would come to schools and educate. I remember that we would drop a coin for them but that somehow died out, which means our society, as a voluntary organisation, had weakened. 

The intention of this Bill is to strengthen it and to be strengthened; it is difficult to start on its own without the involvement of Government. 

I implore Government to allow it to grow even in terms of governance but for the start, I request Members not to fear but allow that it is strengthened again. In some countries, they are development arms of Government. Even if they had special focus on disaster, war but still, they would be considered. The most important bit is to eventually allow them to be weaned of Government but at the beginning, it is very difficult.

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.24
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the Bill. Growing up in Kyegegwa, my home was in between two refugee settlements, Kyaka I and Kyaka II and so, we regularly used to see vehicles of the Red Cross with words written on in Swahili; “Msalaba Mwekundu” some of us did not know what it meant but we crammed them because we were young. We knew that they were helping people.

It is that spirit of voluntarism, like Hon. Asamo said, but of recent, it has kind of fizzled out. I have a strong belief that this Bill is intended to reawaken the Red Cross and strengthen it. It is on the basis of that, that I support it. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.25
DR MICHEAL BUKENYA (NRM, Bukuya County, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report and also hon. Byarugaba for coming up with the Bill. The Parliament of Uganda, through the committee on Health and the Committee on Budget, with the approval from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has been supporting the Uganda Red Cross but had to look for a route for the money to get there.

The Ministry of Health came with a request to facilitate collection of blood at the time we had challenges in 2017 and from that time, things have significantly improved. 

When you have Uganda Red Cross Society collecting blood from one corner and you have the Ministry of Health collecting from another corner, you will find that most people will go to where the Uganda Red Cross Society is. They will go there and will not ask for anything. However, when the Ministry of Health is there, they will go and even ask for something to go with. Therefore, we need to support the Uganda Red Cross Society.

I also think that in the law, we have to find a way of excluding Government in the governance but forcing Government, on behalf of Ugandans, to be one of the donors as a volunteer to keep the spirit of volunteerism. As Parliament, let us make sure that we have a package to make sure that the Uganda Red Cross delivers. 

There are issues that we may not completely discuss here but with the money which we provide - which Hon. Bahati avails – there is always debate on where it should be used between the Uganda Red Cross Society and the supervising ministry. Sometimes, it ends up in construction because that is where the ministry sees its priorities. Sometimes, it ends up buying ambulances instead of asking for their own money to buy ambulances.

You will notice that regional referral hospitals have got ambulances through the Uganda Red Cross Society. That was Government money that was supposed to assist the Uganda Red Cross Society undertake some particular operations. However, because there was a need for ambulances - which is also not bad – some of the money was taken there.

I support the concept that we force the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Government of Uganda to be volunteers and contribute a package, and that they are excluded from the governance and management of the society. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Bahati has heard “money”, so he has got up. (Laughter)

4.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the members of the committee for the report and for the amendments that are being suggested.

Madam Speaker, I belong to the Scouts’ Movement, which is a similar organisation based on voluntarism, love for country and always being prepared in times of trouble. We had a similar situation where we were struggling, first and foremost, on where we should be accommodated in the Government structures. 

I also know, Madam Speaker, that you have been a very strong Girl Guide and you have supported the movement for a very long time. What we did was to negotiate with Government and now the Scouts and Girl Guides’ movement is accommodated under the Ministry of Education and Sports.

I find no problem with the law being amended to have an accommodation area - where the Uganda Red Cross Society can be housed. We are proposing that it is housed under the Office of the Prime Minister because it is related to issues with disaster and all that. 

Therefore, there is no contradiction. You cannot say that if something is being housed under Government and is being supported by Government then it cannot be independent. I can assure you that the Uganda Red Cross can continue playing its own role but at the same time receiving support from Government. After all, Government should support these efforts, wherever they come from, because they are serving the people of Uganda and complimenting the efforts of Government.

On behalf of Government, we support this move and we will make sure that once it is done, we will be able to appropriate the resources needed to make this movement move forward. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to just augment what the minister has said. You may realise that this came as a result of a Private Member’s Bill. It is because when the delegation came to meet me, they said they have difficulties reaching Government because they do not belong anywhere. 

For a long time, they have wanted to have this law amended but they had no ministry to champion the amendment. Therefore, they came, made a petition and asked that Parliament helps them. That is how Hon. Bakunda Byarugaba agreed to facilitate this. They really do not have a place where they can shout when they have a problem. That is why they wanted this law amended.

Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE
THE UGANDA RED CROSS SOCIETY BILL, 2019

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS ABABIKU: Madam Chairperson –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you amending clause 1?

MS ABABIKU: We are deleting clause 1.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you deleting the title?

MS ABABIKU: The short title.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why are you deleting it?

MS ABABIKU: We are saying we are deleting clause 1, that is, the short title. The justification is that the provision is unnecessary since according to section 3 of the Acts to Parliament Act, Cap. 2, the short title precedes a long title. This is augmented by section 15 of the Acts of Parliament Act, which provides that the citation of the short title to an Act shall be sufficient to identify the Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay, mover? I put the question that clause 1 be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clause 2 normally comes last. Let us go to clause 3.

MS ABABIKU: On clause 2 -

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, it will come last. You may have amendments there, so let us go to clause 3.

Clause 3

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 3 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Under clause 5 (1), we propose to delete the words, “in Uganda” appearing in line two of paragraph (a).

The justification is that the words are redundant since the proposed law is for Uganda. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay? 

MS JANEPHER MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. In clause 5 (1) (a), which provides for recognition of independence and voluntary nature of the society, we need to define what the public authority is in this case. Let us be specific on whether it is a ministry, department or agency.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Isn’t it in the definition section under clause 2? We will check under clause 2 when we get there. Is it defined? Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed?

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like amend the heading, “recognition of the independent and voluntary nature of society.” I would like to add other than removing the words, “in Uganda” on (a) I would like to add the words, “should be a voluntary neutral aid society.” I would like to add the word, “neutral”, Madam Chairperson, to emphasise the element of neutrality.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable members. We have agreed that spontaneous amendments should not be allowed on the Floor because we do not know their implications.

I put the question that clause 5, as amended, do stand part of the Bill?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have an amendment for clause 5 (1) (b). Substitute for paragraph (b) of subclause (1) the following: “Be driven by the fundamental principles of humanity, impartiality, neutrality, independence, voluntary service, unity and universality at all times.”

The justification is to require the Uganda Red Cross Society to adhere to the fundamental principles of the International Red Cross and the Red Crescent Movement at all times. Paragraph (b) has been carried to clause 6 that provides for objects of the society for the better placement.

Madam Chairperson, still under clause 5, I also have-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, you know the way you set your document - your amendment starts from clause 6 but when I open, I see a series under 5. It seems you had some series under clause 5 yet we have passed it. Let us start with clause 6 then we shall come back to those.

Clause 6

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, make your proposals.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In clause 6 are objects of the society. We are substituting for paragraph (a) the following:
 
    (a) Prevent and help alleviate the suffering of any person without any discrimination on the basis of nationality, race, ethnicity, religious belief, colour, economic status, sex, language, political opinion or related criteria.

The justification is to ensure that discrimination of whatever degree is prohibited. The use of the words, “adverse discrimination” is restrictive and implies that discrimination is allowed as long as it is not adverse.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But you have others like (c)-
	
MS ABABIKU: We are also proposing to insert a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (b) as follows: “Render assistance to the medical services of the armed forces in times of armed conflict.”

The justification is that it is a consequential amendment arising from the amendment of clause 5 (b).

Clause 6(c), substitute for paragraph (c) the following: “Take part in national preparedness and humanitarian response plans in situations of armed conflict and other situations of violence; natural or man-made disasters and other emergencies.”

The justification is to ensure that a clear distinction between the mandate of the Uganda Red Cross Society and that of the Government Ministries, Departments and Agencies whose mandate is in the humanitarian field is drawn. The Uganda Red Cross Society is not a national leading organisation in the humanitarian field by virtue of its auxiliary status.

Clause 6 (f), we are substituting for paragraph (f) the following: “Provide community services to the general population through the society’s programmes in fields of health, prevention of diseases, disaster management, social welfare and education in the humanitarian field.”

The justification is to ensure clarity of the objects of the society. 

Madam Chairperson, we also have a proposal under clause 6(h). We are substituting for paragraph (h) the following: “(h) collaborate with public authorities in the national application and implementation of international humanitarian law.

The justification is for clarity. The words, “public service personnel” are redundant.

We also propose a new paragraph. Insert a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (h) to read as follows: “To ensure the protection of the Red Cross emblem and other distinctive emblems and designations recognised under the 1949 Geneva Conventions and their additional protocols.”

The justification is that the new paragraph is as a result of splitting paragraph (h), to separate the two issues contained in paragraph (h) for clarity of the objects of the society.

Clause 6 (i), we are substituting for paragraph (i) the following: “Promote and disseminate international humanitarian law, disaster law, the spirit of volunteerism and the fundamental principles of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement.”

The justification is for clarity.

Clause 6 (j), we are substituting for paragraph (j) the following: “Co-operate with national societies, the international committee of the red cross and the international federation of red cross and red crescent societies in carrying out its activities in accordance to the fundamental principles of the international red cross and red crescent movement.”

The justification is for clarity to promote and strengthen the society’s co-operation and linkages at regional and international levels.

Clause 6(k), we are substituting (k) with the following: “To do all other things incidental to or in furtherance of the objects of the society.”

The justification is for clarity, Madam Chairperson. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson and the chairperson of the committee. I would like to just improve on the wordings. For example, on Clause 6(a), can’t we say “prevent and help alleviate the suffering of any person without any discrimination of whatever kind.” Then we can put all these in the schedule.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, no spontaneous amendments. Sorry.

MR SSEWUNGU: Okay. Then in Clause 6(j), “co-operate with national societies, international committees of Red Cross and International Federation Red Cross and red societies in carrying out its activities in accordance with fundamental principles.” There is a lot of repetition. I wish we could make some corrections to avoid repetition, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where are the repetitions?

MR SSEWUNGU: The Red Cross is coming out so much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: There are national societies; the International Community of the Red Cross, that is the big one, then the International Federation of Red Cross is also another one, the Red Crescent society is another one. Where is the repetition?

MS ASAMO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In the description of 6(a), I would like to propose that we add the word “disability” because it is in the Constitution. I think it should be included rather than putting it in other criteria. It should be there because all those descriptions come right from the Constitution. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: She is proposing to add the word, “disability” to the words, “nationality, race, ethnicity, religious beliefs, colour, status, sex, language, political opinion or related criteria.” She wants to submit that specifically. Do you have a problem with that?

MR SSEMPALA: Madam Chairperson, we have no problem. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 6 (a) be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a new paragraph be inserted as proposed, to act as subparagraph (b) and to be numbered sequentially. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 6(b), (f), (h), (i), (j), (k) be amended as proposed and that a new paragraph be inserted as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7 

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In clause 7, we propose as follows: 

In clause 7 (1), we propose to substitute the word, “everyone” appearing in the line of the provision with the words, “every Ugandan.” 

The justification is to avoid ambiguity by ensuring that the membership of the Society is restricted to only Ugandans, except volunteerism for humanity, which applies to all interested persons.

In clause 7 (2), we propose to substitute subclause (2), with the following: “(2) Procedures governing admission to membership, categories of membership and the rights and duties of members shall be prescribed under the regulations made under this Act."

The justification is to ensure that the operationalisation of the provisions of this Act is done through a statutory instrument instead of a society’s constitution.  

Madam Chairperson, I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, first of all, we have talked about volunteerism. If I am an American who lives in Kampala and would like to be a member, why do you stop me? 

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson, for that concern. We had a lengthy debate on this matter until we agreed that this law is for Ugandans. We also want to avert a situation where some people with ill intentions will come and join this Society to harm our country. Therefore, we opened our door to any person who will wish to support but not become a member. That is what we agreed on. Thank you very much.

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Chairperson. I am not comfortable with the new position the committee has taken of replacing the word, “everyone” with the words, “every Ugandan.”

The Red Cross is a voluntary organisation. As the Deputy Attorney-General stated, throughout his childhood, he saw this as a voluntary organisation. There could be many non-Ugandans living here with a big heart to make a contribution and be part of this society. I have seen cases where there are many non-Ugandans saving lives of Ugandans.

Madam Chairperson, I implore Members to retain the earlier position of the Bill that talked about everyone instead of this one that limits it to only Ugandans. 

I would like to allay the chairperson’s fears about there being some bad Ugandans that might want to hurt our interests. Do you think all Ugandans are good? No. Some Ugandans are not good. Therefore, let us just leave it to everyone. 

MR BASALIRWA: Chairperson, I thank you for this opportunity once again. I would like to agree with the proposal that we maintain the clause as it is since under clause 7 (2), there is a provision to categorise membership. Clause 7 (1) talks about “everyone” and clause 7 (2) can categorise the membership. That is when you can allay the fears. 

Otherwise, excluding some people and introducing membership categories at the same time will be a contradiction. Both objectives can actually be addressed by limiting the categories of membership and the rights and responsibilities thereunder. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is there anything different? 

MR MAKMOT: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I also want to state that the fears of opening membership, especially to Uganda, where the Red Cross is trying to expand to the different districts – to fear that some groups can come and outnumber us and probably change things is farfetched.

I would also like to add that humanitarian causes know no colour or nationality because they are a humane thing that cuts across, especially when we are part of the international body. I think to limit it to only Ugandans is not right. Thank you. 

MR SSEWUNGU: After Clause 6(a) where we have stopped the discrimination, we cannot come to this clause and exclude people.

We, professional teachers, know that the Red Cross is one of the associations that are embraced by children in schools. If you have children that are foreigners, they are supposed to become members of the Red Cross societies in the schools they study from. I wonder how you would say, for example, that the Indians who came to the Madhvani Foundation for business, their children cannot be members, yet, they are studying with fellow children in the same country.

I also pray that this remains the same and I think the Attorney-General is also going to support the same. You cannot restrict membership. When one reads the history of the Uganda Red Cross Society by Henry Dunant, they will understand how he brought it out. He was not discriminating against anybody in terms of colour, size and others. He looked at the blood that was spilled during the war. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 7(1) do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 7(2) be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8
MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are substituting clause 8(1) with the following: “(1) The supreme governing body of the Society shall be a national council constituted in accordance with the regulations made under this Act.”

This is for clarity and to ensure consistency with the current governance structures under the Uganda Red Cross Society constitution. It is a consequential amendment.

Under clause 8 (2), substitute the word “constitution” appearing at the end of the provision with the word “regulations”. The justification is that this is a consequential amendment.

We are proposing to insert a new clause immediately after subclause (2) to read as follows: “The secretariat of the Society shall be responsible for the day-to-day operations of the Society and for implementing the decisions of the governing body of the Society.” 

The justification is that this is to ensure clarity and proper placement of the provision, which had been wrongly placed under clause 25.

Under clause 8 (3), substitute the words “general assembly” with the words “national council”. This is a consequential amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 8 be amended under subclauses (1), (2) and (3) as proposed, and that a new subclause be inserted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9
MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Under clause 9(1), we are substituting the words “its humanitarian activities in conformity with the principles, policies and regulations of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Movements” appearing in lines three and four with the words “objects under this Act”.

The justification is that this is for specificity.

Under clause 9, we propose to delete subclause (2). The justification is that subclause (2) duplicates clause 4 of the Bill, which establishes the society as a body corporate and, therefore enjoys all rights and liabilities that accrue to any corporate body, including the right to acquire or own property.

Under clause 9, delete subclause (3). The justification is that the provision is unnecessary. Matters to do with welfare of the society’s staff should be handled administratively. 

Delete subclause (4). The justification is that the provision has been provided for under a new clause immediately following, since it contains a different issue from that under this clause.

We propose to insert a new clause immediately after clause 9 to read as follows:
“Collaboration of the Society with public authorities
(1) A public authority may enter into an agreement with the Society requiring the Society to provide any service or activity that the public authority may entrust to the Society within the scope of the Society’s objects and functions.

(2) The public authority shall make provisions for covering the costs of any service or activity entrusted to the Society under subsection (1).”
 
The justification is that this is for clarity.

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. For the amendment under clause 9(1), where the committee is proposing to remove the words “humanitarian activities” and replace them with “object”, I am not convinced because primarily, whatever Red Cross does is a humanitarian activity. 

It is more appealing in that even somebody who will want to give in resources or contribute would be more encouraged if we maintain it the way it is in the original Bill – humanitarian activities. Surely, this is the core mandate of Red Cross Society. I would implore the committee that we retain the original draft of the Bill. It actually captures the real spirit of what Red Cross is all about.

MR MAKMOT: I also have a concern with deleting subclause (3), which provides that the Society may constitute and administer any reserve insurance or other funds for its staff. I think the justification for deleting was stated that it could be done administratively. I think if the parent law does not give the legal basis for it, especially with respect to insurance and other things, can’t that be challenged? I wonder whether this should not stay. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, what is your rationale for deleting part of subclause (1) and deleting subclauses (2) and (3)?

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We deleted clause 9(1) because all the programmes have been clearly described under the objects of the Bill. That is where it has been broken down into the specific activities. Therefore, we felt that if one wants to understand what Red Cross Society does, he or she has to go the specific objects of the Bill, which we have already worked on.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, clause 9 deals with properties and assets of the Society. Therefore, you are taking away the power of the Society to own property, to dispose of it and to manage it, yet in the report we were told that the Society in Kenya owns hotels. This is what you are doing – you are removing that power. 

Similarly, under subclause (3), it is not just about objectives. It is about the assets and property of the Society.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We deleted subclause (3) because we felt that issues of welfare are administrative, therefore there is no need to put them in the law. That is the reason we had. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, this is about a reserve fund. It is not just a question of getting insurance. I think you better leave it there. 

MS ABABIKU: Madam Chairperson, I concede on 3(1) and (3)

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is better you leave all of them.

MS ABABIKU: Madam Chairperson, with the clarity the House has given and with your input, I concede to maintain clause 9. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 9, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10
MS ABABIKU: Clause 10 is about funds of the society. We propose to substitute for paragraph (a) the following: “Money appropriated to the society by Parliament through public authorities”. 

The justification is to enable the society access funding through MDAs, since the society is auxiliary to those MDAs to enhance streamlined planning, budgeting, coordination and supervision between the society and the MDAs. 

Clause 10(1)(b)
Delete the words, “responsible for disaster preparedness” appearing in line two of the provision. 

The justification is that the words are redundant since the word “minister” has been defined under the interpretation clause.

Clause 10(1)(d)
Substitute for the words, “advancement of the humanitarian work of the society” appearing in line two and three the words, “purpose of its objects”.

The justification is for specificity.

Clause 10(1)(e)
Substitute for paragraph (e), the following: “Contributions from national and international organisations and individuals.”

Justification is for clarity and specificity. 

We are also proposing to have a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (e) as follows: “Funds raised through fundraising activities”. 
The justification is that the new paragraph arises from splitting paragraph (e), to ensure clarity and specificity. 

Clause 10(2)
Delete the words, “as laid down”, appearing in line three. The justification is that the words are redundant. 

Clause 10(3)
Substitute for the words, “in accordance with the constitution of the society” the words, “as shall be prescribed by regulations under this Act.”

This is a consequential amendment. 

MR OTHIENO: Madam Chairperson, I am aware that we do not allow spontaneous amendments. I do not know whether it would be possible to improve the amendment by the committee on 10(1)(a). 

What I have in mind is that we could make this expenditure statutory such that it is not subjected to cuts and approvals. Once we come here, Parliament approves it and it becomes a statutory expenditure on the Government. I am aware that I did not submit this but I beg your indulgence. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What would be the implications?

MS ABABIKU: Madam Chairperson, allow me to give some information on this proposal. 

Under funding by the Government, we propose that the society should be supported through subventions not through direct appropriation, because we know the procedures that the lead agencies or the ministries go through. It follows direct accountability. We felt that through subventions, where the ministries remain the lead agencies, the Red Cross Society can easily benefit rather than exposing the society to come here as an entity. 

Another complication we realised is that the society has got crosscutting issues to handle. If you allow the Red Cross Society to come here as an independent auxiliary body, yet it has crosscutting issues, it may not be easy to process it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: May I also ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to make a comment because this is a Private Member’s Bill, concerning the proposal by Hon. Othieno. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think the proposal of the chairperson of the committee could be a better option, where we, as the Government, make a subvention and the Red Cross will be able to account for the agency where it has been attached rather than having it as a statutory budget. 

In most cases, statutory budgets are derived from the institutions that have been created by the Constitution. I think a subvention is much better. It will be like a grant and the Red Cross will be able to account for it. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 10, be amended, as proposed by the Chairperson. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12
MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Under clause 12, we are substituting clause 12(1) with the following: “When in time of armed conflict, the emblem, when used as a protective devise on medical personnel, medical units, or transport, shall be visible enough to offer the protection conferred by the Geneva Conventions and their additional protocols. The dimensions of the emblem shall be prescribed by the regulations on the use of the emblem of the Red Cross or the Red Crescent by the national societies”.

The justification is for clarity and specificity, since the emblem referred to the provision is known, that is, the Red Cross.

Clause 12(2); Substitute subclause (1), with the following:  “the emblem, when used as an indicative device on medical personnel, medical units or transport shall be small in size, as prescribed by the regulations on the use of the emblem of the Red Cross or Red Crescent, by the national society.” 

Justification 
For clarity and specificity, to avoid repetition since the use of the Red Cross emblem alone signifies an automatic linkage to International Red Cross and Red Crescent movement. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 12 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12 as amended, agreed to.
Clause 13
MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are substituting clause 13(1), the medical service of the armed forces shall, under the control of the ministry responsible for defence use the emblem to mark its medical personnel, medical units and transport on the ground; at sea and in the air in times of peace and in armed conflicts.

13(2) The medical personnel of the armed forces and religious personnel, attached to the armed forces shall wear armlets and carry identity cards, displaying the emblem issued by the ministry responsible for defence.

13 (3) Where the society provides medical personnel, medical units or transport to support the medical service of the armed forces, the medical personnel, medical units or transport; 
(a) shall be subject to the applicable laws governing the armed forces; may on authorisation by the ministry responsible for defence display the emblem and as a protective device, may make temporary use of other distinctive emblems recognised and enjoying equal status under the Geneva conventions and additional protocols, whenever there is need to enhance protection.

13 (4), The medical personnel under subsection 3 shall wear armlets and carry identity cards issued by the society.

13(5) Not withstanding subsection (1), the medical personnel of the armed forces and religious personnel, attached to the armed forces may make temporary use of any of the distinctive emblems, recognised by and enjoying equal status under the Geneva conventions and their additional protocols.

The justification is for clarity.

MR OTHIENO: Madam Speaker, I have an objection on clause (13). We are now saying that in times of war, the army - the UPDF, which in times of war is a belligerent force, will now be using the Red Cross emblem for purpose of protection? 

This is an abuse to the Red Cross because the Red Cross is a neutral force. The religious medical team or a civil society medical team are the ones that can use a Red Cross emblem in a situation of war to access victims. However, there is no way - It has never happened anywhere in the world that an armed force wears a Red Cross emblem in a war situation and goes to the enemy side because they will be hit.

Actually, you are endangering the lives of other neutral actors; this entire clause is misplaced. I do not know what the Attorney-general can advise. I urge that it should be deleted completely. 
There is no way you can put in law, that the UPDF is also using the Red Cross emblem. No; they cannot use the Red Cross emblem especially in times of war because you are now a belligerent force. You will be endangering the lives of non-combatants, who are there on humanitarian grounds to save lives. They will think that this is now the UPDF advancing under the guise of the Red Cross. Madam Chairperson, this clause is misplaced.

THE CHAIRPERSON: should the Bill come later? Let us hear from the minister.

MR KAFUZI: On the face of it, it may appear misplaced but it is also possible that the army has a unit that does humanitarian work in the field, even during times of war. It is there to cater for both sides. It may be a team of medics, which looks out for members of the UPDF and those of the other side.

MR AKOL: Madam Chairperson, you remember that at one point, we had a fear that if we place a society in the hands of Government, they will be misinterpreted and at the same time be misused. We are now coming to the point where confusion is coming up.

I have interacted with soldiers a lot, both the medical and the legal people. If you are in the UPDF, even if you are a medical person, you are a soldier and when fighting with the other side, you will not be spared because you are a medical doctor.

I do not think it is right for us to include a clause where the UPDF should also be using the sign of the Red Cross in a war front.

As my colleague said, you would be endangering the lives of the people who have been working in the Red Cross. Why don’t we leave that work for those who are tasked with that responsibly to help the injured in the war front, instead of confusing the UPDF and the Red Cross with the same flag? That is total confusion. I think that is misplaced. Thank you.

MR ONGRIETHO: Madam Chairperson, I do not know whether in any circumstance, you will allow another organisation; even if it could be having all the good intentions to ever use the emblems of another organisation. This is inconceivable.

The army can have all the good intentions but it should not be allowed to use the emblem of the Red Cross. Ask yourself, in that kind of situation of war, who are they fighting? If it is the UPDF fighting, who are they fighting? Even if it is an internal war of all Ugandans, where medical personnel of the army would still help the other Ugandans even if they are the other side, they can still help in another way, without having to use the emblem of the Red Cross.

Probably, the Red Cross could help both sides but they cannot allow their emblems to be used by another force. That is not possible. Yes, we recognise the fact that we are asking Government to be a volunteer and contribute resources but the contribution of resources should not become a reason for them to allow their army to use the emblem of the Red Cross; that is not possible. Chairperson, I think you need to withdraw that. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does that mean we should also delete the original clause? Read the original clause 13; that is what it means.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chairperson, it is very difficult now to look at how the International Red Cross Society started. However, it was started as a result of war. It is very difficult for us to address ourselves to the Geneva Convention and the additional protocols that were put in place at that time. 

What we should note here is that there is no war that is planned. You cannot say, “Country A and B, you are going to start fighting next month; prepare.” Wars come abruptly. We know the International Red Cross Society was formed because of war and people had died; even these soldiers need life. So, the crescent and its emblem are used within. Even in a war, we should note that there are ceasefires. When there is a ceasefire, both parties will stop fighting for some time as they go for settlement. 

What happens here is that there are people, including members of the Red Cross, who come in to help those who have got injured. As you are being shot, there are others fighting to save you when you have been shot in the leg. Still, the Red Cross comes into play. That is why the Geneva Convention and the protocols gave rights and powers for this emblem to be used during war as victims of war are always affected by gunshots and fighting.

Therefore, there is no problem, honourable members, with using this in war. Again, even as you are fighting, you are settling out your differences. Even if you have been shot in an area that has been taken up, they will have to save you. The soldiers who have overtaken that area and are in control of Atiak - honourable member, let me mention your area – will cover those people who are victims of war. They will not shoot them after capturing that place. That is why they say we should use the emblem. Go to West Africa, to the Economic Community of West African States Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) forces, you will see all these things are used very well. 

It is very difficult for us, Madam Chairperson, to look at the Geneva Protocol in its entirety to see why they put it there. Do not look at the Red Cross in particular areas like going to schools, as I have stated, or helping a sick person; it is mainly about wars and disasters. 

If soldiers are going to go to Bulambuli to save victims of a landslide, will you stop them from putting on the red emblem? You cannot! So, this provision has been amended very well. Let us retain it because that is exactly what happens under international law. The Attorney-General is there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from hon. Jovah Kamateeka, hon. Anifa Kawooya and then the Attorney-General.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I want to thank the Attorney-General and hon. Ssewungu. 

Honourable members, the military using the Red Cross is specifically under a section on medical services. You are fighting, people have been hurt and you have members of the Red Cross but they may be overwhelmed. This is why you need the section of the army that is dealing with welfare to come in and assist. When they come in to assist, they are not fighting. It will usually be under ceasefire or you have been fighting and one party has withdrawn.

So, the army personnel go in under the banner of the Red Cross specifically to render medical services, not for any other purpose. If you deny this, then you will have men and women dying on the frontline. (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Actually, honourable members, during war, under the Geneva Convention once the other side is attacking Uganda and they see the crescent, they cannot attack that vehicle. That is under the Geneva Convention.

Yes, we may be fighting and you stole something from me and I am regaining my power. You stole my territory or my land and I am gaining on you, but we must fight as we save people. Once they see that Red Crescent on a green army vehicle, they will not attack and cannot shoot because they are saving lives.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, under the Geneva Convention, this requirement for the emblem is to protect the medical services of the armed forces. It is a requirement under the Geneva Convention.

MS KAWOOYA: Madam Chairperson, as you have guided the House and as hon. Ssewungu just explained to us about the Geneva Convention, the committee in their report put it rightly as the Attorney-General said that it is used by the medics and in other situations.

Madam Chairperson, after you guided that it was embedded in the original Bill; I do not see any conflict from my honourable colleague who is opposing it. I do not see its ambiguity that would leave space for misinterpretation. I am only saying that if you could allow for the sake of us moving in line with the Geneva Convention - The committee has clarified and given further justification, I call upon the colleague to also comply with the committee’s report. I thank you.

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think the clarification that the committee should give regards to what, under the Geneva Convention, we call “legitimate targets”. 

We are talking about medical protection. Madam Chairperson, you are reading a provision in the Geneva treaties on medical protection. However, the issue is: who is providing that medical protection? This is where the committee should guide – can medical protection of an enemy combatant use an emblem of the Red Cross or Red Crescent in an armed conflict? If they did so, wouldn’t they become a legitimate target? I think that is where the issue is. 

Basically, protection of medical facilities by the Red Cross and Red Crescent is permitted. However, the use of the emblems by combatants will in itself constitute a war crime. You need to clarify that. That is where hon. Othieno comes in; do you now become a neutral party? 

Assuming the UPDF is fighting Kony and the UPDF medical personnel are moving in that territory with their medical vehicles that have emblems of the Red Cross or Red Crescent; if Kony attacked that vehicle, will they be committing a war crime? Will they be violating the Geneva Convention or the UPDF will not be misusing this Red Cross or Red Crescent emblem? That is the clarification that this committee should have given because the way the provision is structured lacks clarity. 

You would get guidance from the treaties themselves because they make provisions for this. In the submission I made earlier, some of the proposals in this Bill are provisions that are already catered for under the treaties. It would make our work easier if we transferred those provisions from the Geneva Conventions into this Bill; obviously “Mutatis mutandis” as the lawyers say, with necessary modifications. That is where the challenge is.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, I think this is clear. This is about medical personnel in situations of conflict. Not all the soldiers are going to wear this -

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This clause generally is talking about situations of emergency where the Red Cross draws personnel from different specialties. It can be from health, defence, to make sure that lives are saved and the injured are secured and treated.

Madam Chairperson, based on the submissions given by members, I would like to admit in 13 (2) that there is some error that we made. Let me read it out: “The medical personnel of the armed forces and religious personnel attached to the armed forces shall wear armlets and carry identity cards displaying the emblem issued by the society and not the Ministry of Defence.”

When these staff are put together, they are protected by using this emblem of the society. That was the error we made. However, in the subsequent subclauses, they have been put rightly. For example, in subclause (4) we have put it rightly. That is the whole amendment I am trying to make. It was confusing the House and I agree with the concerns of the members. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: How about 13 (3) (b)? Do you still retain the words, “responsible for defence”?

MS ABABIKU: By the Uganda Red Cross Society.

THE CHAIRPERSON:  “May, on the authorization by the ministry responsible for defence display the emblem as a protective device. In 13 (3) (b) - under your amendment-

MS ABABIKU: Where the society provides for medical personnel, medical units or transport to support the medical services of the armed forces, the medical personnel, medical team or transport shall be subject to the applicable laws governing the society. It applies now.

THE CHAIRPERSON: How about (b)?

MS ABABIKU: “May on authorization by the society display the emblem as a protective device”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay.

MS ABABIKU: Yes. Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 13 be amended as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14
MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In clause 14, we are proposing the following:
“Clause 14(1), civilian medical personnel hospitals, civilian medical units or civilian medical transport assigned to the transport and treatment of the wounded, sick and shipwrecked with express authorisation of the society be marked with the emblem as a protective device in terms of armed conflict.

Clause 14 (2), civilian medical personnel or civilian religious personnel attached to hospitals or medical units shall wear armlets and carry identity cards displaying the emblem issued by the Uganda Red Cross Society.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 14 be amended as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are substituting the following under clause 15: 

“15 (1) The society is authorised to use the emblem of the Red Cross in accordance with the Geneva Conventions and their additional protocols.

Clause 15 (2), The society shall use its distinctive logo and seal constituting the emblem surrounded with the words “Uganda Red Cross Society” or any other abbreviation of Uganda Red Cross Society.

Clause 15 (3), The society is authorised to use the emblem as an indicative device to link a person or an object using the emblem to the society, and dimensions of the emblem shall be small to make it different from the emblem employed as a protective device.

Clause 15 (4), The society shall, when using the emblem, apply the regulations on the use of the emblem of the Red Cross or Red Crescent by national societies.

Clause 15 (5), The society shall, in collaboration with public authorities, ensure strict compliance with the rules governing the use of the emblem at all times.

Clause 15 (6), A national society operating in Uganda shall, with the consent of the society, use the emblem in accordance with this Act.”

The justification is to make the provision clear and remove unnecessary repetition; to restrict the provision to regulation of the use of the Red Cross emblem save where there is need to enhance protection. Subclauses (7), (8) and (9) have been incorporated under clause 13 for proper chronological flow since they relate to armed forces; to keep the provision within the scope of regulation of the emblem. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 15 be amended as proposed?

MR ANTHONY AKOL:  Madam Chairperson, the use of the emblem is always two-sided. It looks like this is addressing one only because it is protective and that function is not addressed in this. I thought that when we are addressing the uses of the emblem, they should include the two functions.

MR OTTO MAKMOT: Madam Chairperson, the clarification that I am seeking is in respect to   clause 15 (1) where initially in the proposed amendment, they had extracted what is provided for in the international treaty and brought it here for purposes of - normally when people are reading these Acts, sometimes it is difficult in use to cross-reference.

You need to have the treaty and other provisions but by extracting it, they had made it easy by not subjecting somebody to cross reference. I also realise it is quite long. I do not know whether we should not leave it like that. Thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chairperson, I do not know why the committee is changing clause 15 (1). Honourable members, if you recall, there was a time when the police arrested owners of small clinics because they were using the Red Cross. They claimed that those small owners were using an emblem that does not belong to them. This came as a result of clause 15 (1), as it is, because it gives you the procedure of amendment, how it came into existence and the protective system of this emblem. 

Madam Chairperson, I do not know why you wanted to avoid this clause, which is key in protecting this emblem from people who might come, use it and pass it off - for fear of infringement of the emblem by other users. That is why people have resorted to using a blue cross, green cross or a black cross but not the Red Cross. I think we should retain it as it is. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, when you imagine that everybody is going to look at the convention - somebody from Kigezi or Agago may have difficulties looking at the conventions and the treaty.  

MR SSEMPALA: Madam Chairperson, I agree with the previous speakers that we retain the original one.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We have put the justification in our provisions here. We are only making it clearer. That was the major amendment we made. We have not deleted it but we made it clearer. If you want to use it, the procedures you have to follow will automatically limit you. The Red Cross has to take charge on whether or not to give; so, any person that opts to use the emblem without being issued by the Red Cross will have done it illegally. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: This provision is about the use of the emblem by our local society. That is what it is. I do not think it is about everybody else but it is about authorising our local society here to use the emblem.

MR SSEWUNGU: Chairperson of the committee, if you read clause 15 (1) in the original Bill, it reads, 
“The society shall be authorised to use the emblem of the Red Cross on a white background and the designation Red Cross for all the purposes foreseen by the International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent in conformity with the Geneva Convention of 1949 and their additional Protocols of 1977 and 2005 and the 1991 Regulations on the use of the emblem by National Societies adopted by the International Conference of the Red Cross and the Red Crescent and this Act.”

You must be very careful as we amend this law because you have an international body. Madam Chairperson, I do not know when you will attend that conference but I pray that COVID-19 reduces so that we take that journey and see. 

They are giving you regulations when you must have used – That is why in the above amendments - clause 14 and above, it is stated that during war and all those areas. However, if you do not sustain this section, people are going to go back to the Red Crescent and it will be against the law. I pray that you maintain this section as it is. 

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson and my colleagues for the input. I concede on this. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 15 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15 agreed to.

Clause 16 
THE CHAIRPERSON: You have some amendment, honourable chairperson. 

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are deleting the entire clause. The justification is that it is redundant. It is irregular for Uganda to legislate to authorise an international humanitarian organisation to use the Red Cross or Red Crescent emblems, yet the use of the emblems is internationally regulated. Uganda is simply domesticating the use of those emblems.

Thank you, Madam Chairperson. 

MR OTHIENO: Thank you. I am looking at the original Bill and it talks about the International Red Cross and the Red Crescent being allowed to use the emblem here. 

Our society is actually domesticating the Geneva Convention. I do not understand what the committee is saying because, in any case, it is the Geneva one which can refuse the Uganda Red Cross Society from using its emblem not the other way round. 

In my opinion, clause 16 was just to show that what we are doing here is in tandem with the Geneva Convention. That is how I understand clause 16.

Madam Chairperson, I urge the committee to allow clause 16 to stand. The heading reads, “Used by the International Organisation of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement.” They are the ones legitimising us to use this emblem, which belongs to them and not us. You cannot stop them from coming here. They are actually helping you because they can tell Uganda to stop using their emblem. What will you do? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: This law is supposed to apply here in Uganda. I think what clause 16 says is that when those organisations are here, they are eligible to use. I do not think we should delete it. 

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I concede on clause 16. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 16 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16 agreed to.

Clause 17 
Ms ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We propose in clause 17 (1) the following:
 Substitute for subclause (1), the following -
"(2) The Government shall ensure strict compliance with the rules governing the use of the emblems at all times."

The justification is to restrict the application of the provision to the scope of the Bill, that is, to only the emblem of the Red Cross.

Clause 17 (2)
Substitute for subclause (2), the following -
"(2) The Minister shall, in consultation with the society, prescribe measures and guidelines for persons authorised to use the emblem both as a protective or distinctive device in accordance with the Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols." 

Justification
    • For clarity and to ensure consistency in usage of the word, "Society" instead of the use of the phrase "Uganda Red Cross Society" since the word, “Society” has been defined under the interpretation clause.
    • The application of the words, “names and signals” appearing at the end of the provision is not clear.

We also propose to insert a new subclause immediately after subclause (2) to read as follows:
“The guidelines issued under subsection (2) shall provide for the necessary administrative and disciplinary sanctions for misuse of the emblem.”

The justification is to ensure clarity and better chronology of provisions.

Clause 17 (3)
Substitute subclause (3) with the following: “(3) The Government shall take appropriate steps to prevent misuse of the emblem and shall disseminate the rules governing the use of the emblem among the armed forces, police forces, public authorities and the civilian population."

The justification is to avoid repetition since paragraph (ii) of subclause (3) has been taken care of under subclause (2) and the new subclause inserted immediately after subclause (2).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there must be a reason why all these - the red cross, red crescent, red crystal, red lion and sun - were put there. If you do away with that, it means I can put the red sun on my car and drive and you cannot stop me because I have it.

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Chairperson, I had earlier on raised that concern when I was debating. I think it is important for the committee to clarify on the fate of other symbols that relate to the work of the Red Cross. What kind of protection are we giving them in this law if we decide to completely remove them? 

We are aware that they are one and the same - they just complement each other. The Red Crescent was just an adoption that was being insisted upon by the Muslim countries. You find in the Muslim world the Red Crescent is being used and in the largely Christian world, it is the Red Cross but they are basically doing the same things. I do not think it is in our interest as a country not to provide protection to some of these symbols that carry out the same role. I think the committee should clarify on that.

MR MAKMOT: Madam Chairperson, I remember when we were debating the other aspect where the Ministry of Defence would issue cards, we changed from that and took that power to the Red Cross but dealing with the medical council to allow the medical workers. 

In this particular case, in clause 17 (2) the minister, in consultation with Red Cross Society, prescribes such measures and guidelines for persons authorised to use the emblems, names and signals. I am worried about these consultations especially with respect to the use of names. As we know, consultations in this case are not obligatory, in my view. You could end up being copied in and just given names.

I think this is a very critical matter, especially the use of these emblems. I think the control should be given to the Society and maybe the ministry. Yes, the consultation with ministry is very important, but I think in wording it, we need to make sure that the power and control is more with the Society, especially when we are trying to say that they should be neutral and independent. However, if the minister has all these powers, I do not know whether we are not compromising on that. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, supposing the Government wants to issue number plates having the red cross, red crescent, red sun, how do they do it without working with the Society? Can the Society say, “These are now your number plates”? There must be consultation.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have listened carefully to the Members’ input right from the time of the debate. We opened up because the Red Cross is adopted by a specific group and that is the same for the Red Crescent and others. Therefore, at this point, if we maintain our proposal as it is, it will contradict the earlier statement that we opened up to reflect on the international protocol. Therefore, we are conceding to maintain what is in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 17 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18
MS ABABIKU: Clause 18 is on the misuse of the emblem as a protective device in times of armed conflict. The committee proposes to substitute clause 18 with the following:
“(1) A person who, during armed conflict, wilfully or on the order of another person -
(a) causes death to;
(b) commits acts resulting in the death of; or
(c) causes bodily harm to
an adversary by making perfidious use of the emblem whether as a protective or indicative device, commits a war crime and shall be tried in accordance with the laws governing war crimes in Uganda.

(2) In this section, ‘perfidious use’ means appealing to the good faith of the adversary with the intention to deceive him or her and make him believe that he was entitled to receive or confer the protection provided for by the rules of international humanitarian law.

(3) A person who, in times of armed conflict, uses the emblem, or any other sign which constitutes an imitation of the emblem without authorisation required under this Act, commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding twenty-four currency points or to imprisonment not exceeding one year or both.”

Justification
    • To make the provision clear for ease of implementation.
    • To make the provision inclusive by providing for the misuse of the emblem as an indicative device during armed conflict.
    • To ensure that the provision is kept within the scope of the Bill as regards the regulation of the use of the emblem. The emblem applicable to Uganda is the Red Cross and that is what the Bill seeks to regulate.

Madam Chairperson, we are deleting the last justification because we have opened up. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposals. I put the question that clause 18 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19
MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are substituting clause 19 with the following: 
“Clause 19(1) A person who wilfully and without authorisation under this Act -
(a) makes use of the emblem or any other sign, which constitutes an imitation of the emblem, which is likely to confuse the public irrespective of the purpose of such use;
(b) displays the emblem or words of the emblem on a poster publication, announcements, leaflets, commercial documents, internet or digital media;
(c) affixes the emblem on goods or packing;
(d) sells, offers for sell or places in circulation, goods marked with the emblem, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 500 currency points or imprisonment, not exceeding two years or both.

Clause 19(2)
The court may, not withstanding the penalty prescribed under this subsection, order for the destruction of the goods, emblem or any other sign, which constitutes an imitation of the emblem pre-covered in connection with the offence.

Clause 19(3)
Where the offence under this section is committed by a corporate body, a person involved in or who orders the commission of the offence shall be held liable for the contravention.”

The justification is for clarity and to restrict the provision to the scope of the Bill. I beg to submit. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is a proposal for the amendment of clause 19. I put the question that clause 19 be amended as proposed.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20
MS ABABIKU: We are deleting clause 20. The justification is that there are already existing laws and institutions to deal with such interim measures. I beg to submit. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: The question is that clause 20 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, deleted.

Clause 21
MS ABABIKU: We are substituting clause 21 with the following:
“(1) A person who fraudulently represents himself or herself to be a member or representative of, or agent for the society for the purpose of soliciting, collecting or receiving money or material commits an offence.

(2) A person who contravenes subclause (1) is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding 100 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding two years or both.”

The justification is for clarity, to provide a sanction for the offence and to make the provision more effective. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The question is that clause 21 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22
MS ABABIKU: We are substituting clause 22 with the following: “Unlawful use of the emblem or name of the society
(1) A person shall not, without the society’s written authorization, use or display for the purpose of his or her business or use as a trademark or commercial mark, the emblem or the name of the society. 

(2) A person who contravenes this clause commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding 100 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding two years or both.” 
The justification is for clarity and to keep the provision within the scope of the Bill; and to provide a sanction for the offence to make the provision more effective. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 22 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 23
MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are deleting clause 23. 

The justification is that reference of the provision to section 23 makes the provision redundant since clause 23 is only to pledge the penalty but does not create an offence. Clause 23 is taken care of under clause 19.

The penalty in relation to clause 23 has been catered for under the same clause. I beg to submit. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: The question is that clause 23 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, deleted.

Clause 24
MS ABABIKU: We are substituting clause 24 with the following:
“24(1)A person shall not register a business, an association or industrial models or designs in the name of the emblem or using the emblem.
(2)A person who contravenes this clause commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding 100 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding two years or both.”

The justification is to make the provision clear and within the scope of the regulation of the emblem adopted by Uganda.

Madam Chairperson, I am deleting that justification because it is consequential. We have removed the one we have been consistently using and we opened up for not only Red Cross but also Red Crescent. So, we are deleting that first justification. 

What we shall have here at the end is to avoid repetition since prohibition of use of the emblem as a trademark or commercial mark is provided for under clause 22. I beg to submit. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: The question is that clause 24 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 25
THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 25 be deleted. 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, deleted.

Clause 26, deleted.

Clause 27
MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are substituting clause 27 with the following: “The minister may, in consultation with the society, by statutory instrument, make regulations for better carrying into effect the provision of this Act.”

The justification is for clarity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 27 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 28
THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 28 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28, deleted.

Clause 29
THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 29 be amended by deleting subclause (1). That means the other subclauses remain. Not so, chairperson?

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We propose the deletion of clauses 29(1) and (2).
We are substituting 29(3) with the following: “Any person who was a member, an office holder or employee of the Uganda Red Cross Society immediately before the coming into force of this Act, shall continue to be a member, office holder or employee of the society.”

The justification is for clarity.

Clauses 29(4), we are substituting with the following; “(4) a branch of the Uganda Red Cross Society existing immediately before the coming into force of this Act shall remain a branch of the society. 

The justification is for clarity.

We are deleting clause 29 (5), because it replicates subclause (i). 
We are substituting clause 29 (6) with the following: “all deeds, bonds, instruments and contracts to which the Uganda Red Cross Society is party before the coming into force of this Act shall remain effective and enforceable against the society.”

The justification is for clarity. I submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The question is that clause 29 be amended as proposed. 
(Question put an agreed to.)

Clause 29, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 30 
MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are substituting clause 30 with the following; “Repeal the Red Cross Act Cap. 57” 

The justification is that it is repealed for clarity; subclause (2) is redundant since there is no statutory instrument made under the current Red Cross Act CAP 57.
The current Red Cross Act does not make provisions for statutory instruments. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The question is that clause 30 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30, as amended, agreed to.

Schedule
THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the schedule do stand as part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule agreed to.

Clause 2
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, do you have an amendment there?

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Under clause 2, in the interpretations; (a) substitute the definition of “additional protocols” with the following: “’additional protocols’ means the additional protocols (i) and (ii) of 8 June 1977 and additional protocol (iii) of 8 December 2005 to the Geneva conventions.”

The justification is that the Geneva conventions Act Cap. 363 only domesticated the four Geneva conventions of 1949 and the Act includes only 4 schedules in respect to those conventions.
The additional protocols to the Geneva conventions are not part of the schedules to the Geneva Conventions Act.

The additional protocols of 1977 and 2005 were ratified by Uganda on 13 March 1991 and on 21 May 2008 respectively. 

(b) We are deleting “the constitution”.
Justification is that the word has been deleted from the Bill.

(c) Emblem of the Geneva Convention, substitute for the definition of the phrase “emblem” of the Geneva convention the following: “’Emblem’ means the heraldic emblem of the Red Cross on a white background formed by reversing the federal colours of Switzerland as defined in the Geneva Convention.
The justification is to ensure consistency and clarity.

The phrase “emblem of the Geneva Convention” Defined under the interpretation clause is not used anywhere in the Bill in that form. The word used in the Bill is “emblem”.
(d) delete the words, “laws of Uganda” appearing at the end of the definition.

The justification is that the words are redundant.

(e)Substitute for the definition of “Minister” the following, “’minister’ means minister responsible for General Duties.”

The justification is that given the auxiliary nature of the Uganda Red Cross Society, its mandate cuts across many Government Ministries, Departments and Agencies and the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees is one of those MDAs.

The Minister for Disaster Preparedness and Relief like other MDAs is directly responsible to the coordination and supervision of activities and programmes of the Society that relate to its specific mandates.

Therefore, the Ministry for General Duties is more suitable for general coordination and supervision for all the activities of the society.

(f) Delete the definition of the word “movement.” 
The justification is that the definition is not necessary since the word, “movement” is not used anywhere in the Bill singularly, to refer to the International Red Cross and Red Crescent movement. It is rather - (Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. If we specify “The minister responsible should be the Minister for General Duties” is that not to say that we shall always have a Minister for General Duties?

Would we rather not say, “Minister responsible” rather than say Minister for General Duties because that is to assume too much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: A minister appointed by the Prime Minister or Government.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. At the initial point in the Bill, it was proposed that we have a Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness and Relief but we said that this ministry is still in direct collaboration in the Society.

Over specific mandates - and the Uganda Red Cross Society has got multiple mandates that it is offering through other MDAs. Therefore, it puts the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Relief at par with other MDAs.

We were looking at this neutral ministry, which supervises and coordinates multi-sectoral activities and that was how we came up with the Minister responsible for General Duties. Under the office of the Prime Minister.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Maybe named by the Government because this law will not end tomorrow.

MS KAMATEEKA: Honourable chairperson, now that the chairperson has clarified, it is better for us to say, “the Minister as named by the honourable Prime Minister” because this will be a minister in the Prime Minister’s Office.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. You are assuming that the structure of Government will remain like that. Why don’t we say “Government?”

MS KAMATEEKA: Okay, “responsible minister as named by Government.”

MS ABABIKU: Madam Chairperson and colleagues, we thank you for your input.
(g) New definition: Insert a new definition “National Society” immediately after the definition of “movement” to read as follows; “National Society includes, Red cross, Red Crystal, Red Crescent, Red Lion and Red Sun societies operating in other countries in accordance with the Geneva conventions and their additional protocols and national laws.”

The justification is for clarity.

(h) “Public authorities”
Substitute the definition of “public authorities” with the following: 
“‘Public authority’ means a ministry, department or an agency of the Government, including a local government, with which the Society cooperates in the performance of its auxiliary mandate by virtue of the Geneva Conventions or international humanitarian laws to which Uganda is a party.”

The justification is to ensure consistency with the Geneva Conventions Act and other international humanitarian laws to which Uganda is a party.

Madam Chairperson, I submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, this is our domestic law but you are saying you are going to include societies operating in other countries. Why? This is our law.

MS ABABIKU: Madam Chairperson, thank you for reminding us. We had adopted that other societies using other emblems can also operate in our country. So, we are going to amend this. 

“‘Public authority’ means a ministry, department or agency of Government, including a local government, with which the Society cooperates in the performance…” I think I am reading a different text. “…of its auxiliary mandate by virtue of the Geneva Conventions…”. Madam Chairperson, let me get the right clause.

Under (g), we propose to insert a new definition, “National Society”, immediately after the definition of “Movement” to read as follows: 
“‘National Society’ includes Red Cross, Red Crystal, Red Crescent, Red Lion and the Red Sun Societies operating in accordance with the Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols and national laws.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why are you talking about the other countries? That is my problem. 

MS ABABIKU: For these other countries, I am proposing to delete because we have built consensus that Uganda should allow the other emblems to be used in our country, not only limiting it to our Red Cross.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Stop at “Red Sun Societies” and delete the rest. 

MS ABABIKU: Okay. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPEERSON: You already talked about the Geneva Conventions.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. 

“‘National Society’ includes the Red Cross, Red Crystal, Red Crescent, Red Lion and the Red Sun Societies.”

The justification is that it is for clarity.

(h) Public authorities 
Substitute the definition of “public authorities” with the following:

“‘Public authority’ means a ministry, department or an agency of the Government, including a local government, with which the Society cooperates in the performance of its auxiliary mandate by virtue of the Geneva Conventions or international humanitarian laws to which Uganda is a party.”

The justification is: to ensure consistency with the Geneva Conventions Act and other international humanitarian laws to which Uganda is a party.

Madam Chairperson, I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 2 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3
MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are proposing to substitute clause 3 (1) with the following:
“3. Continuance in existence of Uganda Red Cross Society 
(1) The Uganda Red Cross Society in existence before the coming into force of this Act and established under the Red Cross Act, Cap. 57, is continued in existence subject to the provisions of this Act.”

The justification is that it is for clarity. Also, Uganda adopted the use of the Red Cross – Madam Chairperson, I drop the second justification. 

We are proposing to insert a new subclause immediately after subclause (1) to read as follows:
“The Society shall be a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal and may, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this Act -
(a) acquire, hold or dispose of movable and immovable property;
(b) sue or be sued in its corporate name;
(c) do all acts that a body corporate may lawfully do.”

Justification: to ensure proper chronological flow of provisions by bringing the provision relating to the corporate status of the Society from clause 4 (1) to clause 3, which provides for the Society’s establishment.

Madam Chairperson, we are proposing to delete clause 3 (2). The justification is that the Uganda Red Cross Society is already a member of these international humanitarian organisations. It was admitted as a member of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies in 1965. It is, therefore, a member of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, comprising the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, the International Committee of the Red Cross and National Societies. 

Since membership to international humanitarian organisations is voluntary, it would not be necessary to put such a requirement in the law. Madam Chairperson, I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 3 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.
Clause 4
MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are proposing to delete clause 4. The justification is as follows:
    • Sub-clause (1) has been provided for under clause 3;
    • Matters to do with membership, governance and management have been dealt with under clauses 7 and 8;

    • It is also irregular for subclause (2) to require Parliament’s delegated legislative mandate to be exercised through a constitution of an organisation. The Constitution of the Uganda Red Cross Society is not a statutory instrument through which delegated powers should be exercised to deal with administrative and procedural matters or details needed to operationalise provisions of an Act of Parliament. 

An organisation’s constitution is registered as a document under the Registration of Documents Act, Cap. 9l and therefore, does not have a legislative effect.

Section 14 of the –

THE CHAIRPERSON: If you are deleting it, you do not have to go through all that. You are deleting; isn’t it?

MS ABABIKU: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. I put the question that clause 4 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we had inadvertently forgotten to mention the others. I think let us do clause 5 again. Present clause 5.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Under clause 5 (1) (a), we are deleting the words “in Uganda”, appearing in line two of paragraph (a).

The justification is that the words are redundant, since the proposed law is for Uganda.

We propose to substitute paragraph (b) of subclause (1) with the following: “(b) be driven by the fundamental principles of humanity, impartiality, neutrality, independence, voluntary service, unity and universality at all times.”
 
The justification is: to require the Uganda Red Cross Society to adhere to the fundamental principles of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement at all times.

For paragraph (b), I beg to correct the first justification, because we have opened up to other signs apart from Red Cross and Red Crescent movement; to require the Uganda Red Cross Society to adhere to the fundamental principles of all the societies at all times. That is what I am proposing.

Paragraph (b) has been carried to clause 6 that provides for objects of the society for better placement.

Clause 5 (2), substitute for subclause (2) the following: “A public authority shall respect and support the society’s adherence to the fundamental principles of the international red cross…” – I beg to improve on that - “A public authority shall respect and support the society’s adherence to the fundamental principles.” I beg to have a full stop there rather than bringing these two different signs of the society.

The justification is for clarity, to avoid unnecessary repetition since the voluntary and independent nature of the society is derived from the fundamental principles of the society.

Clause 5 (3), substitute for subclause (3) the following: “A public authority shall work with the society in a consulted and efficient manner in response to conflict, violence or disaster, and shall support the society in fulfilling its objectives under this Act.”

The justification is that it is impractical for public authorities to support the society in this administrative function of recruitment, training and retention of volunteers. This is an internal administrative process.

Clause 5 (4), delete subclause (4). The justification is that the provision is unnecessary since the Uganda Red Cross Society will operate in accordance with this Act, as provided under clause 3.

Madam Chairperson, I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Title agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.38
MR EMMANUEL SSEMPALA (DP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Madam Chairperson, I would like to move a motion that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto? I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto?

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.38
MR EMMANUEL SSEMPALA (DP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Red Cross Society Bill, 2019” and passed with amendments clauses 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8,10, 12, 13, 14, 18, 19, 21, 22, 27, 29, and deleted clauses 1, 20, 23, 25, 26, and 4. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.40
MR EMMANUEL SSEMPALA (DP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion for the adoption of the report from the Committee of the whole House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted?
(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING
THE RED CROSS SOCIETY BILL, 2019

6.40
MR EMMANUEL SSEMPALA (DP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Red Cross Society Bill, 2019” be read the third time.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Uganda Red cross Society Bill, 2019 be read the third time and do pass?

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, THE UGANDA RED CROSS SOCIETY ACT, 2021

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, title settled and Bill passes. Thank you very much. (Applause) We commend Hon. Byarugaba and the Committee on Presidential Affairs for the work done.

6.41
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to honestly appreciate the whole House chaired by you. We learnt a lot and we thank Members for their input. It has enabled us to process the whole Bill within a day and a few hours in which we have been sitting over it.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, we pledge our commitment to keep learning from colleagues and also from you. Members, we are grateful. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. Earlier on we had indicated that the ministries could present their policy statements. I do not know whether there are any which have come. Okay, who goes first?
	
LAYING OF PAPERS

6.41
THE MINISTER OF SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Ministerial Policy Statement of the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation, Votes 023 and 110, for Financial Year 2021/2022.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the policy statement is sent to the sectoral committee for perusal and report back.

6.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mr Peter Ogwang):  Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the ministerial policy statement for Vote 020, Ministry of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance, for Financial Year 2021/2021.  I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the policy statement is sent to the Committee on Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance for perusal and report back.

6.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR SPORTS (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, in conformity with section 13 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and rule 145(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I beg to lay on Table the ministerial policy statement for the Financial Year 2021/2022, for the Ministry of Education and Sports, Vote 013. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the policy statement is sent to the Committee on Education and Sports for perusal and report back. Any others? 

6.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table two documents:
    1. The Ministerial Policy Statement for the Office of the Prime Minister - Vote 003 and; 
    2. A Supplementary Schedule No.5 for the Financial Year 2020/2021. 

I beg to lay. 

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, I checked the Order Paper and I do not see the supplementary schedule that the minister is laying. Are we proceeding well? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, let us finish with the policy statements. Are there any policy statements? – Okay. You can now move to a separate item. (Laughter)

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, once again, thank you for giving us an opportunity on the Order Paper to lay the Supplementary Schedule No. 5 for the Financial Year 2020/2021.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back. 

We would have wanted to proceed with another Bill but I think it will take time. We have a small motion relating to our work in the Pan-African Parliament. I do not know whether we could take that and then on Tuesday, we settle for the Bills. Is that okay? Minister, is it okay? - Okay. 

MR OTHIENO: Madam Speaker, I need clarification from the minister. He has laid on Table a supplementary request. I am a member of the Committee on Budget and processing these requests consumes a lot of time. What has been happening is that this House spends a lot of its precious time. We pass the supplementary budgets but the minister does not release this money and the entities do not get this money. 

I do not understand why the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – unless he gives us a guarantee that they are going to give this money this time – we waste a lot of Parliament’s time in the committee and the plenary here  but at the end of the day, entities do not get this money. 

Otherwise, there would be no need of wasting our precious time when we have a lot of business to handle and yet, he knows that the money will not be given to the entities. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what assurance can you give that this is not another of those occasions when we are going to waste time? 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, in the course of next week, we shall update the House on the implementation of the appropriation, especially the supplementary appropriation that we have made so that everybody knows how far we have gone in terms of releasing resources.

I would like to assure the House that once this supplementary is passed, which is about our investment in the oil company, we will be able to release the money. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I raised this matter here. I am asking the minister that when he is bringing an update, he should tell us about the KCCA issue; the supplementary we approved to repair Salaama Road, which is the CHOGM Road. He has never addressed this issue. You can even bury people in the potholes along Salaama Road, without digging them. You simply put a dead person in there and just cover. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, that issue can be handled properly in the sessional Committee on Infrastructure to look at the oversight of that. I do not think our ministry is in good position to do that. 

THE SPEAKER: Shall we have that motion? 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO SUPPORT THE CANDIDATURE OF HON. ANIFA BANGIRANA KAWOOYA, WOMAN REPRESENTATIVE SSEMBABULE, FOR VICE PRESIDENT OF THE PAN-AFRICAN PARLIAMENT

6.50 
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to support the candidature of Hon. Anifa Bangirana Kawooya, Woman Representative Ssembabule District, for Vice President of the Pan-African Parliament.  

“WHEREAS Article 5 and 17 of the Constitutive Act of the African Union establishes a Pan-African Parliament as one of the organs of the African Union and bestows onto it the functions and powers to, among others, ensure the effective and full participation of the Africans in the economic development and integration of the continent;

AND WHEREAS Article 4(l) of the Protocol to the Constitutive Act of the African Union Relating to the Pan-African Parliament requires each State Party to be represented in the Pan-African Parliament by an equal number of five parliamentarians;

NOTING THAT Article 12 of the Protocol establishes the Bureau of the Pan-African Parliament constituting the office of President and four Vice Presidents, who are elected from among members of the Pan-African Parliament, to represent five regions of African Union; 

NOTING FURTHER that the four Vice Presidents serve for a period of two and a half years, renewable once and the term of the current representative of the East Africa Region to the Bureau from the United Republic of Tanzania has come to an end;

RECOGNISING that Hon. Anifa Bangirana Kawooya, Woman Representative, Ssembabule District and Uganda’s representative at the Pan-African Parliament has expressed interest in being elected to the Bureau as the Vice President;

ACKNOWLEDGING that Hon. Anifa Bangirana Kawooya has served this country with dedication as the Constituent Assembly Delegate 1993-1995 and Woman Representative for Ssembabule District since 2001 to date;

APPRECIATING that Hon. Anifa Bangirana Kawooya, while at the Pan-African Parliament, has diligently represented Uganda and was assigned additional duties based on her expertise and passion to advance gender and human rights related issues which she has passionately performed;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this 10th Parliament that:
Parliament and the Executive collectively support Hon. Anifa Bangirana Kawooya’s candidature for Vice President of the Pan-African Parliament.” 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? (Members rose.) 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by several members of the House. What is the justification? 

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, I would like to briefly talk about Hon. Anifa Kawooya, who is one of the longest serving members of this august House but also as a leader of delegation of Uganda to the Pan-African Parliament. I would like to say that hon. Anifa Kawooya, having joined us in the 10th Parliament in the Pan-African Parliament, performed extremely well. 

Having been a first timer at the Pan-African Parliament, it was amazing to know that Hon. Kawooya, as we speak now, is serving as the President of the Women Caucus of the Pan African Parliament, which we need to applaud.

Madam Speaker, hon. Anifa Kawooya has also served at different levels including as a member of the Committee on Agriculture, Natural Resources and Economy at the African Union. She has also served as the chairperson of the gender committee not only at the Parliament of Uganda but also at the Pan African Parliament.

I know that at the Pan African Parliament, we do Bureau elections by rotation. Aware that the Parliament of Uganda has overwhelmingly supported my candidature previously, although we postponed our victory to the future, which is going to be when hon. Bangirana Anifa Kawooya takes over the mantle, the time is for Uganda.

I, therefore, believe that the person that we present to the Pan African Parliament to represent Uganda at the Bureau as the Vice-President of the Pan African Parliament will do us proud. Aware that the elections will be taking place a few months from now, that is, between April and May, for the next two and half years, it is imperative that Uganda as a country takes keen interest in endorsing the candidature of hon. Anifa Kawooya. 

The turnover of Members of the Pan African Parliament has been high; as we speak today, we have hon. Okot Ogong and hon. Anifa Kawooya who have returned and will be joining you in the next Parliament. As the delegation of the Pan African Parliament, we have therefore resolved that for continuity, it will be very prudent for us to take up the leadership position at the Pan African Parliament to market Uganda. We believe that we have the brains to effectively participate at the continental level. 

She is a gender activist - I could say much but for now, I would like to ask that this Parliament endorses and supports the candidature and campaigns of hon. Anifa Kawooya for Vice-President of the Pan African Parliament. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, is there need to debate this? Honourable members, I put the question that this House unanimously endorses the candidature of Hon. Anifa Bangirana Kawooya to enable her compete for the presidency of the Pan African Parliament.

(Question put and agreed to.)

6.57
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am overwhelmed by this august House putting trust in me to represent this institution and our country Uganda at the Bureau of the Pan African Parliament.

I would like to thank the mover who has been the leader of the Members of Parliament who represent this institution and our country.

Madam Speaker, I would like thank you for the support you have given us for the time we have been at the Pan African Parliament. You have seen us grow and personally, I am so grateful. I started with you when you were in the National Resistance Council while I was in the Constituent Assembly. 

I have been a legislator for 27 years and in the Pan African Parliament for five years. I think my expertise, vigour, determination and resilience will see me once again continue with the service to represent this Parliament, which entrusted me with this responsibility when I came in 2016. 

I look forward to continuing serving you diligently at the Bureau of the Pan African Parliament. As a gender activist, I am sure this time, the seat will be ours and I will not disappoint.

Thank you, honourable members, for putting your trust in me. I will do the necessary, not alone but with your support and contribution. As the saying goes, I am here to serve you and my country. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The Clerk is directed to extract the resolution and arm the Hon. Kawooya with our support. That tribute is evidence of our support so that she can go and effectively compete in the Pan African Parliament.

Honourable members, I would like to thank you for the work done. House adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.59 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 16 March 2021 at 2.00 p.m.)


 


