

Tuesday, 12 March 2013

Parliament met at 2.54 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting and I want to begin by welcoming hon. Hussein Kyanjo who has been away undergoing treatment. I also want to welcome hon. Wadada. Apparently, she has been sick but nobody had informed me. She is now back and she will be coming later this afternoon.

2.55
MS THEOPISTA NABULYA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to present a complaint from the workers of Uganda in regard to the misuse of the NSSF. You may recall that on 12 December 2012, I presented a petition regarding the liberalisation of the pension scheme and the report is yet to be brought on the Floor of the House.

But to our surprise, the Minister of Finance has gone far by accepting to give Shs 31 billion to Umeme in exchange for shares without the consent of the workers. Despite that, the workers representatives from these two organisations NOTU and COFTU have made a number of pleas asking for an audience for the Minister of Finance to discuss the same but she has ignored this and as a result she has ended up allowing Umeme to buy shares without even consulting the board of NSSF. This is against the NSSF Act, 1985, section 30 and also the Constitution, Article 119 sub-section 5.

Therefore, this is what I want to ask the Parliament, to hear the prayers of the workers;
One, they are saying that people who are involved in the unlawful purchase of the Umeme shares without the consent of the owners of this money should be brought to book.

Two, the Minister of Finance should cause a meeting with representatives of workers to discuss their saving scheme.

Three, workers are demanding that the intended Bill on liberalisation of social security scheme should be halted until the meeting has been caused between the workers and the Minister of Finance.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see anyone from the Ministry of Finance but whoever is in charge should inform the minister.

MS NABULYA SSENTONGO: Madam Speaker, allow me to lay this statement on Table for further consultation and probably, where need be, be taken to a committee for more research.

I am laying this complaint of the workers against the conduct of the Minister of Finance, hon. Maria Kiwanuka, regarding the pension fund of workers of Uganda and it is laid down on this Table by me.

THE SPEAKER: I was saying that whoever is in charge on the Government side will inform the Minister of Finance about this complaint that she has allowed NSSF to purchase shares in Umeme illegally.

3.00
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance concerning security and peace in the country.

There are alarming incidences reported in the mass media and witnessed by some people directly. We have the nasty incidence of soldiers in Bombo who got killed by a fellow soldier - ten of them.

There was the incidence of Mbuya Police barracks being attacked by unknown armed people. There are cases of soldiers who have been deployed abroad especially those that had been returning from operations in Garamba.
 
We had a case in Moyo District where a soldier who worked in Central African Republic in the operation against the LRA and Congo came and killed his wife and children in a place called Afogi.

There are similar cases in Luzira and Western Uganda, where people who return from operations outside tend to be violent against themselves and their families. 

The question of national importance I am rising for is; we need an explanation from the Minister of Defence and that of Internal Affairs on the issue of security. What is happening in Uganda? What we hear and see in the mass media is about thugs. We had thugs and rebels in this country and they were dealt with. What is really happening and also can we get a guarantee up to the level of safety of the citizens of Uganda and their property?

3.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, the issue the honourable member has raised has been raised on this Floor before and we have prepared an explanatory statement. We have been waiting for a slot for the Prime Minister to present this comprehensive report on all the issues that have been regarding the matters he has just narrated.

I am taking note of this concern again; when I go back, I will follow it up with the Prime Minister so that this statement can be made. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery, we have officials from the South Sudan National Legislative Assembly. They include Mr John Gatop Du, leader of the delegation - please, stand up and you are welcome - Mr Levy Emmanuel Hassan, Mr Taban Henry Gama, Mr Joseph Akong Deng and Ms Rose Gary. They have come to share experiences with their colleagues in the Parliament of Uganda. Thank you.

BILLS
FIRST READING

NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES CONTROL BILL, 2007

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Control Bill, 2007” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. Please, go ahead.

MR JAMES BABA: The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Control Bill, 2007 was presented during the Eighth Parliament and was then accompanied by a Certificate of Financial Implications.

Thereafter, a resolution of Parliament was passed on 25 October 2011 to sieve and retain Bills tabled in the Eighth Parliament, which were not concluded. We are, therefore, reintroducing this Bill for consideration by Parliament. I wish to lay on Table the Bill entitled “The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Control Bill, 2007.” I beg to move.

3.07
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am glad that we were able to save this Bill but I am aware that it is now being moved by the Minister of Internal Affairs, like it was the other time.

I am particularly concerned that it is that particular Bill that has taken so long to see the light of the day. May I propose, if it were possible, to have it managed by the Committee on Health? Narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances are responsible even for some of the matters that hon. Fungaroo has been raising. People are getting mad. That law is long overdue. However, the pace at which we are proceeding is not very palatable. If it is possible, I propose that we shift the responsibility of scrutinising that Bill to the Committee on Health. I hope it will be able to come up with a report within a shorter time so that we pass the Bill.

I am afraid that the Committee on Internal Affairs and Defence seems to be overloaded and not moving.

MR OKEYOH: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give my colleague is that, actually, for this Bill even to appear, it has been the Committee on Internal Affairs that has been pushing and it would be unfair for the colleague to say that the Committee on Internal Affairs is dilly-dallying.

We have requested for this Bill and it has been the Executive that was slow. I want to assure you that the Committee on Internal Affairs can duly and ably handle this matter.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what I see in the objectives of the Bill; they deal with possession of trafficking the drugs, cultivation but they also deal with offences.

I do not know whether the Ministry of Health would be able to manage searches, monitoring of mail, powers of arrest without warrants, variation of narcotic drugs, etcetera. But I could ask the Committee on Health to work with the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs.

Please, can you handle this expeditiously? We are tired of these old Bills hanging around us. It is committed to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. They will be supported by the members of the Committee on Health.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR DISABILITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had asked the committee and the ministers to go and harmonise their position. We can receive the report and then go to committee stage.

3.11
MR WILLIAM NOKRACH (NRM, People with Disabilities, Northern): Madam Speaker, you recall that we met here the other week, on Wednesday, to consider the report on this Bill and you directed that we do more consultations on this. I am now giving a report of the meeting we held to harmonise our positions. 

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development introduced the National Council for the Disability (Amendment) Bill, 2010 towards the close of the year. This Bill was saved and reintroduced to Parliament in 2012 and referred to the Parliamentary Sectoral Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. The committee completed its work on the Bill and presented a report to Parliament on Tuesday, 26 February 2013.

The debate on this report could not be concluded because the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development requested for more time so that consultation with the committee on some key issues could be made. The Speaker of Parliament granted permission to the ministry to consult with the committee and report to Parliament the following day.

On Wednesday, 27 February 2013, the committee held a consultative meeting with the ministry to discuss the concerns of the ministry. The ministry was represented by a team of three people headed by the Minister of State in charge of the Elderly and Disability Affairs, hon. Suleiman Madada. The meeting discussed and agreed on the concerns raised by the ministry. 

The key issue was on clause 1 of the Bill, specifically, on section 6(1)i) of the Principal Act, which says that the National Council for Disability is to assist the Electoral Commission to ensure the conducting of free and fair elections of representatives of Persons with Disabilities to Parliament and Local Government Councils.

The committee recommended the deletion of the clause and the justification given was to exclude the National Council for Disability from electoral functions since its principal function is monitoring.

However, the ministry requested the committee not do so and quoted section 6(1)(c) which says that ”To act as a coordinating body between government departments, other service providers and Persons with Disabilities as another function of NCD that qualifies section 6(1) of the principal Act not to be deleted.

The meeting further observed that this Bill is proposing an electoral structure parallel to the existing structure of the NCD and makes it different from the youth and women councils.

It was agreed as follows:

    1. Section 6(1) of the principal Act should not be deleted.
    2. The ministry will afterwards bring a Bill to amend the entire NCD Act in order to realign it with other councils.
    3. The other parts of the report remain as they were.

On Wednesday, 27 February 2013, the second reading of the Bill was done and many more issues, for clarification, were raised by Members. Consequently, Parliament advised that more time for consultation on this matter be given. It also advised that the Committee on Local Governments together with the Minister of Local Government join the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development in handling this matter.

Therefore, the Speaker directed the above mentioned committees and responsible ministries to urgently meet and prepare a report to Parliament on Tuesday, 5 March 2013.

The meeting was held on the afternoon of Wednesday, 27 February 2013 in the Speaker’s Dining Room. Present at the meeting were: hon. William Nokrach, who chaired the meeting; the Minister of Local Government, hon. Adolf Mwesige; the Minister of State in Charge of the Elderly and Disability Affairs, hon. Suleiman Madada; hon. Alex Ndeezi, the PWD Representative for Central region; hon. Hellen Asamo, the PWD Representative for Eastern; hon. Sofia Nalule, the PWD Representative, National.

Two other members of the two committees could not attend the meeting because the debate on the Marriage and Divorce Bill was going on and they had interests in it.

The meeting studied the Bill and the committee’s support to the National Council for Disability (Amendment) Bill, 2010 and made the following observations and proposals:

The first proposal was on clause 1 of the Bill in relation to Section 6 (1)(i) of the Principal Act. The meeting was guided by hon. Adolf Mwesige to the extent that it was not proper to retain clause 1 in regard to this section. His position was that this can be challenged in a court of law. He observed that the content of this clause is the mandate of the Electoral Commission because it is mandated to handle all matters relating to elections. In his view, what had appeared in the committee ought to have been retained. Hon. Suleiman Madada and all the members in the meeting accepted this guidance.

On clause 31 (a), the meeting agreed and proposed that: 

    a) In sub-clause 3, the entire provision be substituted to make it clear that the Electoral Commission is the only body mandated to organise, conduct and supervise elections to form the electoral colleges that will elect representatives of Persons with Disability at the various levels of government. 
    b) That sub-clause 4 should form part of the Bill; the committee had earlier on recommended deletion.
    c) On clause 31(b), the meeting proposed that this clause should form part of the Bill although the committee had earlier on recommended deletion.

The other issue we deliberated on was in regard to clause 31 (c). On this, the meeting proposed that a new sub-clause 2 be inserted immediately after that provision to read as follows: “The minister may, by regulation, prescribe other disability coding that shall be used to determine whether impairment has substantial functional limitation of daily life activities for a person to qualify to be a person with disability.”
This is to provide for any other categories of disability not yet included in the coding of the Bill.

On Schedule A, the meeting proposed that in paragraph one, substitution for the entire provision be done with the following: “The five delegates at this level are to ensure representation in terms of categories of disabilities and gender where applicable.” This is for clarity. 

In paragraph two, substitution be done for the entire provision with the following: “The five persons with disability executive committee members from each district shall form the national electoral college to elect representatives of Persons with Disability for Parliament.” This is also for clarity.

Madam Speaker, the meeting ended well with everybody happy with the proposals. 

On Tuesday, 5 March 2013, the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development met to study the proposals advanced by the committee for harmonization purposes. The committee adopted the proposals but with a few amendments being done. Please, find attached herewith a copy of the proposed amendments reflecting the decisions arrived at by the meetings of both ministries and the committee. 

I can report that we are now ready to proceed with the business. I beg to move. (Applause)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR DISABILITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

MR NOKRACH: Madam Chairperson, maybe you will guide us on this. On that day, we passed clause 1. So, I thought we now need to recommit the entire Bill. I beg to be guided.

MR MWESIGE: Madam Chairperson, at the conclusion of the last meeting we had on this Bill, you had directed the Minister of Local Government, the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the two committees to consult one another. This is the outcome of that consultation. In that regard, I would like to appeal that we consider clause 1 as well.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, that is agreed to.

Clause 1

MR NOKRACH: Madam Chair, the committee proposes that clause 1 be deleted. The justification is to guarantee the independence of the Electoral Commission as required by Article 62 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

We also propose that by deleting clause 1 - by the way, we are deleting sub-section 6 (1)(i) of the Principal Act. As said, the justification here is again to guarantee the independence of the Electoral Commission as required by Article 62 of the Constitution. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 1 be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, deleted.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it Clause 3 or 31? Okay, but there is something they wanted to do on Clause 31 (a). Chairperson of the committee, do you have any amendments on Clause 31? Okay, they are part of clause 2.

MR NOKRACH: Madam Chair, on Clause 31 (a), we propose that we substitute the entire provision with the following: “The Electoral Commission shall organise, conduct and supervise elections to form the electoral colleges that will elect representatives of PWDs at the various levels of Government.” The justification is for clarity on who should organise, conduct and supervise elections to form the electoral colleges.

b) Immediately after sub-clause 4, we insert a new sub-clause 5 to read as follows: “For the avoidance of doubt, the members and officials of the National Council for Disability shall not be involved in the formation of the electoral colleges.” The justification is to avoid interference with the constitutional mandate of the Electoral Commission.
c) By re-numbering sub-clauses 5 to 6. The justification is to address the inclusion of new clauses.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I would like to seek clarification on who will form these electoral colleges and how they will be formed. I am asking this because is it going to be the Electoral Commission to organise, conduct and supervise elections to form electoral colleges? What are these electoral colleges?

MR MADADA: Madam Chair, as you read through the Bill, you realise that we have provided for stage one, which is about establishment of the electoral colleges. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 31 (a) be amended as proposed.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31 (a), as amended, agreed to.

Clause 31 (b) agreed to.

Clause 31 (c)

MR NOKRACH: On this clause, the committee proposes that: a) immediately after sub-clause (a), we insert a new sub-clause to read as follows: “The minister may, by regulation, prescribe other disability coding that shall be used to determine whether impairment has substantial functional limitation of daily life activities for a person to qualify to be a person with disability.” The justification is to provide for any other categories of disabilities not included in the coding of this Act.

We also propose sub-clause (b) to take care of the re-numbering of the sub-clauses. The justification is to address the inclusion of the new sub-clauses.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 31 (c) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31 (c), as amended, agreed to.

Schedule A

MR NOKRACH: Madam Chair, the committee proposes that in Schedule A, we substitute the content of paragraph one with the following: “The five delegates at each level are to ensure representation in terms of categories of disabilities and gender, where applicable.” The justification is for clarity.

In paragraph two, we propose that we substitute the entire provision with the following: “The five persons with disability executive committee members from each district shall form the national electoral college to elect the representatives of Persons with Disabilities to Parliament.” The justification is for clarity.

We also propose that we rename paragraph 2 to become paragraph 9; paragraph 3 to become paragraph 8; and paragraph 4 to become paragraph 6; paragraph 5 to become 7; paragraph 6 to become 4; paragraph 7 to become paragraph 5; paragraph 8 to become paragraph 2; and paragraph 9 to become paragraph 3. The justification is for better flow and chronology.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Schedule A, be amended as proposed and stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed.)

Schedule A, as amended, agreed to.

Schedule B

MR NOKRACH: Under Schedule B, we propose the insertion of Paragraph 17, immediately after paragraph 16, to read as follows: “17; Little persons.” The justification is to include little persons among the categories of Persons with Disability.
We also propose the re-numbering of the paragraphs to reflect the new insertion. I beg to move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, who are little persons? Are you talking about pygmies? But also at an appropriate time, I will move the addition of another paragraph to take care of people who develop hunch-backs. They are also disabled people but not catered for here. In talking about little persons, are you reflecting on weight or what? If you are talking about pygmies, then all of them in that area will be disabled people. So, what are you talking about?

MR NOKRACH: Madam Chair, little persons are those people who are old but their body sizes are smaller than their ages. You cannot compare them to the pygmies because those ones live in an area that fits their situation. So, they have to be like that.

Little persons are people who are smaller in body size compared to the people among whom they live. For example, in some of our communities, there are people who are as old as myself, but when you look at them, they are very small in size. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. William Nokrach, we have already passed a provision that the minister will determine whether the impairments are substantial functional limitations. If you are just small in body size, is that a substantial functional disability?

MR NOKRACH: Yes, Madam Chair and let me give a funny example. A little person who is smaller may not be able to pick objects in higher positions as compared to those who are not. Therefore, the functions are limited.

But as you rightly put it, we have brought in a new provision to the effect that the minister will prescribe all other categories of disabilities in the regulations. In the circumstances, we may not debate this provision successfully now because it might require proof to justify functional disability. Maybe, we can let this be taken care of by that provision for the minister.

MS ASAMO: Thank you, Madam Chair. Little people are those who, for the lack of a good word, are called dwarfs. They are produced with smaller sizes. They never get pregnant – you must have seen some lady who interviews people on one of the television stations. That size – [Hon. Members: “Sarah Short”] – no, I am talking about dwarfs and not Ms Sarah Short; I am talking about people who are produced as dwarfs. 

These people have formed an association called the Association of Little Persons of Uganda. They are called little persons because no one wanted to call them dwarfs. The problem here is that the chairperson of the committee is defining them as short people. But neither pygmies – they are children in some of our families. Some of them develop big heads. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you support the amendment. Not so?

MS SSENTONGO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I am a member of this committee and I am one of those who suggested that we put the little people there. Some of you drive along Entebbe Road. At Kibuye, there is a short gentleman; he is old but he has a hunchback. He is a dwarf and he has that hunchback; he cannot do anything; he is begging all the time. So, we need to consider them as People with Disabilities. Surely! 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then he is not little.

MR BESISIRA: Madam Chairperson, while we are talking about the small ones, there are the big ones. (Laughter) There are people who, as they grow, are really big. Some of them cannot move; they have stomachs they cannot carry but that is how they have grown. They are big in that they have got to be moved in wheelchairs. Are those not People with Disability? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I am sure the minister is listening and when he amends this Schedule, he will think about it.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chair, thank you very much. I am a member of the committee. The information I would like to give may be vital.  Initially, when the chairperson and the rest brought the idea of little persons, I wondered what would exactly amount to a little person. But I think I got an answer last Sunday. 

I was moving up to the Nakasero area from the Watoto Church when I met a gentleman that with all due respect, I would imagine was this size.(Member motions with hands_) He had very small hands and very small legs. It was hard to tell whether what he was wearing was shorts or pants and this gentleman was - like when you are moving from the pavement and you are now going to the actual road, he could not even get himself there. He had to first sit down, which was even very hard to say whether he was sitting down. I wanted to take a picture of him or maybe take a video. That is when I understood exactly what the little persons are.

And then my honourable colleague from Bunyoro area brought up the point of the huge persons. I have very many ladies in my constituency who are very fat and they have been attacked by diseases like Arthritis. In medical explanation, they will tell you that you cannot heal. They sit in the same place from morning up to sunset; they cannot even walk; they cannot help themselves. They are just helped. We need to expand those a little bit. I am trying to support what he brought out. Thank you very much.

MR MADADA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank colleagues for other categories of disability they are proposing. But as you note, under amendment 4, clause 31(c), it has provided that the minister may, by regulation, prescribe other disability coding that shall be used to determine whether impairment has substantial function limitation of daily life activities for the person to qualify to be a person with disability. 

Therefore, I want to appeal to the chair of the committee that we drop this one amendment of the little persons and we give ourselves time to consider the other types of disability as already provided for in this clause. As you note, the debate continues even outside here. There are people who are saying, “We have brain-acquired injuries and other issues.” So the best way forward is to ask the committee to drop that particular amendment since it has already been provided for in the new Bill. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable minister, if it is there, why did they propose it? Does it harm your law to include little persons?

MR MADADA: Madam Chairperson, what I am saying is that they wanted to include one extra type of disability but there are many other disabilities that can come in and since we already have a clause that says, “The minister may, by regulation, prescribe other disability coding that shall be used to determine whether impairment has substantial limitation…” then we have room to consider the little persons alongside the other forms of disability that may come later.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. Honourable minister, I think you have not listened to this debate. Members are in support of the little persons. The big ones you can consider but the little ones they are in support of. 

I put the question that Schedule B be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule B, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mr Suleiman Madada): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House do report there to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House do report there to.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mr Suleiman Madada): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House considered the Bill entitled, “The National Council for Disability (Amendment) Bill, 2010” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mr Suleiman Madada): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR DISABILITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mr Suleiman Madada): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Council for Disability (Amendment) Bill, 2010” be read for a third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the National Council for Disability (Amendment) Bill be read for a third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR DISABILITY (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2013.”

THE SPEAKER: The Title is settled and the Bill passed. Honourable members, in the Gallery, we have students from the commercial section of YMCA Jinja Branch. They are up here. They are represented by hon. Balyeku and hon. Nabirye. You are welcome. (Applause)

The other guests are our friends from Namibia. Those are some Members of Parliament from Namibia but I need their names. You are welcome. They attended the Women’s Day celebrations in Nakasongola and they looked very nice in the picture with the President. (Applause)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT) (NO. 2) BILL, 2012

3.43
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You had guided that before we move to the third reading, efforts would be made to harmonise the provisions of the Bill, which we have just passed with the Local Government Act. We have studied both Bills and we think that following the passing of this Bill, amendments should be made to section 118 of the Local Governments Act. 

So, if Madam Speaker allows, the Chairperson of the committee could move for recommital so that we consider the amendment.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think we had not come to the third reading. We stopped just short of the third reading because we wanted to know whether you were including their provisions in the Bill.

So, I think I come down, he makes the amendment and then we move.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT) (NO. 2) BILL, 2012

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chairperson, I need to be guided on this procedure. We are now going to amend the Local Governments Act and we are going straight to third reading for that particular amendment. I have heard it is to be moved by the Chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. I thought it would have been better for the custodians of that Act to be the ones to move the amendment which is consequential arising from what we have just passed. I need to be guided. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: When I stopped the Bill before the third reading, I had asked the minister and the chair to go, harmonise and then tell us whether they are going to include an amendment to the Local Governments Act relating to that election. So, I think minister instead of him - because it is your Bill 

MR MWESIGE: I thought any Member of the House can move an amendment but I will oblige, Madam Chairperson. 

The amendment is on section 118 of the Local Governments Act. I do not know whether - I hope copies have been distributed. We had agreed that the chairperson moves the amendment but if the chairperson allows, I can read it. Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am reading the amendment.

The amendment is to the effect that we want to insert provisions relating to the election of councillors of Persons with Disabilities in local government councils. So, we propose that the Local Governments Act, herein after referred to as the principal Act, is amended in section 118 by substituting for sub-section (2) the following:

“A councillor representing Persons with Disability shall be elected in accordance with the electoral structure provided for in the National Council for the Disability Act as follows: 

    (a) In case of the village council, all willing Persons with Disabilities in each village shall assemble to elect five executive members.
    (b) The chairperson of the Persons with Disabilities executive committee shall become the secretary for disability affairs at the village council.
    (c) In case of the parish, the five Persons with Disabilities executive committee members for each village shall assemble at the parish or ward to elect the executive committee members for Persons with Disabilities.
    (d) The chairperson of the Persons with Disabilities executive committee at the parish level or ward level shall become the representative of Persons with Disabilities at the parish council.
    (e) In case of a sub-county, division council, or town council, the five Persons with Disabilities from each parish or ward shall assemble at the sub-county division or town council to elect two councillors representing Persons with Disability, male and female, to the sub-county, division or town council.
    (f) In case of a district or city council, the five executive members from each sub-county or division council or town council shall assemble at the district or city council to elect two representatives male and female to the district council.”

Madam Chairperson, the justification for these amendments is to reflect the structure in the National Council of Disability Act in the Local Governments Act. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that section 118 of the Local Governments Act be amended as proposed by the Minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Section 118, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports there to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports there to.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.50
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled the Local Governments (Amendment)(No.2) Bill, 2012 and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.50
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT) (NO. 2) BILL, 2012

3.51
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2012” be read a third time and do pass. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Local Governments (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2012 be read for a third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT)(No.2) ACT, 2013

THE SPEAKER: The Title is settled and the Bill passed. Honourable members, I indicated that we have colleagues from the National Assembly of Namibia. They are from the Committee on Gender, Youth and Information Communication Technology of the National Assembly of Namibia. We have hon. Nimrod Muremi, leader of the delegation and vice-chairperson of the committee; the hon. Ruth Nhinda, Member of Parliament and member of the committee; hon. Ambrosius Kandjii, Member of Parliament; Ms Mara Bessinger, parliamentary clerk. You are welcome.

BILLS
SECOND READING

PUBLIC ORDER AND MANAGEMENT BILL, 2011

3.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Public Order and Management Bill, 2011” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded.

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Speaker, the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs will no doubt confirm to this House that there has been sufficient debate, consultations and dialogue by all interested parties since the first reading of this Bill.

Many groups and interested parties participated and gave their views on the Bill, mostly on how to make it better and to address specific concerns. In response, the committee has come up with reasonable amendments, which took into account most of those concerns, which in many cases the sponsors of the Bill, the Executive, largely agreed with so that we have a law which everyone will abide by and own.

All the stakeholders that gave their views and input have been very clear on the need to have a legal framework that regulates public order and management. This is because all seem to agree that the provisions of the Constitution, the existing regulations and the rulings of the courts of law have all been fairly blurry, hence the need of this Bill to come up with a clear legal framework that regulates public order and management specifically.

The Public Order and Management Bill seeks to protect demonstrators as provided for in the Constitution under Article 29 (i)(d) and non-demonstrators under Article 43 of our Constitution in a win-win mode and hence the need for regulation. This is because civil rights and liberties that negate or infringe upon conventional duties, responsibilities and obligations of other people can be a recipe for anarchy on society.

Therefore, the exercise of rights and freedom should not be used as a tool for incitement of hostility and hatred and to be a divisive factor among people in society. The Bill is aimed at regulating public meetings.

The point to emphasise here is that human rights are legitimately made limited in order to safeguard the rights of others. This required striking a balance between the enjoyment and practice of one’s basic human and constitutional rights without infringing on the human and constitutional rights of others.  

This Bill, therefore, seeks to ensure that there is this balance between those exercising their rights obligation to respect the rights of others. In essence, the emphasis of the Bill is on ensuring peace rather than enforcing the law.
              
Furthermore, the Bill requires an organiser of a public meeting to notify the Police of the intention to hold the meeting in writing so that the organiser and the Police can work together in a shared responsibility of the public cooperating together with the Police. 

It is important that the Police is not perceived as an agent, which is against demonstrations, assemblies or gatherings but as a body that impartially applies the law and that organisers and participants need to cooperate with the Police in order to organise peaceful and unarmed demonstrations. Police who act outside the law are subject to the Police Code of Conduct and of the Police Act and shall be punished accordingly. 

Spontaneous demonstrations will be inconsistent with the requirement of the Bill which provides for “notice”. All assemblies, demonstrations, gatherings etcetera can only take place with notification. 

Honourable members, we are legislating for law abiding citizens.  For spontaneous eruption arising, for example, from a speeding vehicle knocking down a school child is the work that the Police and Penal Code should take care of.

The Bill should not disallow critical assessment of government policies and actions of others in the legitimate exercise of this freedom. This section of the Bill will be amended accordingly. 

As Chairman Mao once said, “let a thousand flowers bloom and let a thousand flowers contend” in situations of tranquillity and peaceful enjoyment. This should be the spirit of the law. In short, people should be free to express their dissent and or approval with policies or actions that affect them without breaching the peace and in many cases people have shown approval of actions that affect them around the country, for example.

Madam Speaker, the Bill is not intended for lawful meetings of any public body held in accordance with the Constitution of such public bodies be it mosques, churches, trade unions, political parties, social or cultural groups provided such meetings are held in their ordinary places of business or other place not being a public premises as is held to conduct lawful business. 

Basically, these are meetings and gatherings which the Police should not interfere with because they would not fall under the regulation of public meetings. For example, you have “kwajulas”, weddings or funerals – these should not be the business of this Bill. An elaborate definition of a public body is provided among the new amendments in the new definitions.

Lastly, where the law provides for a prohibition, there should be a sanction. These two are catered for in the Bill. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you, honourable minister. Can we hear the report of the committee?

4.01
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): I thank you. Madam Speaker, as honourable members may recall, this same subject matter came up on 25 April 2012 and I thought that the Minister for Internal Affairs was refreshening Members on the contents of the Bill. I have the Hansard of the session on Wednesday 25 April 2012. The Bill was introduced, a report was read and the minutes were laid on Table. What we are supposed to do, according to the Hansard, was for Members to debate the report.

But suffice it to say, this Bill was dealt with conscious of the very many interests - you note that - attracted by the contents of the Bill. 

In our report, we reported that we had a record number of submissions from political players, political parties, the civil society organisations and many other people like religious leaders that were interested in the contents of the Bill.   

At the same meeting, I reported that as a committee, in spite of our divergent political views, we tried as much as possible to even at a professional level critically examine the Bill and come out with positions that we thought were acceptable to the committee and will be acceptable to Parliament.

So, I think that at this moment, the report is before the House and, Madam Speaker, you had actually directed that Members should go and read the report and come for debate. So, I think that we are ready for debate and then we shall come up with the proposed amendments in the report.

THE SPEAKER: The report was presented and we had been given to go and read. 

4.04 
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): I thank you very much. The chair has just told us - and yes, the report was presented last year - that Members should be ready to debate. In the minister’s statement while presenting the Bill for second reading, he also decided not to go into detail of the object of the Bill. 

It would only be fair in my opinion that the chairperson of the committee spends a little time or be given a little more time to refresh the Members minds on this Bill because I am not sure if Members even perused through it last year – whether all the facts and data are still up to date. In any case, then why would we have to get another copy of the report since it was already presented last year? 

I propose that the chairperson of the committee be given a few minutes to refresh and bring everybody aboard on this before we start debate.

THE SPEAKER: In other cases, when we have had Bills on which we have had reports presented and not debated, we have had a synopsis from the chair. So, give a synopsis of your report. 

4.06
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): I would like to thank the chairman of the committee for giving us more copies because he knew that most likely we have misplaced these copies. We want to thank the chairman for this. 

Even if the chairman gives us a synopsis, we still have a small problem. We need to understand before the chairman can give us - as you are aware, all our minds have been on the Divorce and Marriage Bill. (Laughter) In fact, we have all been on that and with the concentration that is still going on, we have not done much on the Public Order and Management Bill.

Madam Speaker, we would plead with you and the chairman to allow us to go and look through and maybe next week we can start as we are still nursing the issue of marriage and divorce because it is a serious issue. We are begging you, Madam Speaker and the chairperson who has really done good to give us copies. We thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: But will the marriage issue stop you from listening to a synopsis? (Laughter)

4.07
MR JAMES BABA: Madam Speaker, I have no problem with the request from the Leader of the Opposition.

But if you recall the last time we considered this before we went to committee stage, it was the very Leader of the Opposition who requested for more time and even asked for the minutes of the committee report so that he could go and study it but since then, it is almost a year. How much more time can be given -(Interjections)- that is the point that I wanted to raise.

THE SPEAKER: Can you give a synopsis? At least, I know that Members can listen. Let us make some progress –(Interjections)-no, refresh your memory by listening to him. We are coming there.

MR TASHOBYA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I suppose the synopsis – what I would say is really brief and highlighted in the statement made by the minister. 

But what I can say is that the background to the Bill is to define the responsibilities of the parties involved when having public meetings.

The Constitution of Uganda, Article 212 mandates the Police to preserve law and order. Article 29 of the Constitution guarantees fundamental rights of individuals to associate, demonstrate and meet. But also, Article 43 of the same Constitution provides that in enjoyment of ones right, one must also not infringe on the rights of others. 

So, the basis or foundation of the Bill is to provide - first of all, to recognise that members of the public have their constitutional right to meet and demonstrate in public meetings but in so doing, they also have an obligation of not infringing on the rights of others to exercise the same rights and that is why the Bill provides for cooperation between the parties that are involved when a public meeting is held.

The Bill provides for individuals convening public meetings to notify the Police so that the people who are going for these meetings are protected. For example, if you are going on a public road or park – the people that are going to assemble are safe and secure but at the same time, you may be holding a public meeting at a venue which another person would also want to use. So, it is to provide for orderliness and security of the parties involved in holding public meetings and to also provide for responsibilities of those that would not want to cooperate with the Police for the repercussions that would ensue when one holds a public meeting without taking into account what is provided for in the law.

So, that is the brief synopsis or background to the Bill. As I have already mentioned, we read the Bill and you asked Members to internalise it. I want to assure Members that we debated this Bill very cautious of the political interests and repercussions this Bill would attract. 

I want to invite Members, to first of all, read the report and debate and I am sure that many of the recommendations that are coming up would be very acceptable to the majority of the Members in this House. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the House resolves itself - 

THE SPEAKER: Not yet. (Laughter) Honourable members, do I see any request for the Floor?

4.13
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Madam Speaker, given the importance of this Bill - the minister also said that it was about close to a year ago. My thinking is that you give us time to read the report again so that we are able to debate this fairly.

I am actually bringing this because I one time went to Zambia and found that they came out with a law which later on caught up with the people who are in the ruling party, who had become the Opposition. The law was not a good one – (Laughter) - and they said that when Members of Parliament make laws, they make laws that can stand the test of time. It should not be made to catch up with the Opposition because you will later find yourself in the Opposition. 

So, Madam Speaker, my appeal is that you give us time to try and again go over this report so that we debate this fairly and make sure that we come out with a law which is good for Ugandans. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this report is only 14 pages. I will permit you to read it overnight and debate it tomorrow.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE BILL, 2009

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we were at committee stage and we stopped at clause 23 or something. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, this Marriage and Divorce Bill is very important and we are all eager to go through it. As you are aware, this law has been around since the Seventh Parliament. It changed names; it was the Domestic Relations Bill and it is now the Marriage and Divorce Bill. Now that the Bill is at Committee Stage, our people, whom it also affects, have raised very serious issues. An old lady approached me and said, “How do you pass a law, which will affect my children tomorrow without consulting me?” She said, “I would have been happy if you had really consulted me.” 

This law is no different from the land law and we would be happy if we again moved around the whole country to get views and sensitise people on marriage and divorce. It is not affecting only us in Parliament. I want to plead with Members of Parliament that it is affecting the people outside more and if you have a problem with your husband or wife, let us not use this law now. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are now debating. Let me defer this matter to tomorrow. Next item.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS ON THE PETITION BY “THE CITIZENS ACTION FOR QUALITY PUBLIC EDUCATION” ON THE POOR QUALITY OF EDUCATION IN PUBLIC SCHOOLS

THE SPEAKER: Isn’t there any member of the Committee on Education and Sports? Are there any members of that committee here? [Mr Kasibante: “I am here.”] Can you present the report? They were distributed last week. Come down here, hon. Kasibante. 

4.19
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Madam Speaker, I rise to present a report of the Committee on Education and Sports on a petition by the Citizens Action for Quality Public Education on the Poor Quality of Education in Public Schools. Copies are being distributed. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Please, proceed.

MR KASIBANTE: Madam Speaker, the petition was presented to this House by hon. Nansubuga Rosemary Sseninde, Woman MP Wakiso District, and it was referred to the Committee on Education and Sports for consideration and report to this House as per Article 90 of the Constitution and Rules 147 and 177 of the Parliament Rules of Procedure. In this petition – (Where upon Hon. Ssinabulya accesses the Chamber_) 

THE SPEAKER: I see your chairperson -

MR KASIBANTE: Madam Speaker, I wish to introduce my chairperson, hon. Sylvia Namabidde Ssinabulya. She is ready to present, she has just permitted me to give the introductory part of it. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I want to thank the Committee on Education and Sports for their high level of cooperation. Please, take the Floor. Thank you, hon. Kasibante. 

4.22
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Sylvia Ssinabulya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I want to thank hon. Kasibante for standing in for the chairperson. A copy of this report was presented to Members and I do not know whether there are still more copies. But two weeks ago, a copy of the report was presented but I was not given the opportunity to read it. 

This is a report of the Committee on Education and Sports on a petition by the Citizens Action for Quality Public Education on the Poor Quality of Education in Public Schools. The petition was presented to this House by hon. Nansubuga Rosemary Sseninde, Woman MP, Wakiso District, and referred to the Committee on Education and Sports for consideration and report to the House as per Article 90 of the Constitution and Rules 147 and 177 of the Parliament Rules of Procedure. 

In their petition, the petitioners prayed that Parliament impacts upon the government to:

    i) Amend the Education Pre-Primary, Primary and Post Primary Act, 2008 to require parents and guardians to make a mandatory financial contribution towards the provision of lunch to all children at school.
    ii) Increase Capitation Grant to at least a minimum of Uganda Shs 22,000 per child per year in the Universal Primary Education system. 
    iii) Ensure more decent classrooms are constructed as well as rehabilitation and construction of new classrooms. 
    iv) Recruit more teachers. 
    v) Ensure the operationalisation and full implementation of the Public Service Negotiating Consultative and Dispute Settlement Machinery Act, 2008; in particular the setting up of the Public Service Negotiations and Consultative Council for the negotiations of a collective bargaining agreement.
    vi) Increase teachers’ salary from the current entry point of Shs 273,000 to at least Shs 546,000 in the financial year 2012/2013. 

Madam Speaker, the committee considered this petition and now begs to report.

Methodology

The committee held meetings with the petitioners and these included the Uganda Joint Christian Council, the Uganda Muslim Education Association, the Uganda National Teachers Union, Forum for Education NGOs, Uganda National NGO Forum and Action Aid International and the committee also held meetings with the Ministry of Education and Sports. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the minutes of the meeting at Table.

The specific petition prayers:

    a) The prayer to amend the Education Act, 2008 to require parents and guardians to make a monthly financial contribution towards the provisions of lunch to all children at school. The committee was informed that the UPE policy guideline for children’s feeding which demands the carrying of food to school has not been successful due to a number of factors that include nutritional, political, economic, social, cultural as well as behavioral attitude of parents, guardians and children. This has led to many children, about 80 percent of them, going hungry at school and consequently, unable to concentrate on learning. 

The committee observes that most parents or guardians have abdicated their roles towards child welfare to the government although section 5(2) of the Education Pre-Primary, Primary and Post Primary Act, 2008 mandates them to provide food, clothing, shelter, medical care and transport to their children. This has contributed to poor performance and high school dropout rates. 

The committee further notes that statements made by some political leaders towards the objectives of Universal Primary Education have been misinterpreted to imply that Government is the sole stakeholder in the UPE programme hence the education. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports enforces operationalisation and further sensitisation of the populace of the Education Pre-Primary, Primary and Post-Primary Act, 2008 in relation to the roles and responsibilities of parents and guardians to their school-going children. 

The committee further recommends that politicians desist from making statements that are contrary to the law as they are often misinterpreted or interpreted for individual benefits. 

b) 	Prayer number two is to increase the capitation grant to at least a minimum of Shs 22,000 per child per year in the UPE system. The committee was informed that the current capitation grant provided by the government per child per year stands at Shs 5,000. This is highly inadequate to even cater for the basic needs of the child at school and teaching materials required for learning to take place. 

The committee was informed that the Minister for Education and Sports in a Sector Budget Conference in April 2012 had stated that in the budget proposals for the Financial Year 2012/2013, the capitation grant would be increased to only Shs 10,000 per child per year at primary level. This too is inadequate hence the proposal for an increment of up to at least Shs 22,000. 

The committee was further informed that not only is the capitation grant inadequate but it is more often than not released late and sometimes towards the end of the financial year. This has negatively impacted on the operations of schools and consequently the quality of education. 

The committee also learnt that the capitation grant is never released in totality and rarely are the balances remitted to the respective school accounts. 

The committee notes the concerns raised by the petitioners and observes that late releases and inadequacies of the capitation grant are issues not only limited to the primary level but are affecting all government education institutions and hinder their functionality to full potential.

The committee further observes that the issue of late releases has become consistent and could be a pointer to the underlying corruption in the education sector. The committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development makes timely releases to enable these institutions carry out their planned output. 

The committee reiterates its recommendations that Government carries out a comprehensive review on the capitation grant provided at different levels taking into consideration the prevailing monetary environment. This should be done annually in commensuration with the prevailing monetary environment. 

The committee further recommends that an in-depth investigation into late releases and undisbursed balances be carried out.

c) 	The third prayer was to ensure more decent classrooms are constructed as well as rehabilitation and reconstruction of new classrooms. The committee was informed that the low completion and retention averages have also been attributed to overcrowding with the pupil to classroom ratio standing at national average of 83 pupils per one classroom, while places like Arua stand at 114 pupils in a classroom against the recommended 55 pupils per one classroom. 

The committee further learnt that the existing structures were built for a capacity of 40 to 50 children hence overcrowding. This is a poor teaching and learning environment which has consequently translated into poor education standards.

The UWEZO Uganda 2011 report revealed that the 92 percent of P.3 pupils tested could not correctly read a P.2 level English story book while 73 percent of P.3 pupils could not solve numerical division sums of P.2 level implying that all children in P.3 should actually be in P.1. 

Mention was also made of the fact that currently, 35 percent of children under UPE continue to study under trees and in dilapidated structures that should have been condemned. This is a safety and health hazard. 

Madam Speaker, the committee observed that the government funding to public education institutions is very low and lacks the comprehensive programme for reconstruction, rehabilitation and construction of new classrooms in all institutions countrywide. This has contributed highly to the rapid dilapidation of the structures. 

Further, the committee observed that the government lacks a regular maintenance culture. This impacts highly on the final cost for rehabilitation.

The committee appreciates Government’s effort in trying to raise the literacy rates by providing free universal education but notes that unless more funding is injected into the sector, Government’s intentions as outlined in the objectives of the Education Act, 2008 may be far from being realised as most of the issues pertaining to the education sector are attributed more to inadequate funding.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government carries out countrywide consultations with the relevant stakeholders as every region is unique in its needs, in order to come up with an all-inclusive comprehensive budget-based programme for the rehabilitation, reconstruction and construction of education institutions in the country.

The fourth plea was about the recruitment of more teachers. The committee learnt that the quantity and quality is wanting. Given the high pupil-teacher ratio varying between 1:80 to 1:114 pupils, there is need to prioritise teacher recruitment. The committee observed that due to poor remuneration of teachers, this profession has been relegated and is now being taken-up as last resort by either those with the lowest grades or those who have failed to get into courses of their first choice. This has impacted negatively on the quality of teachers trained, which in turn translates into teacher absenteeism and low motivation.

The committee recommends that Government prioritises teacher recruitment. We also recommend that Government explores ways to restore the teaching profession back to its former glory.

Our prayer five is about ensuring the operationalisation and full implementation of the Public Service Act, 2008, in particular the setting up of the Public Service Negotiations and Consultative Council for the negotiation on a Collective Bargaining Agreement.

The committee was informed that teachers union has been denied its legal right to collectively bargain for salaries and wages as per appendix 2, sub-section 1 of the Public Service Act, 2008. The committee was further informed that instead, Government, arbitrarily and contrary to earlier commitment, offered teachers a salary increment that neither was negotiated over nor commensurate with the prevailing high inflation rate and economic environment. The committee cites Government’s lack of vigilance in the enforcement and fulfilment of most of its laws and obligations. Therefore, we recommend and urge Government to enforce its laws in addition to fulfilling its obligations accordingly.

The final prayer is about increasing teachers’ basic salary from the current entry point of Shs 273,000 to at least Shs 546,000 in the financial year 2012/13. The committee was informed that the entry point salary of a teacher remained at Shs 273,000. Worse still, a large number of teachers was not on the government payroll; they had been cleaned off. This too, led to low morale and high teacher absenteeism.

The committee, therefore, wishes to reiterate its earlier recommendation that Government increases teachers’ salaries by 100 per cent during the financial year 2013/14.

Madam Speaker, a number of issues emerged as the committee interfaced with the different stakeholders. I beg to report on them.

One of these issues is about automatic promotions. The committee observed that automatic promotions of pupils in UPE schools, irrespective of grades has greatly contributed to the poor quality of education, poor grades and a high failure rate. This is contrary to Government’s intended outcome as provided for in the Education Act, 2008.

Consistently, over the last 10 years, the performance of UPE pupils in PLE has been dismally poor with only an average of 4 – 8 percent passing in division one; 33 to 47 percent in division two; and 11 to 20 percent ungraded.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government reviews its policies on UPE in relation to automatic promotions if the intended objectives are to be achieved. Government is also urged to regularly review its policies on education so as to be at par with the dynamic social-economic and political environmental changes.

Poor sanitation facilities were cited as one of the major causes of high dropout rates especially among the girl children. It was further observed that most schools lack sanitation facilities while others lack separate facilities for girls, boys and teachers. This too, has contributed to the drop out in the retention and completion of pupils in UPE schools, Uganda’s completion rate being the lowest in the region at an average of only 25 percent compared to 84 percent in Kenya, 81 percent in Tanzania and 74 percent in Rwanda.

The committee recommends that Government carries out a comprehensive review of the entire education sector taking into consideration factors affecting the quality of education which is core to the development of a nation.

The other issue that emerged was the politicisation of the sector. The committee was informed that the education sector has been politicised by various government officials and politicians who use UPE and USE programmes to serve narrow political interests, hence subverting and crippling the noble intentions of the programmes.

The committee concurs with the petitioners and notes that UPE and USE programmes have been used by political leaders to serve narrow interests especially statements made to imply that universality means free services by Government. This has made most parents to relegate their role to Government.

The committee observes that the entire populace are stakeholders in the education sector and, therefore, recommends and urges everyone to work towards the success of the sector.

In conclusion, the committee notes that most of the problems in the education sector accrue from inadequate funding, poor monitoring, management, supervision and corruption. The committee further notes that although teaching is a noble profession, it has been relegated. The committee also recognises and is concerned about the deepening corruption in form of ghost schools, teachers and pupils and the manner in which it is destroying public education.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the House adopts its report on the petition by the Citizens Action for Quality Public Education. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson of the committee. We only have comments for 15 minutes because there is another paper on education.

4.43
MS HELLEN GRACE ASAMO (NRM, People with Disabilities): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the chairperson of the committee for presenting a report on the deteriorating education levels in Uganda. The situation of UPE is worse for children with disabilities. There are no teachers to handle such children although the policy recognises that they should be the first to be taken to school. That is why they are the first to drop out. It is because of the apparatus. 
When you look at the capitation grant – whereas we recognise there is a small grant that is given to special needs schools, such a grant is not given to the other schools of UPE to cater for things like papers and special instruction materials for children with disabilities. So, such children have ended up dropping out of school. If not, they struggle in their own way and at the end of the day, they do not do well at primary leaving examinations level.

On the issue of construction of schools, I want to say that accessibility is still a big challenge. When you go to many of these primary schools, you find the rams very stiff, which makes it difficult for children in wheel chairs to access classrooms.
 
It is also agreed that in the policy, there should be something on a special toilet system for learners with disabilities –(Interjections) - yes, in some schools, there are special toilets, but it is the teachers who instead use those toilets. The reason being they are more comfortable than the ordinary ones. So, teachers take benefit of using such toilet systems.

To add on what the report has suggested, I would like to propose that we should take care of the issue of children with disabilities as far as their education is concerned. In the budgeting cycle, we should be very specific on issues of children with disabilities - (Interruption)

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable member for giving way. This issue of children with disabilities should require Government to set up special schools for them. For example, in the districts of Gulu, Amuru and Nwoya, there is only one school for children with disabilities especially those who have blind and deaf impairments. 

But also the teachers for those children are nowhere to be seen. Yes, many are trained, but most of them do not accept postings to village schools like in Gulu and Amuru.

Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Is that information or you are debating?

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Madam Speaker, I am summarising. Anyway, what I am saying is that we really need to think about the plight of these children by setting up schools in all the districts or sub-counties, if need be. Thank you.

MS ASAMO: Thank you for that information. I know that in Uganda, we are advocating for inclusion because we do not have jobs for disabled people. When you take them to special schools, they will be scared of working with the rest of the society.

In some schools, you might have one teacher to take care of children with disabilities. But how do you expect that teacher to prepare lessons for children from P.1 to P.7?

I would like to suggest that the Ministry of Education should find ways of facilitating hard-to-find teachers such as those for special needs education.

4.47
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I also would like to thank the committee for working on this report within the specified time to have it ready for the House.

There are numerous challenges in regard to poor quality education in Uganda. My thinking is that we need detailed reform at the Ministry of Education and Sports if we are to get better education services for this country.

Let me specifically mention some few issues. For our pupils to perform well, there are very many stakeholders who must be involved. We should, for example, have very vibrant school inspectors. But we cannot do that because we do not seem to have enough money. We cannot fund them to move around these schools to do their work. In the absence of that, you cannot expect them to perform. That is one of those big challenges that the Ministry of Education and Sports must address.

The other issue is about the responsibilities of parents. I recall in 2007, we passed a law to compel parents to pack food for their children. But I would like to inform the House that that law has failed to work, reason being that it is difficult for anybody to pack food when they do not have any stored at home. What I am saying is that parents themselves do not have food to eat. What people do these days is just to buy what they are going to cook for that day. There is nothing reserved for children.

Now that the law on packing food has failed, we should allow schools to charge some little money from parents so that they can be able to prepare food for children at school. I think that will work. (Member timed out.)

4.50
MS SARAH NETALISIRE KAYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for presenting this report. The challenges of the education sector are not about to end. Today, as we talk, many of our teachers still face the challenges of being deleted from the payrolls. That is in addition to their salaries delaying to be paid. If someone, for example, earns Shs 270,000, at the end of the month such a teacher will find only Shs 20,000 remitted to their accounts. So, how do you expect such a teacher to deliver effectively while in class?

At one moment, management at my district tried to encourage teachers to go to classes and teach because their salaries had not been affected. But when salaries for the school inspectors and DEO failed to come last month, they got it rough. As I talk, they also go and sit in their offices doing nothing.

As we talk about quality education, we should first of all think about those who are providing services to our children. As leaders, we need to change on the messages that we deliver to our parents. I know during campaigns, we normally want to talk about issues that please voters. But the issue of “Entanda” has totally failed. It has made many of our parents become very irresponsible. 

Many school management committees are failing to convince parents to contribute money for food and other resources to cater for the children during school. Yes, this “Entanda” programme can work for schools in Kampala but not in my area, Manafwa. If I have one or two or five plates that I use to serve food to my family, how am I going to pack food for the children going to school? But also where is the food to pack? How about the hygiene? How is this food going to be stored –(Interruption)

MS TETE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I happen to come from Bukwo District where teachers have to move to Kapchorwa to pick salaries. During the rainy season, teachers have to travel all the way from Bukwo, through Kenya – all the way up to Kapchorwa to access their salaries. So, how do you expect a teacher to move all the way? The children are there; a teacher spends like five days travelling and going back. This has contributed to the failure of the children in Bukwo. We do not have a bank. The road is bad. The road - 

THE SPEAKER: Actually, you have no road. 

MR KIYINGI BOSSA: Thank you very much, the honourable member for Manafwa for giving way for further information. In respect to “Entanda”, sincerely speaking this has failed. “Entanda” is packed lunch - packing some lunch for the pupils. In Mpigi, this has failed. As I speak, the RDC of Mpigi, Mr Fred Bamwine, has issued letters to all headteachers giving them notice that he is going to arrest them if at all they accept that the parents should group themselves in a manner that would enable them give food to the children while at school. This has created a very big problem in Mpigi District and I would like to inform honourable members, to come up and address this matter before it is too late. Thank you, honourable colleague.

MS NETALISIRE KAYAGI: Thank you, my colleagues, for the information. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to close.

MS NETALISIRE KAYAGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you look at the people who are discouraging parents from contributing lunch for their children, their children are in private schools; they are not in UPE schools. They are in well-to-do schools and boarding schools - Kampala Parents. 

Madam Speaker, I am kindly appealing to the ministry - in the last Parliament, we tried to ask the Minister then, hon. Namirembe Bitamazire, to tell us what the President had to say about the provision of lunch by the parents. She declined - (Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank my colleague for giving way. She has asked a question that tickles me: What does the President say about this? The  information I would like to give is that about two years ago, during the campaigns, the President of this country came to Kumi and he warned any headteacher or any member of the PTA or School Management Committee who would charge even an extra shilling for lunch. He warned them and said anybody found doing this would land himself or herself in jail.

So, the information I would like to give is that these directives that we see Bamwine and other RDCs giving - in fact, they have been given the responsibility of carrying out surveillance to see what is happening in schools and whoever is found charging even a single penny extra will fall in hot soup.

The other piece of information I would like to give is that in Teso, packed lunch is something that is going to be complicated. Our staple food is “Kalo” or “Atapa” and when you carry “Atapa” to school, it is something that gets cold very fast. Eating cold “Atapa” is not only unhealthy but it is also unpalatable. Thank you very much.  

MS NETALISIRE KAYAGI: Madam Speaker, I know my time was taken up by Members who were giving information and I believe their information was vital. I want to thank you.

4.58
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Seninde for bringing this petition and the committee for the report. It is 15 years now since UPE was introduced in our schools. Before that, we had very strong parents and teachers’ associations in schools and in the meetings of these associations, parents would agree to build their schools, to look after their children while at school and, even in some schools, to give some allowances to the teachers as an association. The PTAs were almost abolished and as we talk and a few schools still have these associations running. 

When you look at page five of the report, paragraph two, the quotation being attributed to UWEZO about the performance of pupils is that pupils in P.3 were found to be fit for P.1. As we talk, these same pupils are in P.5. In two years’ time, they will be candidates. When they go for the PLE examinations, they will definitely fail and this year, the results showed that we had lost 85,000 pupils who had failed their examinations at P.7. They are called failures; they are in P.7 but they are fit to be in P.1. They have been passing automatically from one class to the next.

The private secondary schools also enrol these pupils for senior 1 and senior 2. You find when they reach senior 4, they cannot sit for their examinations because they do not have P.7 certificates. The parents have lost money; these are illiterates but they have been at school.

Madam Speaker, therefore, I find that the recommendations in this report - (Member timed out.)

5.01
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to thank the education committee and the Chairperson in particular. It is very good that this report has come at this particular time.

The committee has recommended recruitment of more teachers in UPE schools. Currently, when you look at the teacher-pupil ratio in schools, it is worrying in most schools. Last Thursday, we had a problem in Bukomansimbi in a certain school called Kyabagoma Primary School, which had only two teachers. Lightning struck the school and one of the two teachers was killed and we remained with only one teacher for all pupils in the primary school. You can imagine that. 

So, as we talk – (Interjections) - it is in Uganda. Bukomansimbi - (Mr Kawuma rose_) - first wait with your information. I just want to finish this point. When you look at the teacher-pupil ratio in schools, it is a very big problem. You can imagine where a full school is having only one teacher teaching pupils from Primary one up to Primary Seven. That is a very big problem. 

The issue of increasing salaries is also very important and the report has given it priority. But the most important thing to think about here is that the salaries that are paid should also be paid in time because even the small salaries which come to teachers are normally paid very late and if - (Interruption)

MR KAWUMA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I want to provide is that I am a teacher and I was a union leader for the teachers. One of the concerns of teachers, and probably what is causing the frustration of trying to bridge the teacher:student ratio, is the issue of remuneration. Recently, I was interacting with the teachers and they told me - because the committee observed quality and quantity - that many of them chose to go back to upgrading but whereas they have upgraded, they have maintained them at that original pay upon qualification.

MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI: Thank you, hon. Kawuma, for your information. Madam speaker, the other issue I want to bring out in this report is about addressing installing lightning arresters as mandatory in all schools. Because as I have told you that last week we had a problem where pupils were attacked by a thunderstorm and some of them have now been admitted in hospital. So, we need to address the issue of installing lightning arresters in schools. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Franca Akello, then Prof. Bukenya. Due to public demand, I have increased by 15 minutes.

5.05
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the mandatory financial contributions towards the provision of lunch, I want to request this House to come out with a serious resolution that parents of UPE schools contribute money not only to provide lunch but also to give some motivation to the teachers since Government has failed to motivate teachers. I say this because there is a very high difference in performance between urban schools and village schools because at least in urban schools, when you compare performance of, for example, Buganda Road to Lira - Paliwa Primary School in my district, in a year, you can hardly find a first grade. So, what is the big difference? And all these are Government schools. The difference is teachers of Buganda Road may be getting some extra pay. 

So, I would like to request that this House resolves that at least, we allow parents to contribute some reasonable amount of money. It can be like - and some districts have resolved at their level to do that - (Interjections) - I will allow information from Nwoya District.

MS ADONG: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I want to give is that parents in schools like in my district have resorted to paying teachers in Government-aided primary schools. We have about five schools with only two teachers running from P.1 to P7. So, the parents decided to contribute money and I want this House to thank them. So, I urge this House to make a resolution so that at least, parents can be able to do - if Government cannot fulfil its commitment, we cannot sit and wait and see the future of our country ruined with that kind of education. (Dr Baryomunsi rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Information from Kanungu. I will give you one minute.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and thank you honourable member for giving way. The information I would like to give is that while I agree with the proposal, I also want to say that in the last Parliament, when we enacted the Education Act, 2008, we clearly put a provision that parents are allowed to make contributions. The only problem has been the message from the political leaders, especially, the President. When he goes out, he says UPE and USE are free, so, no parent should contribute anything yet the law - and that is why the RDCs go out to arrest head teachers yet the law clearly defines the responsibility of parents. 

Parents can contribute any amount of money to support these schools. So, we can make the resolution to strengthen what is already provided in the law. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are examples of schools I would give to this House whose parents have resolved - in my district, there are a good number of schools whose parents have resolved to contribute some given amount of money every term at least to give some motivation to the teachers and this has improved their performance. So, this Parliament could come up with a strong resolution which would be taken up by the ministry to allow parents to contribute so that we can realise some improvement in performance.

On capitation grant, I am a shadow Minister of Education and I follow a lot what the ministry promises this country. Last year, the ministry promised they would begin disbursing capitation grants at least two weeks before the start of every term. But I can tell you, the ministry has not done that. Money has not been disbursed two weeks to the start of the term in any school in this country. In any case, they send the funds either very late towards the close of the term or in the middle of the term or in some cases, the monies are not sent in totality. So, this should really be corrected.

I also would like to make a comment on construction of more classrooms. The ratio given by the committee is very lenient because in some schools - I will give you an example of some school in my district which has the ratio of 200:1 classroom; a primary one classroom having 200 pupils in one classroom, which is not commensurate with the policy that is provided because in the policy, we have 55:1. Really, the ministry must work hard to make sure that you construct classrooms. That is for those who have classrooms. There are some schools whose students are studying under trees.

And also, more importantly, we have to find out from the Ministry of Education why inspections are not carried out in pre-primary schools. We do not know what this Government has for our children. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I gave you an extra minute and you have used it. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: It was not given. 

THE SPEAKER: I gave it to you. Okay, half a minute to complete and then Prof. Bukenya. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Anyway, I am working on an alternative policy, which I will table before this Parliament. But my biggest concern is why inspections are not carried out in pre-primary schools. We do not know what the pre-primary schools are giving our children. There is a policy for pre-primary schools but this country has surrendered it to the private sector. This is what I would like to add. Thank you.

5.12
PROF. GILBERT BUKENYA (NRM, Busiro County North, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and the chairperson of this committee for a very good report. I want to ask the Ministry of Education if they still do cognitive assessment of children, particularly in primary school. Long time ago, this was being done to find out what proportion of our children is three dimensional thinkers; what proportion is two dimensional thinkers; what proportion is one dimensional thinkers. The smaller the dimensions of your thinking, the more restless you become when you are in class and you expound more energy. Therefore, you want to increase the energy for our study. That was the reason for the establishment of the porridge project in 1953 in primary schools.  

Therefore, I think it would be very wrong, if we do not know these proportions, to be able to urge the Government to provide lunch or for parents to provide lunch. With the degree of malnutrition we have here, we have a very high percentage of brain hunger. I think the percentage of brain hunger, that is, starvation from the brain, is now about 70 per cent. If that occurs and you have a child who goes to school from 8 o’clock in the morning to 4 o’clock in the afternoon, you are wasting five hours of no uptake, unless that child is a three dimensional thinker. 

So, honourable ministers for education, maybe it would be good for you to undertake such assessments. That time they were being undertaken by educational inspectors, who used to sit in classrooms to see how many children were fidgeting or how many children were serious. They would therefore reflect on the degree of dimensional thinking.

I urge that the issue of giving lunch must be; in fact, there is no joking about it. (Applause) This question of saying that this lady cannot and therefore let the child go, you are really wasting the child’s time in school. So, I wish Parliament can strongly recommend that lunch must be provided by children especially in primary schools. If it is my child, I would like to give food for that child and there is no joke about it.

Secondly, the Government must now start looking at why we are having a very high rate of dropouts in primary schools. When you have universal primary education, every child should be in a school but then you have a high dropout rate of up to 80 per cent. That is the highest in East Africa. Why? These are questions that must be asked in our fellow groups.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I would also like a recommendation to have a proper re-establishment of school inspection programmes, inspectors in schools. This will help to facilitate the teachers to teach. They will also help the ministry to establish the degree of apathy that is going around in primary schools. There is apathy. The teachers are not teaching because the teachers are really in trouble – (Member timed out)   

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will contribute on the other one as it is also on education. 
 
5.19
MRS FLOERENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. As we discuss this report, as Members of Parliament we should really put a lot of emphasis on it because as soon as the results come out, the press attaches the results to the Member of Parliament. The other day, they were naming which MP has not performed well in PLE and USE. So, we should seriously come up with measures on how we can improve performance in schools. 

When I analysed why my pupils are not performing well in Namutumba District, most of the reasons have been brought out. There is lack of meals for pupils and also for teachers. There is also lack of houses for teachers, which causes absenteeism; teachers say that they cannot walk long distances and they cannot come and stay at school while hungry and so they decide to stay at home. Also on the meals, with malnutrition in my place, it is very difficult to ask a parent to pack food for the children because they do not even have enough for their homes.  

We also discovered that there was lack of sanitation facilities in schools, more so for the girls. When the girls go into their monthly periods, they do it for four days in a month. So in a term, it is 16 days, which means that they miss out on school for 16 days a term. (Interruption)

MR KAWUMA: I thank you, Rt. Hon. Speaker, and I thank my colleague for giving way. I got touched when she talked about the performance of the students in her constituency. The other time I was reading a magazine about the jigger problems in this country. We are still trying to address the problems of jiggers. This is a health problem that affects the children’s performance especially in that area of the country. (Laughter) Maybe the Rt. Hon. Speaker – (Laughter)

MRS MUTYABLUE: I thank you very much, colleague, for the information but the jiggers are not in Namutumba and in Busoga anymore. 

Madam Speaker, I think that we should really resolve as Parliament that the Ministry of Education should provide usable sanitary towels to pupils in primary schools – (Member timed out_)

5.22
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma County Islands, Buvuma): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am a bit disappointed with the submission because it is actually entirely a mainland submission, even from everyone who has talked. The situation in the islands is actually worse. In the islands, for example like Buvuma, I have one USE secondary school serving 52 islands and it stops at senior 4, and it is a day school. How can we expect the students from the other 51 islands to move to this day school on one island? No wonder -

THE SPEAKER: There is information from another islander, hon. Makhoha.

MRS MAKHOHA: I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way. The information that I would like to give is that at least for you, you have one USE school but for Dolwe Island, we completely have no USE seed school. 

MR MIGADDE: I thank you very much for the information. Actually, Dolwe is not a district but Buvuma is a district. So I am talking about a district of 52 islands with one secondary school. Right now, every student who starts senior 4 is calling upon the MP for further education because the whole district stops at S.4. So we have a very big challenge.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the minister has been talking about the hardship allowance as one of the incentives of ensuring that these teachers can stay on the islands or in other hard-to-reach areas. When this hardship allowance does not come, the teachers only use these hard-to-reach areas as a way of getting onto the pay roll and once they get onto the pay roll, they ask for transfers. So we need the Ministry of Education to assist us in this.

The other thing is about carrying food. In some schools, teachers actually confiscate food from the pupils claiming that the pupils are eating in class, because even the teachers are hungry. (Laughter) So, there is no way a hungry teacher can teach a hungry student and we expect results. (Interruption)  

MR OLANYA: I thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I thank my colleague for giving way.

I would like to inform my colleagues that teachers used to get allowances for hard-to-reach areas but as we talk now, the Government has stopped paying this allowance to teachers. I would like the Minister for Education to clarify why they have stopped the payment of the allowance for hard-to-reach areas and yet our teachers used to survive on that small allowance. I thank you.     

THE SPEAKER: Another islander. (Laughter) Okay let us hear from hon. Bakaluba.  

REV. BAKALUBA: I thank you, honourable, for giving way. Actually, when we talk about quality of education, for us from the islands we have that problem. It is a hard-to-reach area and at times the Ministry of Education sends teachers to the islands but these teachers will remain in Kampala, Mukono and elsewhere and they will not go to the islands. So, you wonder how our children are going to pass. 

You hear results being announced of the best schools but our schools cannot afford at all. We are creating two generations of the rich and the poor - those who can reach Makerere and those who are totally going to fail, who are just going to remain there. We need to work on it. I thank you.

MS KARUNGI: I thank you very much, Rt. Hon. Speaker, and I thank the honourable colleague for giving way. The information that I want to give to the honourable member is that much as we are talking about all those challenges, like one of the colleagues has said, the teachers who get their salaries through Stanbic Bank, especially in Kanungu and I do not know whether in Buvuma it is like that, are not getting their salaries. I do not know whether the minister is aware about that. He could also give further clarification on that. Tell us why some are getting half pay and others are not getting and why it is only Stanbic Bank affected - [HON. MEMBER: “All banks.”] - I did not know that it was all banks because in Kanungu we have few. I thank you very much.

MR MIGADDE: I thank you very much for that information. Madam Speaker, I only call upon the Ministry of Education to find out why a Government primary school with structures and teachers fails to get a first grade and then a small ramshackled school somewhere gets a first grade and yet these teachers are all from the same training institutions. The Ministry of Education must carry out research into why actually some districts are terminating contracts of teachers. ((Member timed out)

5.29
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for this report but I am alarmed at the figures that are being put out. Currently, we are paying Shs 5,000 per student per year as capitation grant. The committee is recommending a minimum of Shs 20,000 per student per year. My question is: how much does it cost or what is the minimum cost to educate one child for one year? I think that should be our starting point and we should try and mobilise resources, whether from Government or parents, to meet that target. 

The fact is that the people are our greatest resource. Forget oil or whatever else but it is the people of Uganda who are the greatest resource for Uganda. If we cannot invest in our children, then we have a serious problem. If parents cannot raise the Shs 5,000 or the Shs 20,000, then our figures on poverty reduction are false because I cannot fully appreciate how a parent can deny their child a future. 

If there is an economic circumstance, it is really up to Government to determine what exactly the problem is. In dealing with this important question, we must realise that the teachers are a vital ingredient in order to develop our future through the education of our children – (Interjection) - I will take your information.

MR AMURIAT: I thank you very much, my dear brother, hon. Jimmy Akena, for giving way. 

Madam Speaker, the Government is giving this country a raw deal. When you talk about Shs 5,000 as capitation grant given to a pupil, this translates into Shs 30 per day. What can Shs 30 do? This is far less than the requirement for the procurement of instructional materials including chalk. I do not think you can buy few pieces of chalk at Shs 30. This should also include money meant for buying recreational facilities like balls and sports facilities. 

The Government is certainly not serious when it provides just Shs 5,000 and even delays this Shs 5,000 or some of that Shs 5,000 never reaches the schools. I think we need some change in this country.    

MR AKENA: I thank you, honourable colleague, for that information. The fact of the matter is that we have free schooling masquerading as free education. (Member timed out)

5.33
MS JENNIPHER MUJUNGU (Independent, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): I thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker and honourable members. I would like to concur with the petitioners, the grounds in the petition, the prayers sought and the recommendations made by the committee.

On the issue of capitation grants, I would also wish to support the committee on increasing the capitation grant. In my district of Ntoroko, I was last year approached by the Chief Administrative Officer on the issue the capitation grant and it was really low that it could not help out on the situation in schools. Once the capitation grant is very low, it really affects the performance of these schools because you find that a school cannot afford scholastic materials like chalk, just like one of our colleagues has said. I have been to these schools in my district and when you visit them, they ask, “Honourable MP, could you assist us with chalk; could you assist us with benches to sit on?”

Madam Speaker, on the issue of school structures, I want to say that in most of these UPE schools the structures are incomplete. There are no doors, no windows and even the floors are not cemented. So, you find that the pupils are living in very pathetic conditions which really negatively affect their performance. Some pupils study under trees. In my district, we still have people who study under trees and of recent, we are getting heavy rains and lightning and definitely, there is fear for these children because anytime they will be victims. 

On the issue of teachers’ salaries, for sure teachers’ salaries need to be reviewed. These teachers need to be motivated because if they do not get enough salary, they will not definitely come to teach these pupils. (Interruption)

MR BARYAYANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you, colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give is to the effect that in my constituency, Kabale Municipality, some teachers have been put in prison because they have salary loans and because their salaries have not been paid, they cannot remit those loans. So, in the long run, some of them have been put in prison. 

I remember last year, I told this august House that teachers should be considered like the Generals or the soldiers and policemen of this country. A policeman gets tax-free goods - they do not pay taxes. They have army shops and police shops, where they can get iron sheets, mattresses and other goods tax free. Why don’t you give this kind of incentive to the teachers?
I remember asking the honourable Deputy Prime Minister, who is a General; he has a card and when he goes to the ATM, they do not deduct the charge of Shs 1,500 that they always deduct when one makes a withdrawal. The card they use is not deductable because they are specially designed for them such that they do not pay any tax while doing those transactions. Thank you, colleague.

MS MUJUNGU: Thank you so much for that information. On the issue of teachers again, I would like Government to also consider the fact that there are hard-to-reach schools. Madam Speaker, you had a chance to visit Ntoroko. Ntoroko is a practically hard-to-reach area. The schools are very scattered; a child begins school at 12 years old and at the end of the day, they lose interest because at 12 years is when a child is supposed to finish primary 7 – (Member timed out)

5.38
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Thank you, chairperson, for the report – (Interruption)

THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. Moses Ali): I just want the honourable member from Kabale Municipality to either substantiate what he has said or withdraw it. I do not understand how he came to know that Generals withdraw money by ATM without paying taxes. Does this therefore apply to everybody using ATMs? IF people using ATMs withdraw money without taxes, then it applies even to him and not only to Generals because it is not only the Generals who use that facility. So, what is this information? Is this not out of ignorance? (Laughter)

MR BARYAYANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Gen. Moses Ali, and these soldiers have special salary cards that also work as ATM cards. When they get to the ATM, they use those special salary cards to withdraw the money and when they use it, there is no deduction that is made. Thank you. 

CAPT. LAKOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a serving soldier or officer of the Uganda People Defences Forces and I use the same type of ATM card which is used by any other person who has an account in any Ugandan bank. I do not know of any time where a teacher or a soldier or a policeman uses an ATM card and they are not charged. So, can he substantiate and mention the soldiers who use these cards and they are not charged? Is he in order to insinuate that solders use special ATM cards and they are not charged and yet I know I am always charged? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Baryayanga, do they have special banks where other Ugandans do not go?

MR BARYAYANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I did not talk about their ATM cards; I talked about their salary cards. You may have an ATM card like mine but your salary cards are tax free. When they are getting their salaries, everything is tax free. (Laughter)

GEN. MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, it is now clear that hon. Aja is definitely ignorant of what he is talking about. He is totally ignorant and you can see it even on his face. He should really have come with information. 

MS BAKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I usually do not like rising on points of order but I am constrained and this time round I will raise one. In this Parliament, we are supposed to treat each other with some decorum. Is the honourable Deputy Prime Minister, who is at the same time the Deputy Leader of Government Business, in order to refer to our well informed honourable member as ignorant as if he did not get all the credentials to be in this House? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: No. The honourable member is well qualified to be here and therefore, he is not ignorant.

GEN. MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I think the whole House should know that there is an Act that exempts soldiers from paying tax. That is information to everybody including the speaker. If you do not know, then we shall let you know. Come and I will tell you the Act. If you want to remain ignorant, that is not my problem. 

THE SPEAKER: So, hon. Aja proposes that the type of law which covers the soldiers should cover the teachers. I think we should arrange to move such a motion. 

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the chairperson for the report that has been submitted to us and the colleagues who presented the petition to this House. 

In the report of the committee, there was a recommendation to increase the salaries of teachers by 100 per cent, if I understood the chairperson right. However, I remember in financial year 2011/2012, before we passed the budget the issue of teachers salaries came up, and that is the year in which we nearly failed to pass that budget. Government at that time came up with a three-year programme on how they were going to increase the salaries of the teachers. Is it not important at this time to get progress on how this programme is performing? It was by a resolution of this House that Government was going to increase the salaries of teachers by 30 per cent. So, how far has that gone?

On the issue of classrooms being insufficient, if it is acceptable by this House, I pray that tomorrow you allow me table pictorial evidence of some schools in Kaliro District. We have got 15 primary schools without a single classroom and they are operating in shacks. If you look at where the students study from, you can see that their lives are in danger. When it comes to the rainy season, then they will not study. If you allow me, Madam Speaker, I will bring evidence to this House for purposes of enriching the report which is before us. (Interruption)

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and colleagues. I want to thank my colleague for giving way. On the issue of classrooms, I want to inform my colleagues that in Adjumani District, decoding of some schools has affected the operationalisation of some primary schools. Therefore, I request that we are given consideration to understand the situation of resettlement in some of the war affected areas. Thank you. 

MR NIZEYIMANA: Thank you for giving way. Madam Speaker, the issue of coding is serious in all districts. You will find that there are some schools that exist, they are Government schools, but they do not have codes. This means these schools cannot be given teachers, they cannot access the payroll and they cannot be given any facilitation from Government because they are not coded. 

In addition to that, you will find that most of the teachers have been deleted off the payroll. Recently, in the last three or four months, very many teachers in districts like Kisoro and Kabale where I have been, have been deleted off the payroll yet they are still serving. Some of their children have dropped out of school because of this. They have kept on filling forms but they have not accessed the payroll and yet they were on the payroll before but they were deleted without any cause. I would like to know from the minister why this is happening and why these teachers are suffering and yet they are serving. I thank you.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, colleagues, for the information. One thing I want to make clear is that the schools I have referred to in Kaliro are actually schools which are well coded and are on the government lists. I want to say that there might be only two groups of people who are so happy with UPE in this country. One is the politicians who benefit by getting votes using UPE. It is something they use for gathering votes and not necessarily for the good of the populace. The second is the less educated people who do not really care whether their children lose out on studies or not. 

I want to report that in Kaliro, there is a subcounty which never got even a single first grade yet there are over 10 UPE schools, that is, Gadumire Subcounty. There is also a school where every pupil in that school got only F9s in every subject; the winner got aggregate 36 and the last also got aggregate 36. This is how we are performing in UPE. It is a shame and I think the committee’s recommendation that there must be a review of UPE is long overdue. It must be done, and probably the committee should even have stated that within a certain time they should come up with a report on how the review of UPE is going on. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I am concerned about the issue of teaching children – (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: That is an important point. You have half a minute to speak it.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My point is that the policy of teaching the children in lower primary in local languages when actually we know so well that in P.7 they will be examined in English –(Interruption)

MS BAKO: Thank you, my brother, for giving way. As a professional teacher, I want to give you this information. Actually, this application of teaching in vernacular is selectively implemented, Madam Speaker. In some schools, they have outrightly rejected it but in other schools it is being enforced. At the same time, all these children sit the same examinations. 

If you are giving children the basic education from P.1 to P.4 in the local language, this leaves them with three years, which is equivalent to 36 months, to cognitively comprehend the language of examination. This alone is creating a disparity. The ministers seated here know very well that in the olden days when they studied, there was no such differential in education. Anyone would come from Arua and would come here to Nabisunsa and to Gayaza. Today, you would have to plead as a Member of Parliament for your child to go to the first world schools of this country.

I think we should really get a positive response from the minister as to why they bring on board a policy which is being selectively applied. The private schools do not want this and some government schools do not want it too; the few head teachers we have heard from say that this will affect their grading and will affect their performance. So, we should rein on the ministry to come out clearly and say that whenever they come with a policy, they should not use some districts and counties for experimental basis to apply such policies. I think it is something that this House should take very seriously; otherwise we are at a loss, especially those of us who come from rural communities. I beg to inform. 

MR LUBOGO: I may not have to say more on the issue of teaching in local languages; she has said it all. However, I have got some information which probably the minister will explain. Today’s scores in these national examinations are actually varied. You may find somebody getting a C6 but the credit is lowered to as low as 15 marks or even 10 just to allow that person to get a credit somewhere. The person has failed but because they want to say that there is something better coming out of UPE, it is lowered to as low as 15 marks or 20 for that matter. I thank you, Madam Speaker. Tomorrow if you allow, I will bring the pictures of the schools in Kaliro District and table them.   

5.57
MS LUCY AJOK (UPC, Woman representative, Apac): Thank you. Madam Speaker, I would like to comment on the issue of teaching disabled children in these schools. As far as I know, the best way for the Government to plan for special teachers is first by having an assessment of the disabled children that we have in the country. To the best of my knowledge, the whole of the North does not have an assessment centre for disabled children, and it is only up to a certain level. Many of them are brought down here to Wakiso, but these children are already disabled and they need to be near their parents for emotional support. I think the Ministry of Education has to set up regional assessment centres for disability and plan how they are going to be educated regionally. 

Secondly, enough cannot be said on the issue of infrastructure. In Apac District, there are schools where we even lack classrooms because some of the classrooms have been taken on as teachers’ houses. We would not have teachers there if those classrooms were not taken over. The infrastructure is dilapidated. 

The issue of pupil to teacher ratio also needs to be looked into. A ratio of 200 pupils per classroom is even good; I have a school where there are over 1200 pupils and only seven teachers, including the headmaster.

I would like, if possible, for this House to declare that the issue of social services - schools and health services - be taken out of this demand driven issue that the government peddles. Out of that, it has created so much disparity in education and health services. 

I would ask, lastly, that the inspection of schools be taken back centrally. You cannot leave it to the district to recruit teachers and also inspect schools. There is no way the central Government will know whether these vital social services are being done well. Even when there are problems with the inspectors, the districts are stuck with them. It is sad that you hear the ministry saying, “they are your own children; you recruited them.” Those are national children, the way I see it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have spent two and a half hours on this subject. Yes, it is important but we also have another one.

5.57
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman representative Gulu): Madam Speaker, my prayer is that the Minister of Education actually takes up this great concern, that we needed a review of UPE a long time ago. Universal Primary Education is about 15 years old now and the exploitation of the potential of our children is at stake. We decided to divide the country into two; there are those from rich families who have their schools and then the poor ones have their schools. Gone are the days when the standard of education was uniform everywhere. This is very unfortunate to the country. We need to do a little more – (Interjection) - If FDC was in power, we would have given a minimum of about Shs 600,000 to teachers now because that was our priority and that is an area of priority.

When we talk about development, we should never underrate the investment in our children especially in education because that is the foundation of development. We cannot talk about development when are not giving enough to education. (Interruption)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, hon. Aol, for giving way. The information I want to give is on the understanding of the word “universal”. I love education with a lot of passion and that has led me to interact with very many people. Recently, Madam Speaker, you launched the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Quality Education and in that meeting we had members of the diplomatic community. I happened to interact with one of them and the message she gave me was that there has never been universal education where private education is also being provided, and that is where we got it wrong.

In Uganda, we have private primary schools where we have 25 per cent who complete the primary cycle while the 80 per cent drop out in the UPE schools that we think are for the rest of the Ugandans. So, we need to redefine the meaning of universal education to include us who have children who go to UPE schools.

MS AOL: When we talk about dropouts, this is a very clear indication that we need to really re-examine UPE. Maybe we are now not attaching a lot of importance to education if we our children drop out up to 80 per cent. This is serious. When they are marking, I hear there are two marking schemes; children from UPE are marked differently from the rest. This is what I gathered. The minister will clarify on that. This is very bad. We need to subject our children to the same treatment and we need the same standards.

When teachers commute from far, they reach school at about 10 O’clock and then by 2.00 p.m. they are already on their way back home. When do they teach the children? This is part of what we have to deal with. So, Mr Minister, you have a lot to do. 

Madam Speaker, this is a very important area for us. I think you should add more time to some members to air out their views and grievances. Some of our schools in the villages are completely not like schools; they do not have chalk, which is only Shs 3500 per box. This is serious. (Interruption)

MS ALUM: Thank you so much, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give you is that you are even going very far when you talk about chalk; there are schools in my district, for example Aleka Primary School, where there are no desks or chairs for the pupils to sit on. In that same school, there are even no teachers’ houses. We only have one house for the head teacher and the deputy head teacher; all other teachers come from out. So, imagine a school where pupils have nowhere to sit and write and where all the teachers come from out. It is very serious in some rural districts.

MS AOL: We also need first aid boxes for first aid services in those primary schools, especially those schools in the villages. At least for urban schools, they are able to get some things but not those rural schools. For us in the North, we are even disadvantaged further because of nodding syndrome. We need to take this up. When we go to those rural schools where the children are affected, you find the teachers also do not know what to do. As leaders, we have a big role to encourage the teachers and maybe to visit schools, since now inspection is no more. An inspector may have a motorcycle but without fuel. So, how can a motorcycle move without fuel?

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way as we talk about the importance of inspection. I am a teacher by profession. It is not about chasing me around but it is about what I do in the class. So, we need to look at recruitment, retention and motivation if you want to see the performance of teachers improve. 

MS AOL: There are a number of things that we can go on counting, but we cannot count them all. My appeal is that maybe the minister needs to- (Member timed out)

DR BAYIGGA: Madam Speaker, a motion like this has been raised every other year and we have been listening to various lamentations from all over the Parliament, from those on your right hand side and those on your left hand side, as this issue cuts across. As we are continuing to lament, - I have not lamented today because I have lamented before - can we really get some kind of assurance that there is some light at the end of tunnel before we continue to lament. Why should we continue to lament when no answers can be given. 

THE SPEAKER: Lamentations will soon close.

6.06
MRS ROSEMARY SSENINDE (NRM, Woman representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee for having taken up this petition and really discussed it. I just want to make a few observations and some amendments to the recommendations. 

On the issue of feeding in schools, I do appreciate and I believe that every member here, as they have contributed, will agree that we have a challenge. The Act itself has a loophole. That is from the observations that I made and from what members have said. The Act itself does not provide sanctions for parents who fail to meet their obligations. For that matter, I want to suggest an amendment to the recommendations of the committee so that we bring it out clearly. Much as the committee has made a good recommendation, it has not brought it out prominently. I think we should say that parents must make mandatory financial contributions towards the feeding of the children, at least a cup of porridge. 

As I continue, I just want to make one worrying observation – (Interruption)

MR KASIRIVU: Madam Speaker, I want to thank hon. Sseninde for giving way. On this issue of financial contribution to feed the children, many of us will agree with me that when we were going to primary, we were supposed to go with food and we went with food and it was mandatory that you should go with food. At lunch time, you would sit with friends and share what you had brought and then there would be cleanliness, checking and so forth.  What went wrong? 

The problem is that we are not identifying what went wrong. This is not a question of contributing money to feed the children; what is the problem at home? Why don’t children come with food, which we used to carry and we would walk many miles during that time because there were a few schools? Now the schools are in short distances. Why don’t children go with food from home?

MRS SENINDE: Dear colleagues, I want to understand and appreciate that the world we are living in is a changing world. We cannot think that the way they used to pack food for you in the 1960’s is the same situation we would expect to have packed food today. 

We must also appreciate that our schools do not have storage facilities. In my constituency, I have been visiting schools where children come with packed food and they put it in a corner on the floor and this food goes bad because the beans were cooked the previous night. They do not have warming systems to help the children have fresh food. Why do we compromise the health of our children simply because we have failed as a Government? 

I want to make it categorically clear that if it is the law that parents must contribute food, why have we failed to make sure that the parents make the contribution? If we have seen that providing cooked food is becoming a problem, then let us allow the parents to contribute something. Let us task the Government to make sure that they calculate how much money a child needs. I calculated; a child needs only 30 maize cobs to take at least a cup of porridge for the whole term. So, let them calculate and quantify it in terms of money for each parent. Let all the parents do that because it is their responsibility. We are killing our children while looking because we want to politicise issues. 

On the second issue of capitation, dear colleagues, I want to remind you that the Shs 5,000 the Government is providing for capitation is equivalent to US$ 1.7 per year per child. How do you expect a child to live on Shs 5,000 per year with this cost of living and all the things that are needed in school and you expect a child to have quality education. Madam Speaker, I want to propose that we make it clear that we boldly ask Government to increase the capitation grant with effect from next financial year, which is 2013/2014.

I want to conclude with one or two issues. On the issue of classrooms and constructions, which is part C, dear colleagues you have heard it here in Kampala that KCCA together with the Police have been going around Kampala closing private schools that have not met the standards. Madam Speaker, aren’t these double standards? How come the Government aided primary schools are not being closed yet they do not also meet the standards?

Madam Speaker, the committee has recommended that Government undertakes a comprehensive review of the issue of sanitation. What do we mean by sanitation? To me, sanitation is about latrines and water; so, what are we recommending Government to review? I just want to say that Government should make sanitation a priority in our schools. Some schools’ toilets have collapsed and children cannot go to school because there are no toilets.

Madam Speaker, allow me to finally request our dear colleagues to give their hearts to the issue of human resource. Teachers are the major human resource in the education sector. Whether you have other resources or not, the moment you fail to give priority to the human resource, you will not achieve much. We should put our hearts to support the teachers in having increased incomes because they do only one job. They are not allowed to do other jobs yet they must take their children to Makerere University like I do or like my colleagues do. We need to be considerate because they do not have private institutions to take their children to. We will only get quality after considering that. I beg to move.

6.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I had a small prayer before I stood up that I try to be as sober as I can possibly be. I sympathized with hon. Rosemary Seninde; given the rate at which she spoke, this is a challenge to the heart. 

Madam Speaker, Japan had universal education by 1905 – (Interjections) – 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, I got concerned by the statement just made by the minister. He made a very strong statement about hon. Rosemary Seninde, who has just spoken, very ably, representing the people of Wakiso District and the country at large. The Minister has failed to substantiate on why he said this. In fact, I have not even understood how hon. Rosemary Seninde speaks. In that regard, may I seek some clarification from the minister on how hon. Rosemary Seninde speaks and why he says that? Why is it a challenge?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Japan had, by 1905, universal education - (Interjections) – This is aggression. Okay, if that satisfies you, go ahead.

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, while in this august House, we are required to respect one another. The minister made a very strong statement against hon. Rosemary Seninde upon which an honourable member requested for clarification. What I have just noticed is that the minister has decided to ignore the clarification sought of him in relation to a statement he just made about how hon. Rosemary Seninde spoke. In the circumstances, is the minister in order to ignore a point of clarification when in fact what he said touched the conduct of a fellow colleague?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, the comments you made preceding your presentation are on the Hansard. So, can you explain to the House what is worrying you about hon. Rosemary Seninde?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, the reason I thought one needs to be a bit sober about this subject is that there is need to compare the objectives, the problems involved, and the solutions you provide. Madam Speaker, if I make my contribution, I will take into consideration the clarifications I will make. So, if I am allowed to continue – (Interjections) - If I offended hon. Rosemary Seninde, my apologies; and if the honourable member did understand her or understand me, I beg to be excused. 

As I was saying, Japan by 1905 had mass education and that explains their development. In Uganda, we started mass education, according to one member here, about 15 years ago. That means the challenges we have on mass education in Uganda are still very real. What are the objectives of mass education? Why do we need mass education? It is to move society. I think some of us should share the experiences other countries have had and why it would be necessary and urgent to get into quantities before we get to qualities. Before we move to quality, we need to start with quantity. If there is anybody who wants to challenge me on this, we can debate that. (Interjections) If you allow me to continue - Quality will come out of my quantity now and you will see the difference.

Madam Speaker, the challenges facing mass education are real. You will not start with enough buildings, enough teachers, enough books or even lunch at that. This is because the economy you are dealing with may not be able to provide all that. So, can we, soberly, – (Interjections) – Please, wait; I want to make my point clear because you have not heard what I intend to say. What I am saying is that the objective of mass education is to get as many people as possible into the main stream. When you do that, you face problems because you cannot have enough buildings, teachers or even books at the start. 

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Universal Primary Education started 15 years ago with USE coming in some years back. In the 15 years, I believe Government should have planned to have enough classrooms and all that we are talking about. So, is it in order for our good minister to tell us that we cannot have everything now when the project stated 15 years ago? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think the members are not satisfied by your explanation. They believe that in 15 years we should have had time to plan and perfect it, say in segments of five years.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, of course 15 years is a long time in a life time but in society it is not. Anyway, the challenges we have now, which are very real, include salaries for teachers; relate that to the taxation you are going through. We are talking of feeding children at school, but we must also consider whether they are being fed at home. Regional imbalances - (Interruptions)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I represent the people of Jinja Municipality East Constituency and I know that most of the Members of Parliament here have constituencies they represent. We are in Parliament talking about very serious matters concerning the parents and children; is the honourable minister, who has no constituency, in order to start laughing at the plight of the parents who are struggling to educate their children yet he knows that actually, education is key to everything and that without education even he would not have been in this House?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, the honourable member thinks he will have the constituency forever. I had mine for a short time but his is guaranteed forever for him. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, I think we can look at this question a little more soberly. The issue of feeding children at school is true; the management of feeding children at school should be looked at. On the availability of resources to buy food by the school, if it has to come from parents, how do you handle that contradiction with the very issue of mass education to enable people who cannot afford their child to go to school – (Mr Besisira rose_) – I am completing my contribution but since members do not want me to speak, I now take leave of the Floor.

THE SPEAKER: Apparently he has sat down. Let us hear from the minister.

6.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Mr Kamanda Bataringaya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank colleagues for the contributions made. I also would like to thank the chairperson of the education committee for presenting this report. I want, from the onset, to state that as Ministry of Education and Sports, we agree with the report presented by the chairperson of the committee. In that regard, let me just give information to the House about three issues we have handled in relation to what the report is saying. 

One is about the issue of recruitment of teachers. Let me inform the House that the ministry is already handling this matter. I am sure about two weeks ago Members of Parliament must have seen the advert in the newspapers in which the ministry advertised 6,254 vacancies for primary school teachers. The ministry made a list, which is in line with the suggestions from districts. So, if you find your district not appearing, it means the CAO for that district never gave us a list to show that there are shortfalls in terms of teaching staff.

The second one is about the issue of salaries. By the time the petition was tabled, there was already a commitment by Government of 50 per cent increment, though in a phased manner. This financial year, they received 15 per cent, 20 per cent in the next financial year and finally they will receive 15 per cent. It was 50 per cent and not 100 per cent as reported by the committee. However, take note that that is an issue that is already being handled. The other issue – (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you very much for amending our rules to enable us move with our technological gadgets into the House. Is it really proper for a Government Minister to come here and lie about Japan? I am saying this because the record is there. 

The other paramount issue is: Does Government find it difficult to hand over some of the schools that it took away from foundation bodies? I know these religious foundation bodies can run many of these schools very well. That will help you to run your own schools. Do you find that a problem?

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Ekanya, are all schools religious founded? There are those that are owned by communities.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, my proposal is that Government should hand over those schools that it took over from religious foundation bodies so that they can be managed well. They can then run the ones for which they bought land and built. 

MR BATARINGAYA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, to answer my colleague, I want to say that we are receiving demands from those foundation bodies that the ministry takes over some of the remaining schools. Now if he is saying we should surrender those we already have taken over, then I fail to know which is which.

As I was saying, the second issue is about operationalization of the Education Act, 2008. The committee report mentioned something about that, but I want to inform the House that as a ministry – (Interruptions)

MR JUNJURA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the Minister of Education because he has just raised the issue of salaries of teachers. I wanted to talk about this issue; unfortunately I failed to catch the eye of the Speaker. There is a persistent problem in Hoima District, and I have been sharing information about it with hon. Atwooki Kasirivu and he said it also exists in Kibaale and perhaps also in some other places. This is about a situation where teachers have continued to earn half pay. 

Worse still, you find a primary teacher in my village, for example, appearing on the payroll of a secondary school in another subcounty. You also find another teacher in some sub county, for example, Buhimba, appearing on the payroll of another primary school in another sub county. That inconsistency in the salary section is bringing a setback in the education system. It is a big challenge, which I raised here on the Floor about three or four months ago, but it has persisted. The personnel department at the district has submitted all the required documents but there seems to be no response. So, I thought you should briefly talk about that for my own understanding and guidance. Thank you.

MS BOONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to give him information that is very important to our primary schools. There are some districts where you find the education officer has posted teachers from Government schools to private schools but they are being paid as civil servants. That is usually done with the connivance of the education officer and owners of some private schools in some districts. This is something you might not know, but it is happening. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In regard to hon. Julius Junjura’ s issue on salaries, I would like to inform you that I have received information from teachers across the country expressing concerns about the fact that they do not receive payslips promptly. The last time they received payslips was in September 2012. Also, note that for the whole of last year, teachers got payslips for only August and September. So, can you explain to this country why teachers get paid salaries without payslips?

Two, I have information pertaining to the fact that some teachers’ salaries have been deducted and posted into UNATU’s account. So, can the minister clarify why some are receiving less money, because deductions from UNATU are over and above what they are supposed to deduct?      

MS NYIRABASHITSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the issue of salary, teachers and all civil servants are supposed to get their salaries by the 28th of every month but this money comes the following month. These teachers have already got loans. On 30th of every month, the loan repayments are deducted and at the end of the day, the teacher does not get any balance on his account. 

Secondly, I want to inquire from the Minister why most times the teachers’ names are deleted. As far as I know, you are supposed to delete a teacher’s name after getting information from the personnel officer. If the personnel officer has not filled the pension report that they delete these teachers’ names or the civil servants, I am wondering who is in charge of deleting them and they spend three or eight months without salary. I think something must be done. An investigation must be carried out into that computer system. That is how they are stealing the money for teachers. Thank you.

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable from Mbarara brought up an issue of connivance between DEOs and some private school proprietors. Madam Speaker and Members, the evidence I have, and which should be researched further and clearly established, is that most of the private primary schools or even secondary schools now in many places are owned by either inspectors, DEOs or some big shots in the districts. So the connivance becomes simple. 

The ministry posts some teachers to some schools but they appear to be teaching in private schools. That is why you find also these private schools now appear stronger than the Government schools. So, we need to do much more. We need not go into rhetoric because teachers are teaching in different schools from those ones they are posted to and for which they are paid. So, Madam Speaker, this is serious corruption. It is undermining education and we need to follow it up seriously. 

MR GODFREY LUBEGA: Thank you very much. I want to advise the Minister that since most of the money that teachers get goes to money lenders and salary loans, and yet almost every district has teachers’ cooperative societies, why don’t we facilitate these societies so that teachers get money within rather than being disturbed. I have learnt that most of the property is taken by these money lenders. In Rwanda, somebody was saying that it has been practised. So, I want to advise you to revise and facilitate these societies so that teachers can get money. Since their money comes late, it can be within that society. Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca B. Mbaguta Sezi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you, Members, for your observations relating to issues of pay for teachers. I will start with the issue of payslips. We have not been issuing payslips for some time as Government because we were changing from one system to another. The ledgers system was the one producing payslips and the new one was still being designed to be able to produce payslips - (Interjections) - Allow me to explain. 

THE SPEAKER: Let her finish her answer first. 

MRS SEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Now we have discussed how to issue the slips to our public servants because it is their right to know how much they are paid using the payslips- (Interruption) 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I wish to thank the honourable Minister, a former bureaucrat, for accepting this information. 

The information I want to candidly give my sister is that Government is not issuing payslips to district officers because, of late, Government pays district officers in instalments. It is in instalments. I can challenge you. I have raised this issue with Ministry of Finance and the mistake is said to be from your docket. Believe me, district officers are paid in instalments. You can go to Mukono, which is the nearest here; you can go to Wakiso, Luwero, Gulu, Arua and that is the truth. So, you find yourself in a difficult situation to issue a payslip when you have paid an officer in instalments.

MRS SEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to confirm to the august House that civil servants or public officers are paid in arrears. They first work and complete the month and then they are paid for that month. That is the policy. I would also like to say that civil servants work for 30 days and they are paid, but we did design a pay policy so that they are paid by- (Interjection) - Let me proceed. 

MS AOL: No, we need to know. Madam Speaker, if this payment, for example for this month, is made around the 31st or the 1st of April, we would not be complaining but the complaint is about the payments taking rather too long. Right now, you find that a lot of teachers do not get their pay; they say, “Oh this month, this one has been skipped.” Why? You need to clarify that. That system of paying teachers after work is okay but you need to clarify why there is a lot of delay for something which has been worked for.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to close the matter.

MRS SEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was developing the point that in the changeover, there have been delays in the payment of salaries. I was trying to indicate that each time the salaries have delayed beyond the 28th, we have communicated to the service because of the changes that are being undertaken.

Secondly, because of the forensic audit by the Auditor-General, a number of public officers, not necessarily only teachers, went off the payroll because the Auditor-General said they were ghosts. We issued a circular to local governments that they should confirm whether those individuals that were called ghosts were still part of their staff, and we gave them three months to do this. Those who submitted, their teachers came back on the payroll. 

On the issue of deductions, the deduction of loans is a personal commitment but Government does facilitate those deductions. There are individuals who take loans from SACCOs and from associations and they get a deduction code. Once they have given you a deduction code, Ministry of Public Service will deduct that money and send it to the beneficiary. What has happened is that because of the delay for five days, six days in the payment of salaries, some of the banks do the deductions from the accounts earlier than the salaries’ arrival. The decision we have taken is for us to provide - (Interjections) - but I have the facts - the deductions along with the salaries. (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I normally get very patient and I would have wanted to give the Minister just a reminder, not really an order. 

Very early last year, I stood on the Floor here and I said to the Ministry of Public Service that that company that you have contracted to manage the teachers’ payroll has connived with the banks to fleece teachers, to the extent that there is a code for deducting teachers’ salaries, some of whom have not even got a loan. Honourable minister, you promised us that you were going to come back and report your findings. A year went down the road, another year is going and now you are saying there is a code. 

Teachers, your public servants, are getting fleeced down there because of the firm that Ministry of Public Service got to manage their payroll. They are conniving with the banks. So, do not be on the defensive; find out this and help the teachers, otherwise they are suffering.

MR BWAMBALE-BIHANDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do not need to apologise, honourable minister, but you should have accepted this information because it is very practical. What is happening in primary schools is that every year, teachers are transferred from one school to another including head teachers. Now, when a head teacher is transferred from primary school A to primary school B, they do not effect that transfer on the payroll. When the auditors went into the field, you would find school A has two head teachers and so one of those becomes a ghost head teacher. That is what is happening in your ministry. This is affecting some members of my family and that is how I came to know about it, and it is not only in Kasese but it is everywhere. 

So, the forensic audit did not make an error. The error originated from your ministry. You do not liaise with the districts to confirm those transfers and that is why those ghost teachers appeared. Actually, there are no ghosts. These teachers exist but they exist in two schools. Try to correct that and you will have no-

MRS SEZI: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I want to conclude by appreciating the comments you have made but also to inform you that the Ministry of Public Service does not carry out the transfers. What happened was that when the Auditor-General found that there were those individuals in the same schools, he reported that they were ghosts and I indicated that- (Interruption)     

MR BWAMBALE-BIHANDE: Madam Speaker, the issue I was talking about is harmonisation. The department that transfers is different from the department that pays. What I was requesting of the Minister was to harmonise the data from the districts, the data from the ministries, with the data that we have on the payroll in the Ministry of Public Service. What is lacking is harmonisation; that is all. I know your ministry does not transfer teachers; you do not need to teach me about that.

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MRS SEZI: Madam Speaker, I want to conclude by indicating that whoever gets off the payroll is the responsibility of a local government and whoever gets reinstated onto the payroll is also confirmed by a local government. Our responsibility is only access. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR BATARINGAYA: Madam Speaker, I was talking about the issue of operationalisation of the Education Act, 2008, in regard to lunch for students and pupils. I said that as a ministry, what we have done is that we are having educational dialogues in every district. So far, we have covered 36 districts. We have a list and next week we shall be going to the east again. In Elgon, we shall have four districts covered and in the Busoga region we shall also have four districts covered making a total of over 40 districts. As resources get available, we shall cover the entire country-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what are you dialoguing about; whether children should eat? 

MR BATARINGAYA: No. The committee recommended that the Ministry of Education and Sports enforces operationalisation and further sensitisation of the population on the Education Act. That is why I am mentioning what we have done so far. I can even read to you all the districts we have covered; the members are here and they will be able to confirm that. So, we are doing this as we await for what the committee recommends, that they bring this Act – (Interjection) - That is what they are saying, because this august House has that mandate. As far as we are concerned, as a ministry we are going towards sensitisation of the population as far as the Education Act, 2008 is concerned- (Interruption)

MRS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you very much. I want to seek guidance. The Minister is telling us that they are carrying out sensitisation. We want to appreciate that, but could the Minister probably help and tell us what they are doing in as far as RDCs are concerned. It has been made categorically clear that RDCs have gone ahead to interfere. Well, they are doing it because they have to do the security part but when it comes to education, I wonder where the security comes in. 

We have heard our colleague giving a very clear example from Mpigi District where the RDC has given letters to all head teachers saying that no head teacher must ask parents to make contributions towards the feeding of children. Maybe the ministry can help us. If we want to harmonise this situation, can you guide us; what are you doing in as far as this is concerned, so that we do not get these political interferences in as far as the education of our children is concerned?

MR BATARINGAYA: Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Education and Sports is not responsible for the RDCs; that is the Office of the Presidency. If he was here, the Minister for the Presidency would do that. What I said is what we are doing as far as the recommendation from the committee is concern. What we are doing now, as a ministry, is that we are operationalising the Education Act, so I will not be able to comment on what the RDCs are saying.

The other issue, Madam Speaker, is the issue of hard-to-reach areas. We have 22 districts, which have been declared hard to reach not by the Ministry of Education and Sports but by the Ministry of Public Service. So, what we have done is that with the little money which was available for construction of teachers’ houses, we have started with those districts. The list is there, and the chairpersons and CAOs where those – (Interjections) - I will give you examples; Gulu is one of them – (Interjections) - Yes, Gulu is hard to reach by classification. Kanungu is another and Amuru is also another. They are there and this was done by Ministry of Public Service and not by the Ministry of Education and Sports. 

We are putting up teachers’ houses in those areas while at the same time they are getting 30 per cent increment. The teachers from those hard-to-reach districts get 30 per cent in addition to the other pay; so, they get a higher salary compared to the others who are not in hard-to-reach areas.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I want to know whether those include the islands of Buvuma and the islands of Namayingo.

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, the clarification I want from the Minister is about districts which are classified as hard-to-reach areas. Some districts in Uganda do not have commercial bank branches, so what is happening is that teachers in those districts gather their ATM cards, give them to one of their colleagues with the secret code numbers and that person is given transport, say from Buvuma to travel to Mukono to withdraw money. 

The clarification that I now want to get from the minister is whether there is an arrangement where these districts that do not have commercial banks operating in their areas can have another arrangement of paying teachers their salaries. Sometimes we have had several of these cases in Mukono. I know this because that is where there is a commercial bank where teachers from other districts come. Some teachers even disappear with money belonging to their colleagues. Is there any way that these teachers can be allowed to access their salaries from their point of service? That is the clarification I seek.

MS NAUWAT: I thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable minister has just told us that for hard-to-reach areas, in addition to their salary they have a top-up allowance and he mentioned something like 30 per cent. My district is one of those districts benefiting from the hard-to-reach allowance and indeed the whole Karamoja sub region. However, the challenge that we have is that not all the teachers are getting this hard-to-reach allowance. You find that the teachers in those schools in the villages are the ones getting that hard-to-reach allowance but those ones within trading centres are not getting it and yet they are all in the same hard-to-reach district. What explanation do you have for this, honourable minister? I thank you.

MR BATARINGAYA: For the case of the trading centres and the town councils or urban areas, they were excluded by the Ministry of Public Service as they are not regarded as hard-to-reach areas. That is why our teachers in those urban areas do not get that money. It is meant for those in the rural areas.

For the issue of the bank -  

MR OLANYA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. In the district of Amuru, our teachers got that 30 per cent last year in November and the same applies to the medical personnel, but now the medical personnel and the teachers are no longer receiving the 30 per cent. So, I would like to find out from you why. Can you clarify why Amuru District is no longer receiving the 30 per cent hard-to-reach allowances? 

MR BATARINGAYA: It is good that you have brought up that point. There is a CAO through whom the money is channelled and so really, that is not something that you would request me to take up because they are already getting that money. They should be able to get in touch with the Ministry of Public Service – (Interjections) - No, the Minister for Public Service is here and she will give you a response.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, these are the few things that I wanted to comment on. In as much as we agree with the report of the committee, we are continuing to address some of these issues, for example the recruitment of teachers, operationalisation of the Education Act and hard-to-reach areas. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think l let us listen to hon. Alaso as she had some proposals. 

6.58
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I intend to propose some amendments. You know that for years we have debated some of these things and I think that it is good to build on the memory of this institution. 

It is important, and I had hoped that the committee would have noted, that almost all the previous reports of this Parliament from the Committee on Social Services then recommended school feeding. So we are not recommending anything new. It is just that Government is adamant, but this recommendation has been consistent. They ought to have the courage to tell us why they do want to feed the children; full stop!

Having said that, on page 2 the committee makes a recommendation, which I thought should have been deleted. In my view, I think that it is not a good one, that you give Ministry of Education the opportunity to go and carry out workshops. Just workshops and workshops; they do not want to carry forward the ideas from those workshops.  So, I propose that there should be a deletion of this recommendation of sensitising the population on pre-primary education. I just think that it should be deleted. 

I would like to propose in its place a recommendation to the effect that Government conducts a review of the policy of universal primary education. Madam Speaker, scholars say that an education system that does not have the courage to review itself is no education system at all. If we think that UPE is good, from 1997 if we are convinced that it is a good policy, we should have the courage to sit down and review the universal primary education policy. That is my proposal on recommendation No. 1.

Recommendation No. 2, the committee looked at all those issues of ghosts. I had hoped, and I want to propose, that as a recommendation we ask the Ministry of Education to make public the findings of the commission of the inquest on Universal Primary Education. We funded it as a Parliament of Uganda. We voted money and even extended another two months. They should tell us why the ghosts are there. We cannot continue speculating as if there was no initiative. I think on that recommendation, I want to propose that Government makes public the recommendations or the findings of the commission on the inquest into Universal Primary Education because by now their work is even over.

Thirdly, on classrooms and staff houses, there used to something called the school facility grant that worked well until about two or three years ago and then they removed it. I would like to propose as a recommendation, Madam Speaker, that the school facility grant be reinstated to build classrooms and to build teachers houses and latrines and then we, as a Parliament of Uganda, will vote money into the school facility grant

Fourthly, the Government of Uganda put in lots of money in 1992 into the commission of the late Prof. Senteza Kajubi. That commission made a lot of recommendations on how to improve the relevance of education. In the last Parliament, we worked through recommendations that were brought by Government on a White Paper in education. I want to recommend that the Ministry of Education comes to this Parliament to report to us on the extent of the implementation of the recommendation of the Government White Paper on Education. 

Fifth, may I recommend that we review the mode of assessment of Universal Primary Education and Universal Secondary Education for UCE, the O’level examinations. The reason is simple. Prof. Kabwegyere argued to this House that the intention of Government is to run mass education – (Member timed out)     

THE SPEAKER: One minute.

MS ALASO: He said that we are running UPE in order to attain mass education. If you are running it that way, then you need to harmonise the mode of assessment so that anybody who goes through the education system devoid of numeracy, educational competencies with ill developed cognitive abilities should be able to be regarded as having qualified. You cannot bring the Uganda National Examinations Board with the present mode of assessment to assess children whom you intentionally do not want to know how to read and write and you are processing them -

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, can you address the recommendations because now you are debating. Just go to the recommendations. 

PROF. KABWEYGERE: Who has this intention? Is she in order to impute the intention of keeping children in schools illiterate? Who is behind this? Who is this conspirator that wants to undermine Ugandans? Is she in order to imply that?

THE SPEAKER: Can you substantiate on who is keeping the children illiterate.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, first of all, the honourable professor said that the intention is to have mass education. It is not –(Interjections)- Yes, wait! I have been given the Floor to substantiate. 

The committee argued that our children do not have the required competencies and therefore they are getting automatically promoted whether they know how to read or write. My recommendation is to harmonise the intention of automatic promotion, whether you know how to read or write, the intention of mass education, whether you know how to read and write, by suggesting a proposal that we need to review the mode of assessment. Right now, assessment is based on whether you know how to read. So if you bring a child who does not know how to read, when he or she sits PLE from Idupa Primary School in Serere, he or she will be deemed a failure but the intention is mass education. So, there is a disharmony between the intention of our education system and the way we are assessing our children, Madam Speaker.  

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to give information to hon. Alaso and I thank her for giving way. 

The honourable minister asked a question and raised a point of order on whether the Government intentionally wanted to keep our children illiterate. There is a high ranking Government official who was campaigning in my district and this issue of feeding children and children having exercise books came up. That person said that those were his children and so whether they have books or not, they should just sit in the classroom and no headmaster should ever raise the issue of food and that if they do, they should be arrested. After that, the RDC began arresting head teachers.

So if you say that the children should just sit in the classroom whether they have exercise books or not, then what are you really saying? I have talked to teachers in my district – (Interruption) -

MR BYANDALA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank the previous speaker for giving way. Is it in order for hon. Wafula-Oguttu to stand here and start telling this House lies that there is a policy of Government – Can he quote where we say that you are supposed to go into class without books and it does not matter? Can he quote a Government policy? Can he quote the source? 

Madam Speaker, we are not going to be here and hon. Wafula-Oguttu quotes a one person somewhere and he calls that a policy. Is hon. Wafula-Oguttu in order to mislead this House?

THE SPEAKER: Can you substantiate?

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: I thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. During the by-election campaign that brought in hon. Baka Mugabi as MP, the President of the Republic of Uganda, His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, was campaigning – [MR NANDALA-MAFABI: “General.”] – General. He was campaigning in Bukooli North Constituency and he said that no headmaster should send away a child from school because it has no exercise books. 

Most of the children, by the way, have one exercise book for all the subjects; a child comes to school with one exercise book for all the subjects and so once one teacher has given an exercise or test to the child, the other teacher does not access the exercise book and so the child sits in the class without studying. If you say that as a leader, are you not keeping these children illiterate deliberately?

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I thank you very much – 

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, the policy of Government is very clear; the issue of issuing scholastic materials is the responsibility of the parents and it is well written in the policy of Government. So, how can hon. Wafula-Oguttu, a man we had a lot of respect for, come here and misinterpret a well written policy of Government which states what Government will do and what parents will do. He knows that parents were requested to provide pens, pencils and clothing.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please conclude your recommendations.

MS ALASO: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will conclude, but let me just say that policy is both written and unwritten and I hope that the honourable engineer Byandala knows that. If it comes from the President, it almost amounts to policy.

Madam Speaker, may I make the request that I made in February 2012. I asked in this House that the Ministry of Education comes to us to present to this nation the performance of our children who had sat PLE that year and who had sat UCE that year. I continued to follow it up but they continued to dodge. They never came back to make that statement until it got off the Order Paper – (Interjections) - Yes, it was even on the Order Paper. It was.

Madam Speaker, the reason that we are crying now is because that year, we did not review it together; maybe some remedial action would have been taken. As a result, we have added another batch of lost children into the ones of last year. If we do not have that presentation to paint a very clear picture this year, we will add another batch. I had also asked for the rural and urban comparison to help us make decisions. May I ask again that the Ministry of Education presents to this House the performance of our children in PLE and UCE this year, rural and urban comparison, and compare it with 2012 to see if we have improved. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know what the chair says about the recommendations. Let us finish with the chair and then we conclude with the minister.

7.13
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Sylivia Ssinabulya): I thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker, and I also want to thank all the members for their contributions and for supporting the recommendations of the committee. I have listened to hon. Alaso’s proposals and further recommendations and I have no problem with the recommendations. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report be amended as proposed by hon. Alaso.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS BAKO: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to inform this House, Ugandans and the minister. I am holding this book, the Annual Budget Monitoring Report, Financial Year 2011/2012. It is as recent as December 2012. Everything that we have been talking about here is rightly put here in Government words. 

I want to draw your attention to the education sector and particularly to page 124, and this is the item to do with classroom construction. It says in the conclusion that out of 38 primary schools the Ministry of Education and Sports planned to renovate and rehabilitate under project 0943 - emergency construction and rehabilitation of primary schools - the ministry disbursed funds to only 19 primary schools and that means 50 per cent. This is despite the fact that this project alone received 94.4 per cent of the approved budget. In addition, out of the 19 primary schools reported to have received funds, five primary schools did not receive any funds from the Ministry of Education and Sports. The Ministry of Education therefore misreported on this. This means that the Ministry of Education and Sports under project 0943 implemented less than 50 per cent of their annual planned targets and therefore did not achieve the planned output.

The recommendation says that the Auditor-General should undertake a forensic audit on the project. The Ministry of Education should follow up the funds meant for Pacho Primary School and ensure that they are recovered and construction and rehabilitation takes place. The ministry should fully account for funds for the five primary schools under the project. You plan for 38 schools and you rehabilitate 19 and you do not release funds for five schools. Where are those classrooms? Where is the construction going on? 

As if that is not enough, Madam Speaker, on page 127, there is output 0708 - classroom construction and rehabilitation. The money released here was Shs 8.04 billion. Out this, Government released Shs 7.86 billion accounting to 97.8 percent. These funds were for rehabilitation and construction of secondary schools under three batches. What is the conclusion? Almost nothing is done.

Staff houses; you will read for yourself because these booklets are there. There are still issues to do with quality. In addition, whereas the Q4 Consolidated Progress Report noted that the Ministry of Education constructed staff houses in eight secondary schools, analysis of the annual work plan for project 0897 - development on secondary education - shows that no staff houses were planned for construction during the period under review. Analysis further shows construction of staff houses were planned under the World Bank Project 1091. 

This further proves that use of funds under this project to pay for construction of staff houses was simply a diversion of funds. Findings show that there are eight schools that did not receive any funds for construction of staff houses during the period under review and no staff houses were constructed. The Ministry of Education therefore misreported on five schools. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, if you look at secondary education, the same series goes –

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I will invite members to read that report. I think they have it. You know the contractors who work on the toilets want to start work and as long as you are here, they cannot start. Do you have any closing comments, honourable ministers? Okay, I put the question that the House do adopt the report as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)


THE SPEAKER: The House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 7.18 p.m. and adjourned to Wednesday, 13 March 2013 at 2.00 p.m.)



