Tuesday, 9 March 2010

Parliament met at 2.15 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting. But like I said the other day, time is running against us in respect of some key business that we have to handle before Parliament is prorogued sometime at the end of April or beginning of May this year. I would like to inform you that we have a number of key and important Bills that we have to handle if we are to have desired fair elections next year.
I know that a number of you are currently involved in making preparations for standing for elections in 2011. However, we should ensure we stand in an election when the foundation is well-laid. Therefore, I would like to appeal to you, hon. Members, to ensure you are in the House this month and next month to clear our table that has got very many Bills. Otherwise, I would like to thank you, honourable members who are here, for coming.

As you might have heard – and I know the Minister of Internal Affairs will be making an appropriate statement – yesterday there was a helicopter crash at Bugiri and among those involved was the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Prof. Apolo Nsibambi, his Permanent Secretary and other government officials. 

This morning, I went to visit him and the other people, including the pilot. I must say that there is hope that they are going to be out of danger. The Prime Minster was able to narrate to me what happened. He was humorous about his going, but that the visa had been cancelled –(Laughter)– I was there with the Chairperson of the Budget Committee. I think the doctors are doing their best. He may be discharged so that he goes home either today or tomorrow. Let us pray for him and all the others who were involved in that accident. 

Last week we had the issue of hon. Kabakumba’s appearance before the Public Accounts Committee, but as you know, we resolved that if there is any case against her, it goes to the Committee on Rules and Privileges. I have asked the Public Committee to draw the kind of reference, which the Committee on Rules and Privileges will use in their conduct before reporting to the House as required by our Rules of Procedure.

But I must say that the time we took this decision, the Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee was not here because he was attending to issues relating to the tragedy that occurred in Bududa. I recall talking about a letter that had been written by hon. Kabakumba to hon. Nandala-Mafabi, copies of which were given to me, the Deputy Speaker, the Prime Minister and the Government Chief Whip. 

Hon. Nandala was not here to make any comments about it, but he has since seen me and said yes, that was okay, though he insisted he never received that letter. The letter that was copied to me, was addressed to him in his personal name. I agreed to inform the House about the status of this matter as communicated to me by hon. Nandala-Mafabi and that is the position. I thought it was not necessary for him to make a personal statement. He insists that as of now, he has never received that letter.

On a sad note, I would like to inform you that one of our senior staff, Mrs Kaddu has lost her father, Rev. Canon Kigozi, who has been residing in Ntinda. He was aged 96. He was a prominent religious person in the country. I request that we observe a moment of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: As for the Order Paper, I would like to say we will adjust it a little by allowing the Minister of Finance to resubmit the supplementaries that were referred to him – I am told he has responded to the salient issues that had been queried. 

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS

2.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues. This is a statement in reference to the helicopter accident that occurred yesterday at Bugiri. As you maybe aware, among the passengers involved in the accident was our dear Prime Minister; he was coming from duty.

The Ministry of Internal Affairs wishes to inform Parliament that a Police helicopter registration No.5X MAC, AUGUSTA WESTLAND No.119, manufactured in USA, while coming from Lwakhaka to Kololo Airstrip, made an emergency landing at Bugiri yesterday, 8 March 2010 at about 3.30 p.m. after the pilot detected a malfunction. On board were: the Rt Hon. Prime Minister of Uganda, Prof. Apolo Nsibambi, the Permanent Secretary in the Office of the Prime Minister, three other government officials and a crew of two. All those on board were temporarily admitted in Bugiri Hospital for immediate medical check up after that mishap. They were later evacuated to Mulago National Referral Hospital for a thorough check.

Apart from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and the pilot, the rest were discharged last night. However, it is also reported that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is steadily improving. The only problem he had was the pain in the back; the spinal code was not affected. So, as you will hear from me later on, he is improving well enough.

This helicopter that is still new, having been acquired by the Uganda Police Air Wing in 2008, has been well maintained. The pilot is one of the most experienced helicopter pilots in the region with over 2300 flying hours of helicopters and with over 30 years of helicopter/plane experience.

The Uganda Aviation Authority, in accordance with the International Civil Aviation Organisation and the CAA regulations has taken over investigations into the cause of the accident. 

A technical team, whose findings will be handed over to the Minister of Works and Transport, is by law mandated to carry out the expert investigations.

Government assures the general public that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and all those involved in this accident are safe with their lives out of danger. A professional and expert team is soon embarking on an investigation and will issue a report on the findings, which Government will, at an appropriate time, make public. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Minister. Yes, hon. Ssekikubo.

2.56
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for delivering this timely statement to the House. It is my prayer and that of the People of Lwemiyaga and Sembabule at large that the Rt Hon. Prime Minster recovers as soon as possible so that he can assume his role in Parliament and other duties.

I rise to complement Government for the timely effort they took to evacuate the Prime Minister and indeed to ensure that all those who had been involved in the accident were checked thoroughly before they were discharged.

However, my concern is that as a country, we ought to set up such measures not only for the Prime Minister and the top echelon of this country, but also for many other ordinary Ugandans that more than often, are involved in such accidents.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to urge Government to expedite this report because the minister has told us this is a new helicopter. And if that is true, then we would wish to know what caused this accident. There are many other accidents; you remember there was one in which a plane that had been in the mapping of minerals exercise was involved, and there have been several others, but up to now we have not received any reports. Mine is to urge Government to always bring us reports when such issues arise, so that action can be taken. I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.

2.58
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Budadiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs – I think if it were about giving marks, you would get more than 100 percent for this good report and the quick action exhibited. This is information we usually need, to avoid relying on rumours.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to join you and honourable members to wish our Prime Minister and all those people involved in the accident, a quick recovery. 

I was also told that when the Vice-President of Kenya was about to take off, he also had a similar mishap – he could not reach our place – we in Bugisu, are waiting for him to come and see for himself the veracity of this tragedy.

However, my concern is about the fact that the Prime Minister had to be airlifted to Mulago Hospital because he is the Prime Minister, after being checked from Bugiri Hospital. How about those people who go to the same hospital, but cannot be airlifted? This clearly shows that our hospitals have a problem. I am saying this because had there to be equipment, the Prime Minister could have been treated from Bugiri Hospital – that was another cost to the Government of Uganda, yet all Ugandans are equal.

By way of information, when we went to Bududa Hospital with hon. Jack Wamai, the MP for Mbale Municipality, we got to realise that victims of the landslides had been in the hospital for the last five days without being taken for X-Rays; I hear because there were no films. 

And when we asked why, the authorities at the hospital said National Medical Stores did not give the films to them in November and December 2009. The same story happened in January 2010. But imagine a person with a broken hand or leg not accessing X-Ray services – the status of Bududa Hospital is very bad. But to leave the victims of the landslides, how about those who go to that hospital everyday?

I would like to say that our health services are in a bad state. We have a Minister of Health who studied from Bugisu and knows Mbale and Bududa hospitals, but is doing nothing about their bad situations. If he cannot do anything for Bududa and Mbale hospitals, how can you expect him to do anything for other places? Mr Speaker, I am pleading that we equip our hospitals. While we were there, we heard of another sad story of a pregnant woman who failed to deliver and had to go for surgery, but the doctors could not perform that operation because the generator did not have fuel. We were told that for fear of losing a person, the doctors had to use their money to secure diesel to run the generator in order to perform the operation. 

The medical superintendent said that the reason doctors fear to work in such hospitals is not about little salary, but that they do not want to see people die in their hands because they do not have equipment to help them. Mr Speaker, when you go there, I would like to request that you visit Bududa and Mbale Hospitals and see the conditions for yourself. If possible, visit some of the health centres in Budadiri so that you can gauge the situation. I am saying this because I come from there; maybe other areas are better. I thank you.

3.02
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This morning, I was at Mulago Hospital and had a chart with the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. He is well and making jokes; I think he will be discharged today.

My thanks should first go to God for saving the lives of those who were in that helicopter. It was by the Grace of God that no life was lost.

My concern is the promise that this matter will be investigated and a report made. I am saying this because more often than not, these promises have not been fulfilled. For example, there was a very serious motor accident on Kapchorwa-Mbale Road, which involved an army truck about two years ago. A statement was delivered on the Floor by the Minister of Defence that investigations would be carried out and a report availed to this House; we are still waiting for that report two years down the road. I hope the Minister of Internal Affairs will not emulate that example in this particular case.

I read in the papers this morning where the Medical Superintendent of Bugiri Hospital was reported to have said that he gave the people who were injured pain killers. Mr Speaker, this is very sad. Pain killers in a one-hundred bed hospital! What if these people had broken limps? 

Mr Speaker, the 23 hospitals that were built by the UPC Government in the 1960s – some of them were deliberately built on trunk roads, like Kiboga, Kiryandongo, Bugiri, to cater for accidents. But if accidents occur and you can only administer pain killers, it is very sad. I think the government should try to do better than that. 

Yesterday, I watched the Minister of Information informing the country about this accident, but she left me a bit confused. She said that these people were perfectly okay; they were healthy. She further added, “They are being transferred from Bugiri Hospital to Mulago Hospital for further check up.” People who are well! How do you transfer them from one hospital to another? You leave us wondering what kind of Government you are. (Laughter) Honestly, if I say I am going for a check up now, definitely something is wrong with me. You cannot say they are well, but they are being transferred to a bigger hospital for further check up. The statement was confusing to say the least. 

Lastly, let me thank Government for the speed at which this matter was handled. It was very unlike a Uganda Government operation. Maybe it was because the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister was involved. I wish they could do that with every citizen because life has the same value. They should do it to all of us; not only when big people are involved then you become active; but when it is ordinary people, nothing is forthcoming. I thank you.

3.07
MR YOWASI BWAMBALE (FDC, Bukonjo County East, Kasese): Thank you. I wish to add my voice to the rest of the Members who have spoken before me by thanking the minister for bringing this timely report. I also wish to extend my thanks to God for saving the Prime Minister’s life and also to thank Prof. Apolo Nsibambi as a person because he had this accident when he was on duty on a public holiday. He deserves thanks. 

I am a Member of the Internal Affairs Committee. I remember that in 2008 when we were budgeting for this helicopter, we insisted that a new helicopter be bought. I am getting a bit worried because this is the same helicopter, which a few months ago crash-landed because it had run short of fuel, and I think it was carrying a minister. So, I am wondering how a new helicopter could not have a fuel gauge for a pilot to know that it is running low on fuel. 

Mr Speaker, we have gone through some funny experiences in this country. In the early 1980s, some military vehicles were procured (Mr Matia Kasaija rose_) Mr Speaker, I think he will reply. In the early 1980s, some Lorries were procured for the army; they were called, IFA. By the time they were off the road, they had been called, “Imported For Accidents” because they were all junk. Then we had the experience of the junk helicopters. 

So, as investigations take place, I wish some deeper investigations could take place to find out whether this helicopter was actually new; because these suppliers and the local procurement officers have funny dealings. They could have duped us with an old helicopter and we think we bought a new helicopter. An aircraft can have a lifespan of as long as 20 years. A helicopter that is hardly two years old cannot develop a mechanical problem like that. And it cannot just run short of fuel and the pilot cannot even know that he is running short of fuel. So, Mr Speaker, I want a thorough investigation especially on how new that helicopter was. I thank you.

3.10
MR SAMUEL ABURA (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and Members. For sure, this is a miracle accident where all people who were on board survived. Furthermore, it is very encouraging that the government is now taking the initiative to investigate what caused this accident. 

One of the things that most of us are complaining about, or that we doubt, is the shopping. Who are these people who go shopping for these helicopters and from which firm? Are they technical people? Are they pilots? Or is somebody just given a tender to go and shop? This is very dangerous. Anything to do with technical transport should involve people who know better because the rampant helicopter accidents in this country are very alarming. 

With regard to the recent accident which has caused harm and damage to the people in Mbale, why should we always make anything that happens upcountry - instead of taking a medical expert to the scene - why do we make transfers to a main hospital? I think we have many referral hospitals now. What is the status of a referral hospital upcountry and in Mulago? That is one aspect we should improve. When we say a hospital is a referral, it should have all the appliances and instruments that are needed in a main hospital. This is the issue that we are all crying for, a hospital that is well equipped.

However, it is very kind of the Lord for having spared the lives of these people, although they have some injuries on their bodies. We hope that they will recover soon. 

Mr Speaker, the buying of helicopters and aircrafts in Uganda needs pilots - the people who have been trained in that sector - to do the shopping. Thank you very much.

3.13
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Today I accompanied you to Mulago Hospital and we were able to talk to the Prime Minister. As usual, he was in his jovial mood and he was able to crack some jokes for us. He even said that by today or tomorrow morning, he would be out of hospital. 

I also want to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs for the quick statement he has put before Parliament on account of this accident. 

I have one concern on this issue and that is the status of insurance of government assets and in particular this helicopter that was involved in the accident. It is important to know whether we are up to date with the insurance of this helicopter, in accordance with the International Civil Aviation Organisation requirements because it has particular repercussions in terms of whether we shall get a replacement or whether they will be able to repair it. If not, then the impact on our meagre budget will definitely be substantial. So, it is important that we get to know whether this particular asset of Government was insured and if not, then this should be an eye-opener to all of us, especially with regard to Government assets.  There is need to insure government assets because when such an incident occurs, to salvage such an asset and get a replacement will be easier. Thank you.

3.16
MS ROSE MUNYIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to thank God for having saved the life of our Prime Minister and the lives of those on board. 

My concern is to do with how police are managing their vehicles and this time round the helicopter. Because much of the time, you find that either the vehicles are not serviced – one time in my district, gunmen shot the chairman LC III; that was at the time theft was rampant in Busia. While looking for police help, they confided in me that normally they get second hand tyres of district vehicles that are being thrown away. So, it looks like there is a problem with servicing of vehicles and helicopters. I do not know whether it is a problem with the budget shortfalls but police perpetually does not have fuel; they do not have tyres for their vehicles and this is a very big problem that needs to be addressed otherwise we shall continue having these issues. 

Turning to the matter of health facilities, I am just putting myself in a situation where maybe I have had a motor accident or a motorbike has knocked me and I am lying in Bugiri Hospital. And I am in critical condition and I have not been attended to and other people, fellow Ugandans, are airlifted and taken to Mulago Hospital. 

I have been to my constituency many times and the people are always complaining about the health facilities and lack of medicine. Last weekend, I was in Busia; in one sub-county I was told that two health centre IIs had been closed for lack of drugs, and the health workers were never there. My uncle, this is not really personal but it is work - we need to do something –(Interruption) 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I stand to give my colleague – by the way she is supposed to be my MP when she decides to do so. I want to thank God, before I give her the information, for the life of our Prime Minister and the team. God is great and it should help us to reflect on our lives. I want to give hon. Rose Munyira information that the situation in health centres with regard to shortage of drugs is in the entire Eastern Uganda but Dr Mallinga may not be aware of this. What worries me is that most of the health centres in Eastern Uganda have run short of ARVs and now medical personnel are being forced to put some patients on a different version of ARVs. 

I sent a message to the National Medical Stores and they told me that they were distributing drugs in Northern Uganda. I told hon. Kakooza, after consulting with Dr Mallinga on the matter, and he told me that National Medical Stores has emergency trucks. I told Moses, who is the Director National Medical Stores, that this is a matter of emergency and that he should not wait to finish with distributing drugs in northern Uganda before he starts in the east while we have patients who are supposed to be on routine treatment. Therefore, if you talk of Busia, the problem is also in Tororo and other places. Thank you, 

MS MUNYIRA: Thank you, hon. Ekanya. As I wind up, what I want to say is that when you are talking to people out there, you realise that people do not have money and many Ugandans are just surviving by chance; they do not have any drugs or anything for their health. I do not know whether we really think about this. But it is very serious. There are no drugs and people are helpless. We really need to address this problem. I have already addressed it to hon. Kakooza.

THE SPEAKER: Let us get only one more contribution and then the Ministers of Health and Internal Affairs come in.

3.21
MR COSMAS BUSIMA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also join my colleagues to wish the Prime Minister a quick recovery. 

I would like to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs for his report on the accident. Let me hope that he is going to use this opportunity to investigate other accidents, which are occurring in the country. 

We have a number of people who are dying on our roads. In fact, so many people are dying on the northern corridor, from Malaba, Busia, up to Katuna. I do not know whether there is also an inquiry into that. Let me pray that he uses this opportunity to find out why these accidents are rampant on our roads. 

Recently, I was travelling from Jinja to Kampala and there were four vehicles that had had accidents; they had overturned at Mabira Forest. So, there must be an answer to that.

One area that is the minister’s weakest point is that vehicles do not have illuminators, which are required to be put especially on the trucks. We have just discussed this with the Minister of Transport but the onus of implementing that regulation lies with the minister. Recently, there was a truck which got stuck near Lugogo for four days! This is against traffic regulations. 

On the issue of drugs, we have raised this issue up to the highest level. We have talked about lack of drugs. Does it mean that this problem has become so tough, so difficult to solve? How come all over the county we are crying about the lack of drugs? What is wrong? Which is this animal that is consuming all these drugs? An answer has to be found because at this rate, how do we say there are no drugs? Why put up health centres if there are no drugs? There must be someone who is consuming these drugs and we need answers from the responsible minister. 

Lastly, recently we had an accident at Kigunga. A fuel tanker overturned and thank God it happened near Kampala. So, a rescue team came from the fire brigade in Kampala and crossed the Nile all the way to the border. We do not have a functional fire engine. If we can raise money to host some guests under CHOGM and spend so many billions, why can’t we raise some money to buy fire engines which we can put at Bugiri, Iganga or wherever there is a police station so that they can respond very quickly to accidents? 

I went to Lugazi to report the accident and I found just one Police vehicle dashing to rescue a petrol tank, without even a fire engine. What sort of rescue is that? We are in trouble and we need some action from the government. Otherwise, at this rate, we are going to lose so many people on the road.
 
MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, thank you very much and I wish to thank my colleague, hon. Busima, for giving way. When I was growing up, every town in this country under the Ministry of Internal Affairs had a fire engine. What this meant is that if a fire broke out in Kumi town, you would not need to go to Mbale to secure a fire fighting vehicle. Today as we are aware, you have to go and call a fire engine and by the time it arrives, the fire would have probably gone out. So, that is the information I wanted to give you. There is no deliberate attempt by the Government of Uganda – the NRM Government - that has been in power for 24 years now, to improve this situation. 

3.26
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank God for sparing the lives of all the people who were involved in the accident. I have been to Mulago today and I was assured by the medical director that all those who were involved in that accident are going to recover well. The Prime Minister is doing well; his permanent secretary has been discharged and several other people have been discharged. In fact, most of the people who were involved in that accident have been discharged and the Prime Minister is likely to be discharged soon. 

I would like to beg the honourable members of Parliament not to use inflammatory language. All of us are capable of using the same language but some of us were brought up not to do so. 

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi says I am doing nothing and he mentioned Mbale Hospital and Bududa Hospital. Bududa Hospital has just been fully rehabilitated by this government. It has a completely new x-ray unit, one of the few new x-ray units in this country. Bududa Hospital is a decentralised hospital. That means that the district recruits the staff and the district takes care of the hospital but Nandala-Mafabi is more interested in politicising almost everything. To him, everything is political and I do not know how many Members of Parliament in here he has insulted and got away with it. I really beg that the next time this hon. Member of Parliament uses such language, he should be referred to the disciplinary committee so that his language can improve.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I rarely raise a point of order to hon. Mallinga. It is true that JICA, and not the Government of Uganda, came and did renovation of painting Bududa Hospital on some parts. We went to the hospital and found sick people with broken arms who had not been x-rayed for five days. Now a minister has come to say that there is a new machine. What is the purpose of the new machine? Is it just a white elephant? Is the Minister of Health, hon. Mallinga, in order to come and lie that Bududa Hospital is operating yet victims of the landslides had been there for five days and were not x-rayed because there were no films?

THE SPEAKER: Well, as I see, the basis of your point of order would require investigations of the facts. It would require me to verify these facts because I do not know the facts on the ground. But then the language you used of lying is not parliamentary. I think what you could have said is “inaccurate facts” that is the decent way of communicating what you want. 

DR MALLINGA: I thank you, for your judgement. Mr Speaker, this hon. Member of Parliament - (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am privileged that I was in this Parliament in the Seventh Parliament and exactly the same language the hon. Minister is describing is the same language he used while on that bench. Is it a change of language? Is it a transformation? Certainly it cannot be strange to him.

DR MALLINGA: When that hon. Member of Parliament (Ssekikubo) came here, he was very young and I do not think he remembers the language I used to use.

To go back to the hon. Member of Parliament from Budadiri, we have to try and be rational, as I said Bududa Hospital was rehabilitated by Uganda Government and they have a new X-ray, they have a new ultrasound. It is one of the busiest general hospitals in this country. I think it has the highest number of deliveries per month and it is Government of Uganda which is taking on all this.

There has got to be responsibility from people who are running the hospital; we are not going to go there and order for X-ray films for them. There is a weakness and there is confusion in the leadership especially - I will not mention.

My honourable friend, Okello-Okello, referrals among hospitals is normal and that is how they are built; there is health centre III, if they cannot handle a case, they refer to health centre IV because that is supposed to have doctors. Health Centre IV if they cannot handle a case, they refer to a general hospital or a district hospital. If a district hospital cannot handle, they refer to regional referral hospital where there are specialists. If at a regional referral hospital they cannot handle a case, they refer to the national referral hospital which is Mulago.

With accidents, some of the equipment to investigate is down there. Bugiri is a general hospital, they might have an X-ray machine but is there somebody to interpret that X-ray because X-ray is a speciality, and radiology is a speciality in case some of the Members did not know especially with injuries to the back or the spine. It needs somebody to interpret injuries to the back and there is no radiologist at Bugiri, there are radiologists at Mulago.

The Prime Minister is a very important person in this country; he has to be taken care of at the highest level possible in the country because there are quite a number of repercussions if he is not taken care of properly. If the Prime Minister had been evacuated alone leaving behind people injured in the same accident, there would have been a question but all of them were evacuated and transferred to the highest hospital in the country.

Pain killers; when somebody has been in an accident and complains of a lot of pain, he has got to be helped. The first line of treatment before even the investigation is to reduce pain and that is a normal thing, ask any doctor.

Hon. Abura was concerned about the same thing of transfers, they are normal. You seek the level of treatment that is appropriate. The levels of treatment differ from one level to another. I have said it is normal to transfer patients to different levels of care.

Drugs; I wish I could have a parliamentary inquiry into the issue of drugs in the country because we have discovered of late that there are drugs at National Medical Stores but the failure to –

THE SPEAKER: We are dragging a lot on this subject; we want to clear other matters. It is high time we concluded this subject.

DR MALLINGA: Let me conclude. We have drugs at National Medical Stores. We have discovered of late that the districts have not ordered for drugs. They are lazy.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think the statement which you have heard from Members and in the media is about drugs in the units not in the drug store because people do not know what the drug store is, they know what is in the hospitals and health centres.

DR MALLINGA: That is why I wanted Parliament to investigate this. They will conclude just as we have been going around the hospitals - you go there and if there a shortage of drugs, you come to the National Medical Stores and ask why they are not sending out drugs. They say nobody orders from the district; so I would beg that we have an inquiry on this. What we have decided, there is what we call essential drugs, and we decided at last month’s meeting that essential drugs will be sent to all health centres whether they have ordered or they have not ordered. So, that is going to take effect but in the meantime, I think there is need for very serious inquiry as to why districts are not ordering for drugs and then the Ministry of Health is blamed for it.

3.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Matia Kasaija): Hon. Okello-Okello, I want to assure you and this House that the report is going to be timely. We shall ensure that the officers or the personnel that are supposed to do it actually do it. By the way, we have even informed the manufacturer, we have informed the agency in South Africa who sold us this helicopter and in two to three days they should be here to carry out the investigation. So, we shall definitely produce the report in time. 

I do not want to venture into matters of health but my colleague, the Minister of Health, has left out one thing. The transfer of victims, although they were in good health, is good. I have been involved in accidents but you may at times never be able to know the full effect of an accident until after some time because you may be feeling very well at the beginning only for the full effects to tell on you later. I think the transfer of these victims, although they looked and sounded healthy, is a normal medical practice because you can never know whether you are injured or not until some time later on – but that is for the Minister of Health to talk about. 

Now hon. Bihande Bwambale, this thing of crash landing in Arua District is totally false – there was no crash landing in Arua. I hope there is a reporter from the Daily Monitor because I do not know why they had to do it that way. We took off from Kololo headed for Adjumani and Moyo – the pilot said the fuel that would take us from Kololo to Adjumani and back would not be sufficient and advised that we pass via Arua to refuel and continue on the trip because by the time we leave Adjumani, it would be too late. These helicopters are not allowed to fly very late in the night. But the Daily Monitor through their – I do not know what type of wisdom - but they went and said there was a crash landing and yet there was never a crash landing at all as I was in the helicopter myself. It was a normal trip and we knew it from the hour we left Kololo that we had to go via Arua to pick fuel and why they said it crash landed, I just do not know. I hope the Daily Monitor can clearly correct this one this time. 

About the newness of the helicopter; the helicopter is absolutely new and not second hand. You remember hon. Members that there was a proposal that we refurbish the old one but then through the wisdom of this House and the Committee on Internal Affairs and Defence, we changed the whole arrangement and acquired a new helicopter and the other was traded in. This helicopter is therefore absolutely new as it was obtained in 2008. But as I said, the report will bring out the facts.

On insurance of the helicopter, I do not want to speculate on this but I want to tell you that the helicopter is fully insured and you will see this when it comes through the report.

About the accidents on roads, I think we should make an inquiry into this. Hon. Members, I have come before this House, as has the works minister and we have told you that 85 percent of the accidents on our roads are caused by the human factor – over speeding, not observing traffic laws, driving under the influence of alcohol and so forth. The Police are doing their utmost best but we Ugandans must also ensure that we have discipline among ourselves. 

I prefer to leave the issue of reflectors for the works minister but every vehicle in Uganda should have functioning reflectors at the back of their vehicles.

I was not aware about the truck that has been stuck at Lugogo for a long time. I want to assure this House that immediately I leave here, I am going to order the Police to tow it away if it is still there because that is definitely a hazard if at all it is still on the road –(Interjections)- I was not aware but they will tow it away.

I suggest that I come back before this House with a full statement and to tell you our plan of acquiring the fire engines in strategic towns where we can be able to go and fight fires should they break out. Our only – 

THE SPEAKER: I want to remind you that this has been an issue before. This issue came up and the government was asked to look into it around the time of the Budo fire some two years ago – this has again resurfaced and it appears therefore that nothing has been done because his complaint was that when you want a fire engine, you have to order one from Masaka to go to Jinja. I think that was the concern.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: I thank you. I will still beg for the indulgence of this House because we are not seated down. We are planning and I do not want to give a half baked report. I want to assure you that there is action being taken - especially if he is to approve our supplementary budget for acquiring new fire engines to be distributed around the country. I beg that I come back before this House in about two weeks time to give a full account of what is on, what is being done and how we intend to do it. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I also want to inform you that in the gallery we have pupils of the Debating and Writers Club of Crown High School Nabweru. You are welcome.  (Applause) We also have people from Seeta, Namuganga sub-county who have come to observe how we perform our work. You are welcome. (Applause) They are represented by hon. Mugambe. 

There is another notice that I should have read and do not know whether to read it at the end - but since I may forget I will read it now: “All members of Parliament are informed that Nile Breweries Limited has organised a social interactive evening with Members of Parliament tomorrow, 10th March at 6.00 p.m.” Please note this in your diaries. (Laughter) 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): On 10 February 2010, I presented to this Parliament Supplementary Schedule I and on the 24th I presented an addendum which made Members of Parliament request that we resubmit the Schedule I and on February 25 I did – 

THE SPEAKER: The Order Paper was adjusted to allow the minister to present on Table concerning Supplementaries.

MR OMACH: The Chairperson of the Budget Committee of this Parliament did write returning Supplementary Schedule I and I now have the honour to resubmit Supplementary Schedule I for this financial year. It has taken into consideration all the observations that were given by this Parliament and it is my prayer that this Parliament do handle this expeditiously as a number of the issues raised in this Supplementary Schedule I are very critical and of emergency nature. I beg to lay the paper on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Let the relevant committee consider the documents and give us a report on Tuesday. 

MR ODUMAN: I am seeking clarification from the honourable minister regarding the events in Bududa and our readiness to handle them. Sometime back we passed regulations for the Contingency Fund. We decided that Shs 2 billion would be set aside for emergency purposes. That time, about two years ago, it was agreed that the minister would come up with a supplementary budget that would go into that account to be on standby for emergencies. It was supposed to operate like a revolving fund. I do not know whether that fund is in place. If not, what has the minister done since that time to bring a request here of a supplementary budget so that we can regularise the Contingency Fund? 

The way the preparedness and response of Government was portrayed in the papers was not good; that we are providing Shs 200 million; we are providing Shs 400 million. We passed regulations for establishment of a fund of Shs 2 billion. If it is not there, Mr Minister, is it here now? We need to do something about that Fund. I thank you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I need further clarification. First, there was a problem with the first submission, now it has been amended. On page 22 of the document they have given us, on the last line; I can see dashes after the first figure. Are those dashes the supplementaries? 

We always pass a budget. The budget is based on activities we have agreed upon. Now we are passing this supplementary budget; is this supplementary adjusting the activities we agreed upon or these are new activities? When you look through this document, it is not clearly-stated. They are saying additional resources; but what activities are we adjusting? Are you telling us that the original activities have not been affected? If they have not been affected, how far have you gone with implementing them? There could be some redundant unutilised resources. 

THE SPEAKER: No, but why don’t you leave this to go to the committee; they scrutinise it and then come back and debate? Maybe what you are asking will be found out there rather than asking these questions when actually – take your time, study and then you may not need to ask the questions. The document has been committed to the committee to consider.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure; I am not discussing the content of the document. 

As you are aware, we had Supplementary Schedule I. What the House rejected last time was Addendum I -(Interjections)- I am a member of the budget committee and I was here in this House. While the committee was discussing Schedule I, we referred the matter back to Government without bringing it back to the House. I thought what is procedurally correct is that the minister should have withdrawn Supplementary Schedule I because it was Addendum I that the House rejected. Are we going to consider this Schedule I on top of the other Schedule I, which is still before the committee? (Interjections) No, the committee does not have power to refer it back. We only suspended discussing it because the House deferred Addendum I and the committee does not have - we only wanted consultation. I was in the meeting and my signature is there. It would be prudent for the minister to withdraw Supplementary Schedule I and present a fresh schedule.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true hon. Ekanya is a member of our committee. The committee took a decision based on what transpired here when the minister submitted an addendum to Supplementary Schedule I.

In our wisdom as the committee, we decided that the minister prepares a comprehensive Schedule I taking into account the issues that were raised by members of Parliament when the minister presented Addendum I. In effect, the committee referred back everything to the minister. So, procedurally, I don’t know whether that means the initial Schedule one has to be formally withdrawn. What we did as a committee was to request the minister to prepare a comprehensive schedule. That means Schedule I, which was presented to the committee, has no effect until we receive a comprehensive one.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there are common terms like corrigenda. Corrigenda are meant to correct something that had a mistake; what they do is to add what they call corrigenda. With addendum, you add on what was originally given. When it is added, it becomes part and parcel of what was given. Therefore, when you reject, there is an opportunity to incorporate the addendum and it becomes a single document. Let the committee consider this and let us know. 

Addendum means I am adding to what I had originally given you. Therefore when you are allowed to take back, you can incorporate so that there is no wrong in addendum and it becomes a single document.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 102/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF HEALTH
  
3.58
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): “Would the minister explain to the House the practical strategies that Government has put in place to reduce maternal mortality to attain MDG No.5 by the year 2015?”  

THE SPEAKER: Are you representing hon. Rwakimari?

MS AKOL: I am representing her.

3.59
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Mr Speaker, hon. members of Parliament will recall that in September 2000 at the Millennium Summit in New York, Heads of State and governments of 191 nations adopted what is called The Millennium Declaration that outlines peace, security and mainstreaming of a set of interconnected development goals into a global agenda collectively code-named “Millennium Development Goals” and in brief, MDGs. The MDG committed to, one, reduce poverty and hunger and to achieve – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, without trying to interrupt you, recently we had the Commonwealth Speaker’s Conference in New Delhi and one of the issues discussed was questions in the House. Actually, the point was how you answer 30 questions in ten minutes. This was the subject and the resource person was the Speaker of Parliament of New Zealand. He told us that in ten minutes, you can answer 30 questions. 

In our Rules of Procedure, a question should be answered within three minutes. And when I look at this, which you had started using to answer the question, I think we might spend the whole day listening to this, yet there are even supplementary questions to be answered. I would insist that we adhere to the rules and that for such a question you find a way to answer it in three minutes so that if you are not able, I can add you just two more minutes. It was a topic for all the Commonwealth Speakers. 

This is a ministerial statement. So, I will give you time on Thursday to answer the question in accordance with the rules. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE ECONOMY FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2008/2009

THE SPEAKER: Last time, this matter came up and the Minister of Finance had to make a statement. Is he ready? You tell us and be on record.

4.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Ministry of Finance is not yet ready with the response to the shadow minister’s submission –(Interjections)– it wasn’t tough, it was soft. 

THE SPEAKER: But why aren’t you ready?

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, the hon. Minister who handled the affairs on that day is not around and she is to bring that report shortly. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think want is happening should be a matter of great concern. Right now, we have about 40 questions unanswered, because the ministers are either not ready or not available. This statement was promised last week and it is programmed for today, but for the hon. Minister to come and say, “We are not ready because the other minister who was here then is not here today.” Government is not run by individual ministers. Where you have more than one minister in a ministry, they should work collectively so that even if one is not here, the ministry should not be brought to a standstill. Government does not depend on individuals. I think Parliament should reject that excuse because it is not good enough. 

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I think you really need to take stern action on the Frontbench on the Government side. You may recall that it was at the request of Government that permission was given to the relevant ministry to come with a statement to this House. Actually, if I remember well, it was hon. Kabakumba Masiko who stood up and said, “Look, we need to respond to the response of the shadow minister of finance”.

Today, I am shocked that it is the same Frontbench that is saying they are not ready and therefore wasting Parliament’s time. We came today, ready to debate the committee report and we are being held back because of the clumsiness of Government. I think this inefficiency should not be rewarded by allowing extension of time to the relevant ministry. In fact caution should be given or some punitive measure should be brought against the Frontbench for failing and wasting Parliament’s time.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, recently I was in some office and I was shown a letter written by His Excellency the President. The letter was bashing you and us the MPs that there are about eight important Bills, which the business people in this country need, but we are not passing them. It said that the committees of Parliament sit, get money and do not produce reports. 

I was disturbed – I found these people discussing you and us the MPs – they said, “You say the President is not amused by the way you conduct business”. Therefore, I know, Mr Speaker, that you are a diplomat and a senior citizen so you decided to keep quiet on this matter. But this matter is not only injuring your reputation which you have built for so many years, but even for some of us who are building a reputation, because they are saying, “All of Parliament and the Speaker”. 

Therefore, I call upon you, Mr Speaker, to stick to the rules so that ministers, chairpersons and members who do not comply are disciplined, so that the rest of us have our reputation protected for our children and for posterity. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This report is a report on National Economy and the issue being talked about is economic growth. We come from undeveloped areas and we had wanted the Minister of Finance to show us where the economic growth he talks about is. And since he cannot talk about it, it means he has conceded to the report of the committee and the report of the shadow minister. 

This business of throwing balls up and down; the people are buying time, they know that Parliament will not be sitting in June. This report of National Economy is a very important report to us and the response to the shadow minister is very important. 

Therefore, we, as Parliament should debate our two reports and adopt them and then deal with these people by way of disciplinary action. We have been telling the President that, “You have a problem – this Frontbench is just sleeping” and they say that I am just abusing them. If you cannot produce results, then want are you doing? Why don’t you go home? If I say that you are doing nothing, you say that I am wrong – all of these ones are just sleeping, too old, too tired. (Laughter) 

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence as the Chairperson of the Committee of National Economy, we did present this report last year in November and the shadow minister requested to make an intervention. I seek your indulgence, that if it is possible, this being a committee report, Members should be allowed to debate the report and then the minister’s report at the end. I thought that would be the right procedure. I seek your indulgence.

4.11
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Albert Oduman): Mr Speaker, I would like to agree with the chairperson of the committee and other members. What we were responding to was part of our contribution as part of the normal debate following a report of a committee of Parliament. 

The minister specifically requested for an opportunity to prepare to contribute to the debate. This House was very understanding and said, “When can you be ready?” and we said Tuesday. Today is Tuesday. On the business to follow on the Order Paper, there is yet another report by the committee for the first quarter of the current year. This particular item is becoming stale on the Order Paper and we are going to be looked at as an ineffective House in terms of discharging business as hon. Ekanya has said. 

This is something that we should put behind us. The report was made and our contribution was to support and agree with the recommendations of the Committee on National Economy; we reinforced them with evidence. Also, because issues of evidence and statistics arose from that contribution, we have come again ready to issue the members additional information we got. That information is here ready to be circulated for members’ attention. It is just to back up what we presented in the form of statistics. I also want to agree that we should debate this, get it off the Order Paper and we deal with new business. I thank you.

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, I think we need more guidance to debate this because we have a committee report and a shadow minister’s statement. I thought the shadow minister should respond to a ministerial statement not a committee report. He now puts us in jeopardy once we start discussing the two; he wants us to start defending a given position whereas as Parliament -(Interjections)- this committee report is both for Government and the Opposition. He is putting us in a position where we have to defend a certain position whereas we should debate it as a Parliament. 

I wish to suggest that the report of the shadow minister be withdrawn and it comes at an appropriate time -(Interjections)- Yes! There are members of the Opposition on the Committee of National Economy; how many positions shall we have as MPs? That is my humble request. Otherwise, it is not good to debate this shadow minister’s report before the minister responds to it. Thank you.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am concerned about the contribution of the honourable member who has just sat down. I would like to observe that those stages that he wants to takes us through are where we came from. Actually, decisions were taken here and the shadow minister was allowed to read his full report in the full view of the Speaker. After that, Government rose and said, “We would like to respond.” They volunteered to do it, they were not forced. Actually, there was even resistance in the House whether it was the right thing for the government to respond to a response of the shadow minister. I think hon. Mugambe seeks to take us backwards. 

I would like to propose that the minister actually tells us whether or not this response is going to come and we proceed. Otherwise, we are wasting the time of the House.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, what is your reaction? When are we getting the statement?

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, Thursday this week, and the request by the chairman of the Committee on National Economy is accepted.

THE SPEAKER: Is the chairman of the Rules Committee here? Chairman, I think it is almost a year since you were tasked to look into the rules as to how committees with members of the Opposition and Government side should conduct business. Have you worked out the rules?

MR NYOMBI: Mr Speaker, I think it is not one year; it is about six months ago. We are planning a retreat where we are going to discuss all these rules because we did request the –

THE SPEAKER: I am asking this because what should happen is that if there is a subject like discussing the economy of a country, it should be transacted by both sides in the committee rather than the committee making a report then you have a rejoinder outside the report of the committee. That is why you were tasked to look into this and advise us. 

In the view that this has not been cleared by the rules committee, we have two reports - we have the report of the committee and a statement by the Shadow Minister of Finance. We have been waiting for a statement by the Minister of Finance but it has not come. If you do not come with the statement on Thursday, we shall proceed without hearing you. We shall definitely conclude considering the report of the committee.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE EMOLUMENTS OF THE PRESIDENT, VICE-PRESIDENT AND PRIME MINISTER BILL, 2009

4.19
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would request that we postpone consideration of this Bill because there is a small area for consultation. We shall be ready at the earliest opportunity. This is about -

THE SPEAKER: You are not ready? So, what is the earliest opportunity? The opportunity is here.

MR KAJURA: No, I am talking about the future. It is because we are trying to incorporate suggestions which had been made on the Floor of the House and it requires one consultation.

THE SPEAKER: One week?

MR KAJURA: Yes, we shall be ready. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last week this matter was adjourned for one reason and one reason alone - the minister rose to say that she had a bad flu and that she should be given time up to today. Otherwise, all matters had been taken care of and it was just that flu. Now it is surprising that a senior minister in the same ministry comes with a new issue and says that some matters are still pending. We were supposed to debate this last week and not this week but we were not told that matters were still pending. Mr Speaker, this takes us back to what we have just said a few minutes ago.

THE SPEAKER: A pain killer would have cured -(Laughter)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Yes. I think, Mr Speaker, flu is not a disease. It is not a sickness -(Interjections)– with flu, you just drink juice and it goes. (Laughter) It is not a disease. 

The point I would like to emphasise is what has already been said previously. It seems the Frontbench on the government side is taking this Parliament for granted. If we sit and follow what they want, we are abusing the taxpayer’s money. I think this Parliament can do better than that. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, as I said at the beginning of this sitting, we have little time and yet we have a lot of business on our table which we should clear before the end of the current session. The current session is likely to end at the end of April or early May so that we can have a break and start another session in June. If we waste the time which we have, we may not clear as much work as we should. So, some kind of seriousness should be displayed in this matter so that we do not waste our time by coming and adjourning. That is the concern that is being expressed by the members.  

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think we have reached the moment when this Parliament should decide what we should do in a situation where the Executive fails Parliament. In this situation we are now helpless and we cannot move forward. We have done our part and the Executive has continued to frustrate us. This afternoon we have dealt with nothing but the frustration brought upon this House by the Executive. So, I think we need to decide; what do we do in the event of the Executive failing to perform? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This Bill came last year and we dealt with it last year. We should have passed it last year. It is true the lady minister came and told us that they were going to rectify this issue and we were happy that they were going to. At that time they asked for a week. That week flew and we asked for — 

If we have done our part, we should assume that for us today we do not want to see this Bill on the Order Paper again. We should go to another item because the moment we put the same Bill on the Order Paper or some work which we should have dealt with, it will be very dangerous for us. The President is blaming us and the public is blaming us. If you cost how much money we are going to be paid for having sat here and not done work, it would be very dangerous. We should surcharge these ministers for the loss of the money today because if we do not surcharge them, they will not know the implications. The public is paying us and the Second Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister for Public Service comes and tells us, “One week.” He tells people, “You should keep time; you should observe this”, and you come and tell us this! This is a person who should have been sacked by yesterday. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.26
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Mr Gerald Menhya): Mr Speaker and colleagues, when this Bill was presented in July last year we stood over four areas and these are: 

1. 	Whether the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Parliament should be included in the Bill to benefit from the emoluments and benefits that were highlighted in this Bill.

2. 	Whether we should provide a house for His Excellency the President upon retirement. I want to tell this House that the committee reconsidered this position. It is vital and it is a practice the world over that presidents are provided with houses on retirement. So, this was an area which was considered and the minister was supposed to come here and simply agree with the principle after the committee revisited that area. 

3. 	Whether Mr Moses Kigongo played the role of a Speaker or Deputy Speaker or Vice-President during the term of his service to this country and therefore whether he should be considered for the emoluments and benefits as stipulated in this Bill or not.

4. 	Whether we should consider past leaders since 1995 or we consider past leaders since 1962. 

Those were the areas that we stood over and we are waiting for the minister to come and –(Interjections)- I cannot proceed because I am not a minister. 

Mr Speaker, I thought I should make this clarification. The Rt Hon. Premier will come and substantiate on these issues at an appropriate time. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: What we should do, honourable minister, is to give you one day and that is tomorrow. On Thursday, you should come and give us a statement on the issues which the chairperson has raised and then we shall see how to proceed. 

As we were adjourning last week we had the issue of Bills which hon. Lukwago wanted to present on a report. We have to look at this before we end the session, that is, next month. I do not know whether members who are interested in what hon. Lukwago was presenting presented themselves to the committee of hon. Tashobya.  

MR KIBANZANGA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. Today the Inter-party Organisation for Dialogue (IPOD) presented their views to the committee. Tomorrow, IPC is going to present its views to hon. Tashobya’s committee. So the process is going on and we once again thank you for your lenience.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, now that is settled.  Hon. Tashobya, we want you to bring the report on ICC. 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I largely agree with what the honourable Leader of the Opposition has said but I wanted to say that last week you directed that we receive the proposals from hon. Lukwago for two days, with effect from today. However, hon. Lukwago rang me yesterday to say that he was travelling for a burial in Arua and asked to reschedule his meeting for tomorrow. So, we agreed that we could have IPOD as hon. Kibanzanga has said. However, somehow hon. Lukwago appeared in the committee today and said that he would be around tomorrow. So we are waiting to listen to him tomorrow. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. When he mentions Arua, I get reminded to inform you that hon. Kassiano Wadri lost his father over the weekend and the burial is either tomorrow or has been today. I am sorry I forgot but I should have informed you. Let us observe a minute of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.) 

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Tashobya, we have also been having this ICC Bill with us for a very long time; could you brief us on the position because we also want to clear it.  

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The ICC Bill has been with this Parliament since 2006 and I am happy to report that the committee has considered the Bill and the report is ready. We are ready to present it before this House. 

THE SPEAKER: It should be included on the Order Paper for tomorrow. (Laughter) Hon. Members, I told you about the invitation we received from Nile Breweries for tomorrow; should I repeat it?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: All Members of Parliament are informed that Nile Breweries Ltd has organised a social interactive evening with Members of Parliament tomorrow, 10th March in the Parliamentary Gardens at 6.00 p.m. So, come prepared to get together. With this we come to the end of today’s business. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 4.32 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 10 March 2010 at 2.00 p.m.) 

