

Monday, 16 March 2020

Parliament met at 10.18 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting, which I hope will not last more than 20 minutes because it has been called under Section 34 of the Interpretation Act to permit Government fulfil obligations under Section 13(3) of the Public Finance Management Act. That is because 15th March fell on a Sunday; therefore, we had to move the process to this morning. Therefore, it is very limited.

However, before we proceed, I just want to announce the sad news of the death of hon. D’Ujanga’s son. He lost him, I think, yesterday morning. They are in church now but, of course, because we are here, we are not able to join him. I would like to ask you to stand up for a minute of silence. 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is an advisory from the Ministry of Health but I think I will read it tomorrow when more Members are here. Let us go to item 3.

LAYING OF PAPERS

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

10.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Hellen Adoa): Madam Speaker and colleagues, I beg to lay the Policy Statement from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; Votes 010, 121, 122, 125, 142, 152, 155, 160, 501-850 for the Financial Year 2020/2021.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Ministry of Education and Sports.

MINISTRY OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

10.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Hamson Obua): Madam Speaker and honourable members, in compliance with Rule 145(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and Section 34(1)(b) of the Interpretation Act, I beg to lay on Table the Ministerial Policy Statement of the Ministry of Education and Sports; Vote 013 for the Financial Year 2020/2021. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, pursuant to Section 13(15)(g) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I also beg to lay the Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance for the Financial Year 2020/2021 accompanying the Ministerial Policy Statement of the Ministry of Education and Sports. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister.

MINISTRY OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT

10.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Madam Speaker, first, I would like to apologise. We should have been ready with this last week. However, we had some adjustments that were made to the financing and that caused the delay in the printing.

I beg to lay the policy statement for the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development; it contains votes 017 for the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, Vote 123 for the Rural Electrification Agency, Vote 311 for the Uganda National Oil Company and Vote 312 for the Petroleum Authority of Uganda. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister.  Kampala Capital City Authority

10.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, on behalf of the Minister for Kampala Capital City Authority, I beg to lay the Ministerial Policy Statement for Financial Year 2020/2021 for Vote 122.

THE SPEAKER: Treasury Operation -

10.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Policy Statement for Financial Year 2020/2021 for vote 130- Treasury Operations.

THE SPEAKER: Inspectorate of Government, Office of the Auditor-General.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I have followed up on both the Inspectorate of Government and Office of the Auditor-General; they are organising themselves. They should be here shortly.

THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda): Madam Speaker, both the Inspectorate of Government and the Office of the Auditor-General do not sit in Parliament; so, Government represents them. I see hon. Bahati occupying the space usually occupied by the Prime Minister. I want to assume by the position of his sitting today, that hon. Bahati is the acting Leader of Government Business.

Madam Speaker, you can imagine that you had to put off many other engagements to come and allow Government to comply with the law. Can the acting Leader of Government Business tell us why these specific policy statements are not here, yet he came to represent Government?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would also like to remind the Government about section 78 of the Public Finance Management Act, which provides as follows;

Section 78(1) Liability on failure to meet requirements and the provisions of Section 13 are very important obligations. It states that where any institution or department of Government which receives public money does not meet the requirements of this Act or contravenes this Act, Parliament may request the minister responsible for the institution or department to make a report to Parliament with an explanation on the matter.

So, the minister responsible will have to give an explanation to this House tomorrow on their failure to meet the obligations yet we gave notice on Thursday. They had the whole weekend. 

Tomorrow, we shall expect an explanation to comply with the provisions of section 78 of the Public Finance Management Act. 

Minister of Agriculture, do you want to say something?  

10.31
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Madam Speaker, I just wanted to use the opportunity to thank you for being lenient to Government. On Friday, I was informed about my ministry’s delay to present our ministerial policy statement. I was pleased to hear that you had allowed us to bring the ministerial policy statement today. To me, this is a sign of lenience on your part. 

On behalf of the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Bahati - I wish to request you before he explains; I know that today, those agencies will be able to present their statements. I would like to beg for your further lenience to allow them sometime to present these statements.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, you had said in your communication -and I am sorry to take you back - that there is an advisory. The point on which I would like to seek your indulgence is that our neighbours in Rwanda are closing institutions including schools because this is a fast moving problem. Kenya, by yesterday evening, was closing schools including universities and these are countries that are almost next door. The advisory of today is now overtaken because of the way this problem is moving. 

I seek your indulgence on whether we can, even in a tentative way, receive any even if it is some sort of reassurance from Government because even before they announced, we were almost failing to come to work.

THE SPEAKER: - assist us in this regard but I do have the advisory, which I thought I would read when we convene tomorrow. Do you want me to read it now? Okay, but let me finish with the issue of laying of the papers. 

I had convened the Committee on Appointments this morning and the candidates are waiting but I had to make room so that the Government could submit their papers; those who failed to submit last week. So, I cannot really continue sitting here to wait, hoping that they will come. That is why I had said that the sitting would last for only 15 minutes but let me just read out the – if they come before we close, they can submit and if they don’t, the minister will have to explain. 

However, let me read the advisory dated 9 March 2020 from the Office of the Minister of Health to the Cabinet ministers and ministers of state.

“Advisory on the postponement of international meetings and conferences due to COVID-19

On 31 December 2019, China notified the World Health Organisation of an outbreak of a pneumonia causing illness that was later conformed to be due to the Novel Coronavirus COVID-19. 

To date, over 92 countries have reported cases of COVID-19, out of the 92 countries, World Health Organisation reports that 31 countries have local transmission of COVID-19. The World Health Organisation declared this outbreak a Public Health Event of International Concern. As of 9 March 2020, more than 105,000 confirmed cases have been reported with over 3,500 deaths.

Uganda remains at high risk of importation of COVID from affected countries with local transmission especially those that have sustained community transmission. This is due to travel, trade, social linkages to the affected countries as Uganda maintains an open border policy. 

The Ministry of Health Uganda is currently conducting heightened preparedness activities throughout the country. Five points of entry that include Entebbe International Airport, Busia, Kyanika, Elegu and Malaba have been activated for enhanced surveillance and screening.

Having assessed the risks associated with the COVID-19 global outbreak, the ministry recommends that all international meetings, conferences and summits scheduled to be held in Uganda be temporarily postponed until the situation improves. This recommendation follows extensive consultations with key experts in World Health Organisation and the United States Centre for Disease Control, the latest available evidence. Consultations assessed the risks of global meetings of importation and spread of COVID in Uganda.

The risk has been assessed as very high due to the following reasons: 

a) 	This being a new virus, there is no immunity in the population so the majority of our people are vulnerable.
b) 	The international events will bring people from many of the already affected countries.
c) 	It is challenging, if not impossible, to avoid crowding and congestion during such large meetings.
d) 	At the moment, Uganda has limited capacity to rapidly expand the COVID response should we start recording cases.

I would also like to bring to your attention that the United Nations has postponed a number of planned international events across the globe. Relatedly, I would also like to advise on limiting foreign travels and avoiding travel to highly affected countries as categorised below. 

The following is the criteria for categorisation. Three criteria were used to rank the countries:

i) 	Based on the importance in assessing the risk of importation from affected countries, number of total cumulative cases. The highest number of cumulative cases, the higher the chances of exportation of COVID-19 cases.

ii) 	Number of cases in the last 24 hours, this is the measure of active transmission of COVID in the countries.

iii) 	Exponential increase in cases in the last seven days. This is an indication of community transmission of COVID. This was measured indirectly by the percentage increase in the number of cases in the last seven days.

The countries that had cumulative number of cases of more than 100 or had more than 10 new cases of COVID in the last 24 hours were 19 and were ranked using the above criteria and scoring.

Category 1

People residing in the following countries; Italy, Iran, South Korea, France, China, Germany and Spain should consider postponing non-essential travel to Uganda. Any traveller from those countries including Ugandan nationals will be subjected to self-quarantine for 14 days on arrival to Uganda even if they do not exhibit symptoms of COVID. 

Additionally, individuals highlighted in category one who insist on visiting Uganda will be subjected to self-quarantine or institutional quarantine at their own cost. 

Category 2

For the following countries; the UK, Switzerland, Norway, Netherlands, Sweden, Belgium, India and USA, the Ministry of Health will observe the travellers very closely and the evolution of the outbreak in those countries and advise on any restrictions in the coming week. 

Category 3

The rest of the countries will undergo the routine screening upon arrival and be advised accordingly on the measures to undertake while in our country to prevent infection and where to report if not feeling well. 

This analysis will be reviewed weekly and the travel advisory updated accordingly and released every Wednesday, beginning Wednesday, 11 March 2020. 

Any of the above countries that successfully contains the outbreak will be removed from this list after 14 days with no new cases. 

The purpose of this letter is to bring to your attention and to request you to inform your ministries accordingly.” 

It was addressed to the Government ministers and not to us. It was just to inform the Government. I am just saying that they should have told all of us. 

10.40
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Madam Speaker, some of the ministers are here because of the urgency to present our ministerial policy statements but we are supposed to rush to Entebbe to discuss the issue. I am very sure that after the Cabinet meeting today, Parliament will be officially informed about the steps Government is taking. 

I would also like to use the opportunity to mention that on my way here, President Kenyatta’s speech was aired on the radio this morning. What he has said is bad for all of us. 

He has closed the borders – apart from the Uganda border – but other borders are closed and entry into Kenya has stopped. Schools have been closed immediately. This morning, day schools were closed and he has given three days for boarding schools to take the children back home. All the gatherings – religious or otherwise – have been stopped. 

Madam Speaker, as we continue talking about it, it looks like if we are still safe, it is only by God’s mercy but we have to think about serious precautions to deter this virus from affecting our population. 

It is the biggest item on the agenda of the Cabinet meeting today. I know the minister will certainly issue a statement after that. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: So, should we expect some advice tomorrow since you will have finished the Cabinet meeting today?

10.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (MINERALS) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The ministry issued that statement, which you have read but I have also been trying to follow up – just like all the other colleagues – on the latest cases. 

As we speak, we do not have any case confirmed in this country. There was rumour of a lady yesterday but that lady had self-quarantined. That is the kind of discipline that is required from any Ugandan that comes into the country from those high risk countries. 

I would also like to appeal to colleagues and the public out there – I think there is a lot of panic that, according to me, is over exaggerated. We need to give comfort to our people that while Coronavirus is highly infectious and can lead to death, the cases of death are actually not more than six per cent. The fatality rate is only six per cent or even below unlike the other viruses that we have had that are more lethal and dangerous like Ebola, which stands at 67 per cent, Marburg and others. 

I would like to appeal to the public to remain calm. Let us stop the panic and the social media reports. Yes, Coronavirus is there, it can also be self-eliminating but let us take the advice that was given by the Ministry of Health to ensure that we promote hygiene seriously. 

THE SPEAKER: As I did indicate, this is a special sitting to receive papers so let us not turn it into a general debate. I have to go to the Appointments committee. 

10.45
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you. The reason I brought this matter to your attention, even in a special sitting, is that Kenya has closed institutions and borders and the minister says that we should stay calm. 

We depend – I do not know which percentage – on Kenya for fuel specifically. If one case is reported in Uganda and Kenya closes the border, you will not have to announce that there should be panic. It will happen by itself. 

That is why I thought that Government would give us some reassurance and advice on how we can prepare. Kenya was waiting and eventually the virus arrived. So is Rwanda. If – (Interruption)

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give is that while Government lies back, information is moving very fast on social media. The Government that is supposed to ensure the calmness as the minister says is quiet. 

Part of the problem that China found in the initial stages of the disease was that kind of attitude where people were told to stay calm, not to worry and that things were going to normalise until the matter became a pandemic on the entire globe. 

Ugandans are reading social media posts. There are cases every day of things happening all over the place – even in Kanungu. We must have Government ahead – if you have been ignoring social media, this is the time to engage social media as much as possible. However, we shouldn’t tell people to just stay calm but ensure that we are giving them the right information on how to handle this matter.

If the minister continues to say that nobody should worry when the entire world is worried, it will only be a unique case for Uganda not to be worried about this disease. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Finally, I would like to thank my colleague for the information. The advisory is on the virus itself but there are other preparations. Do we stock food? Do we stop moving? Let us just continue to pray that it does not happen and Kenya closes -

THE SPEAKER: We are expecting a statement from Government tomorrow. Why don’t we wait for it? We are now talking to ourselves and you are also delaying me. I have a Committee on Appointments’ meeting; the nominees are already here waiting. I only called this sitting to receive these statements.

MR WAMAKUYU: The minister should assure us about fuel security. We normally depend on fuel from Kenya and the information we have is that there is no fuel in the storage tanks in Jinja.
	
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us continue that dialogue tomorrow after the minister has informed us about what Cabinet has decided and what they advise Ugandans to do. I know they have heard. (Members rose_) Okay, let us have the ministers in charge of education and finance and just two Members from this side.

10.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, the debate we will have tomorrow concerns Uganda. As already stated, by the grace of God – we must thank God – we have not yet registered any case. I would like to inform Parliament that sports is an activity that gathers a number of people. At the national level, we are consulting very closely with the Ministry of Health. 

However, at the continental level, you are all aware that Uganda had qualified for the Africa Cup of Nations and we are competing in the next Africa Cup of Nations tournament. I would like to state that the Confederation of African Football has postponed all Total 2021 AFCON qualifiers games that were scheduled to take place between 25 and 31 March 2020 and that includes the game between Uganda Cranes and South Sudan. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to inform Parliament that at a continental level, that is the decision that has been taken by the body in charge of football because they value the safety and health of players. There are African players who are in Europe – playing in those bigger leagues – who would be expected in these qualifier games. Therefore, they have postponed all matches at the continental level. Thank you.

10.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, as the Minister of Health brings a statement tomorrow about the procedures and how we are handling COVID-19, we are also working to bring a statement on Thursday to talk about the economic effects and how we are mitigating them. The statement on economic impact needs some little more work. On fuel, for example, we are going to look at all options and see how we can save our economy.

Madam Speaker, finally, it appears that the two ministerial policy statements will not be available today. Therefore, we will have to give explanations tomorrow, according to the law. Thank you.

10.52
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Concerning the coronavirus, the situation is worrying, much as they are telling us to be calm as we wait for the statement tomorrow. In schools, the price of sterilisers has been hiked. What used to be at Shs 35,000 has gone up to Shs 50,000. Some schools and people are now failing to buy those things to help them keep hygiene. 

Secondly, most schools have visitation day on Saturday. Parents are very worried. A case in point is Rukungiri and Kanungu districts, where they are suspecting a case in Kanungu. Schools in Rukungiri and the whole of western region have parents from Kanungu. How are we going to manage that case?

The last issue is about business. We go to shops and exchange money for commodities. How are we advising the business community to help us when we are giving them money and receiving commodities? I have not seen any shop with sterilisers or water for disinfecting or washing hands. What is the Ministry of Health telling us about how business people can handle the situation? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think that is what the minister said – that on Thursday, we are going to discuss the economic impact of COVID-19. 

10.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Hellen Adoa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Friday, we had a belated Women’s Day celebration in Serere and one of the things that rang in my mind was that the gathering was going to be big. Therefore, I talked to my District Health Officer and he cooperated to get medical staff to be at the place. They fenced off the place and everyone who entered the grounds washed their hands and was advised not to greet anyone inside.

What I wanted to add on to what my colleague has said is, it is true that when you go to schools, even now, you will find that children go from home, especially day scholars, while others are in boarding. They go and mix. Parents also go to schools. This coming weekend, various schools have visitation day. 

Even as the minister brings the statement tomorrow, they need to pronounce themselves, especially on school visitations, churches and supermarkets. As people enter different towns and places like Owino Market, you will find that people are very many. It is not only using water but they have to mix water with Jik and Dettol so that it will be easy for them to wash hands. That is what I wanted to add. Thank you.

10.56
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Coronavirus is drawing closer to us day by day, considering the fact that our neighbours have already reported cases. Whereas the ministries of health, ICT and national guidance have been trying their best to inform Ugandans about this deadly disease as well as the preventive measures, some parts of this country have been left out. 

In the statements made by the Minister of Health on the Floor, they have been naming Entebbe Airport, Malaba and Busia as if those are the only entry points where screening should be carried out. They have left out some border points, bordering with Kenya. For example, there is Amudat, Moroto and even Kaabong. If we only focus on Busia and Malaba, people can leave those points and come to these other ones, which have not been safeguarded.

I call upon the Government to look at all the border points in this country. For the case of Amudat, the Government has to go there physically or support the health department so that they can go physically from community to community. That is when they will get this message across. Thank you.

10.58
MR ROBERT NTENDE (Independent, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, I witnessed two places in my constituency where people had improvised with pesticides. People were washing their hands with pesticides. This is dangerous. When I asked them, “Why do you do this?” They said “Sanitisers are very expensive. We cannot get them”. This is a take home information for the Cabinet as they discuss this deadly disease this morning. The prices of sanitisers should be a priority.

Madam Speaker, there are four fundamental questions the Cabinet should take home as they go to discuss. They should ask themselves; is there Coronavirus? The answer is yes. Is there fear in the world about this disease? The answer is yes. Is there panic in the world? The answer is yes. Are there deaths that have occurred? The answer is yes. After answering those pertinent questions, Cabinet should come back here tomorrow and tell us to be calm. Thank you.

10.59
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Whereas, the people of hon. Ntende are using pesticides, in my constituency, it is terrible. All the protective masks and sanitisers are out of stock. The price of sanitisers and masks at the border have gone very high. I have received calls from people from Mombasa asking where to get them. 

I would like to, therefore, request Government to get prepared. If Kenya with its population is asking for this, I think in Uganda, we shall need more. Madam Speaker, I see the Kenyan Government has been very prepared.

When you go to Luanda, Buteba and Malaba  border posts trying to enter their country, although it is not a Coronavirus screening centre, they have where people can wash their hands with soap. This is not happening in Uganda. Therefore, I request our Government to deploy not only on the One Stop Border Point of Busia but on key porous border areas that bring people. Otherwise, some of us do not use the border post that was put up by the colonial system. We use the ones our grandfather’s used since they are near.
 
Madam Speaker, we have Kenyan students who study in Uganda. Kenya has closed schools; from primary up to university. Due to our good British system of education, we have Kenyan students who come to study in Uganda. Those children cross the border every day to go to school and then go back. The ministry should also help us and handle this. Otherwise, they do not go through Coronavirus screening centre. (Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, the colleague from the border area has allowed me to give him some information. 

Madam Speaker, we should not only focus on those border posts. On Thursday, in Kamuli, we shall be hosting around seven districts, people from different places. Some of these people interact with others from other areas. Also, on Friday, we may have a gathering of around 20,000 people. We request the Ministry of Health to be vigilant so that when there are such gatherings - we cannot stop them. 

Much as other countries have the capacity to say we can no longer hold international conference, we cannot stop these local conferences since the country must continue operating. I would like to, therefore, request the ministry to equip the district health office with sanitisers in big quantities so that when we have such gatherings, people are alert.

Madam Speaker, in our areas, when you do not greet people, it becomes another statement. When you do not interact with someone, it also becomes another story. The ministry should be vigilant and equip these health centres in these districts so that we can freely access the medication required in order to save the lives of our people. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I said, we should have been here for only 30 minutes but we have now gone into things that were not on the agenda. Tomorrow, we shall get a statement from Government about how to manage the virus.

However, I think there are some basic things we can do like washing our hands with soap. That can be done by anyone. We should also tell our people that they need to wash their hands regularly.

Honourable members, the other issue is that there is some ray of hope. A professor who manufactured a treatment for Coronavirus in the USA was here last week and he has brought the treatment to Uganda. Within a fortnight, the treatment will be made here. It will be available on the market here in Uganda.

It is being made by a company called DEI International. He is a young man from Busoga. (Applause) We should not relax but there is hope and the treatment will start here in Uganda. You can imagine this. However, in the meantime, let us do simple things of washing, not hugging and shaking hands.

Honourable members, I am told the Auditor-General’s document has arrived.

11.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Policy Statement for the Office of the Auditor-General for the Financial Year 2020/2021; Vote 131. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the circumstances, the explanation will be in respect of the Inspectorate of Government from the Leader of Government Business.

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development tabled here a list of what he called Certificates of Compliance. The Clerk needs to, therefore, check against the delivery, which ministries are there and those that are not there so that we know. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Thank you.

(The House rose at 11.05 a.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 17 March 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)

