

Thursday, 25 March 2021

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us welcome the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. We have been missing him. We are happy to see him today and all the other Members of Parliament.

I would like to encourage honourable members to go for the vaccination against COVID-19. Things are moving on well. As of now, 256 have been vaccinated. Take advantage of today and tomorrow so that you get vaccinated.

There are two matters of national concern. Hon. Nanyondo and hon. Sebaggala are not here. Let us go to item No. 3.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE H.E JOHN POMBE JOSEPH MAGUFULI, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA, FOR HIS DISTINGUISHED SERVICE AND EXEMPLARY LEADERSHIP TO THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA, THE EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AND TO THE AFRICAN CONTINENT

2.43
The Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business IN PARLIAMENT (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to His Excellency Dr John Pombe Joseph Magufuli, former President of the United Republic of Tanzania, for his dedicated service to the people of Tanzania and the East African region. I am moving this motion under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received with deep sorrow the sad news of the untimely demise of His Excellency Dr John Pombe Magufuli, the President of the United Republic of Tanzania, which occurred on Wednesday, 17 March 2021 in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania; 

AWARE THAT His Excellency Magufuli has had a distinguished political career spanning over 26 years, and an exemplary public service career of 15 years, and has served in various capacities both in the public service and in the private sector of the United Republic of Tanzania;

FURTHER AWARE THAT His Excellency Magufuli meticulously served the United Republic of Tanzania in several key positions, which included the following- 

    a) President of the United Republic of Tanzania from 2015 to 17 March 2021; 
    b) Minister of Works from 2010 to 2015; 
    c) Minister of Livestock and Fisheries from 2008 to 2010; 
    d) Minister of Lands and Human Settlement from 2005 to 2006; 
    e) Deputy Minister for Works from 1995 to 2000; 
    f) Member of Parliament representing Chato District from 1995 to 2000; 
    g) Industrial chemist at Nyanza Co-operative Union Limited from 1989 to 1995; and 
    h) Chemistry and mathematics teacher at Sengerema Secondary School, from 1982 to 1983;

NOTING THAT His Excellency Dr Magufuli was a diligent leader who, with dedication and patriotism, contributed to the economic, social and political transformation of the United Republic of Tanzania;

APPRECIATING THAT His Excellency Magufuli was instrumental in widening and deepening co-operation among the Partner States of the East African Community for the benefit of the countries of the Community, and encouraged projects that brought the people of East Africa together. Examples include fast-tracking the implementation of the East African Crude Oil Pipeline and construction of the Standard Gauge Railway linking various parts of the East African Community countries;

RECOGNISING THAT in the last five years, His Excellency Magufuli has achieved global recognition for his vision, ethical standards and innovative solutions for Tanzania, including formulating policies for –

    a) the restoration of discipline among public servants that has resulted in increased productivity and improved service delivery;
    b) the control of Government expenditure and ensuring value for money in state-funded projects;
    c) the establishment of a special anti-corruption court and the dismissal of many corrupt public officials;
    d) the control and protection of natural resources, including the enactment of three mineral laws as well as reforming the extractive industry;
    e) cost-cutting measures that saw a reduction in foreign trips for Government officials;
    f) the reduction of Tanzania’s dependence on foreign aid;
    g) increased access to electricity by the population, which has resulted in the connectivity of about 80 per cent of all Tanzanian villages and 72 per cent of all urban areas to the national grid;
    h) the promotion of free education in all Government-run primary and secondary schools;
    i) infrastructure improvements across Tanzania, such as the expansion of the country's tarmac roods network in both urban and rural areas, and facility upgrades at the major Indian Ocean ports of Dar es Salaam, Tanga and Mtwaro; and
    j) Revival of the notional airline, Air Tanzania;

COGNISANT that H.E Magufuli made, as a central pillar of his administration, the fight against corruption, tribalism, greed, laziness, poor service delivery and wastage of government resources and redefined the role of the Public Service, by inculcating hard work and service delivery as a tool for social economic transformation, with the motto of “Hapa Kazi Tu,” which translates as, “work only”;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved as follows:

1. 	That the Parliament of Uganda collectively conveys its deepest condolences to the bereaved family, the People of the United Republic of Tanzania and the Chama Cha Mapinduzi for the loss of a distinguished leader and son of the United Republic of Tanzania;

2. 	That Parliament of Uganda takes cognisance of the dedicated service and contribution rendered by H.E Dr John Pombe Magufuli towards the economic transformation of the United Republic of Tanzania and the East African region.”

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by all the Members of the House. 

(Motion seconded.)

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, this is the justification for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Dr John Pompe Magufuli, the President of the United Republic of Tanzania.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, on Wednesday, 17 March 2021, Uganda received the sad news of the death of H.E Dr John Pombe Magufuli, the President of the United Republic of Tanzania. President Magufuli has been a key partner in the East African Community, and a close friend and ally in our key development strides as a country.

He has left an impeccable legacy as a politician and a distinguished champion of Pan Africanism, democracy and the rule of law.

President Magufuli was born on 29 October 1959 in Chato Tanganyika, presently known as Tanzania, to Mzee Joseph Magufuli and Mama Susan Magufuli. He was raised in Kagera Region, currently known as the Geita Region.

President Magufuli started his education journey at Chato Primary School in 1967. Between 1975 and 1978, he attended Katoke Seminary in Biharamulo and Lake Secondary School. He then joined Mkwawa High School for his advanced level studies, from 1979 to 1981.

He later joined the Constituent College of the University of Dar es Saalam known as Nkwawa College of Education, where he studied Chemistry, Mathematics and Education, thereby attaining a Diploma in Education Science. 

Madam Speaker, in 1988, the late President Magufuli was awarded a Bachelor of Science in Education Degree, specifically in Chemistry and Mathematics as teaching subjects from the University of Dar es Salaam. He also earned his masters and doctorate degrees in chemistry from Dar es Salaam University in 1994 and 2009 respectively.

In 2019, he was awarded an honorary doctorate by the University of Dodoma, in recognition of his efforts in improving the country’s economy, through his industrialisation agenda.

President Magufuli started his career as teacher in Sengerama Secondary School, where he taught mathematics and chemistry between 1981 and 1982. He then joined Nyanza Cooperative Union Limited, where he worked as an industrial chemist from 1989 to 1995.

He was then elected to represent Chato District as a Member of Parliament. Shortly after, he was appointed as Deputy Minister of Works.

In January 2006, he was appointed Minister of Lands and Human Settlement. He also served as Minister for Livestock and Fisheries from 2008 to 2010, and later as Minister of Works from 2010 to 2015.

Madam Speaker, on 12 July 2015, Chama Cha Mapinduzi nominated him as their presidential candidate for the 2015 general elections. He won the elections and was sworn in in November 2015, as the fifth President of the United Republic of Tanzania.

President Magufuli was re-elected for a second presidential term in October 2020. However, his tenure was cut short six months into office.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, President Magufuli was a statesman who was globally recognised for his vision, ethical standards and innovative solutions for Tanzania. He was a great reformer of Government institutions, business, industrial relations and political structures for the benefit of Tanzania.

His anti-corruption platform attracted attention around the globe for his unyielding and high ethical standards, when he established a special anti-corruption court and the dismissal of many corrupt public officials.

He was also known for his pragmatic approach towards resolving complex situations and ensured the restoration of discipline among public servants, thus improving productivity and service delivery.

In addition to his consummate abilities as a statesman and leader, he improved Tanzania’s education through promotion of free education, in all Government primary and secondary schools.

President Magufuli is also credited for reviving Tanzania’s infrastructure through the expansion of the country’s tarmac road network in both urban and rural areas and reinstating the national airline, Air Tanzania. 

Cause of death

On Wednesday, 17 March 2021, President Magufuli was announced dead due to heart failure.

The late President Magufuli will be remembered for his anti-corruption fight, love for his country and his profound faith in God. 

He is survived by a wife and children. 

We extend our sincere sympathies and condolences to the family, the government and the people of the United Republic of Tanzania, the East African Community, the African Union and the world at large. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Can I invite the Leader of the Opposition? 

3.01
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to His Excellency Dr John Pombe Joseph Magufuli, former president of the United Republic of Tanzania for his dedicated service to the people of Tanzania and East Africa region. His demise occurred on Wednesday 17 March 2021 in the capital city of Dar-es-Salaam. 

Dr John Pombe Joseph Magufuli was the fifth President of Tanzania from October 2015 and he was re-elected in October 2020 for his second term. 

Dr John Pombe Joseph Magufuli was known for his fight against corruption and against the misuse of public resources, which is a chronic cancer for Africa. 

While in office as a president, Magufuli suspended the country’s Independence Day festivities for 2015 in favour of a national cleanup campaign to help reduce the spread of cholera. 

The cost savings were to be invested in improving hospitals and sanitation in the country. He stated that it was very shameful, spending huge amounts of money to celebrate 54 years of independence when people are dying of cholera. 

In addition, he reduced the ministries from 30 to 19 ministries to help reduce costs. 

He also introduced free education for all the government schools in Tanzania for primary and secondary. 

Madam Speaker, Dr John Pombe Joseph Magufuli contributed to Tanzania’s development whereby he was known for the implementation of massive infrastructure projects such as roads, increased electricity production - reducing the need for power rationing – and standard gauge railway to connect the country with its neighbours, major highways and bus system in the commercial hub of Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania. 

It is with great sorrow that we have lost a great leader who has lived an exemplary life to all leaders in the world but more especially East Africa has lost a strong pillar. 

Dr John Pombe Joseph Magufuli, your life has ended but your legacy will continue to shine.

On behalf of the Opposition fraternity and on behalf of all Ugandans, we say, may your soul rest in peace. 
For God and my country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Is the chairperson of the Committee on East African Community Affairs here? 

3.05
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the committee on East African Community Affairs, as vice chair, I thank the Prime Minister for the motion paying tribute to His Excellency, John Pombe Joseph Magufuli who left us. 

He was a transformational leader by choice. The lesson we have as leaders is that leaders have to have the vision to take those they lead to progression. Such choices entail sacrifice. 

Many times, we as individuals like comfort zones. We do not want to go out of our way. Nowadays we have the phrase, “the new normal” meaning we are comfortable in the normal. 

However, if we are to progress, we have to go beyond the new normal. Going beyond the new normal is what Dr John Pombe Joseph Magufuli did. He had to take decisions that were not popular with many of his citizens. 

I remember, as an officer of government, I had travelled for a security meeting in Dar-es-Salaam. On one occasion, we went out to lunch and the Tanzanian officers who had accompanied me made a joke. They said “This restaurant was a very busy one but you see all the chairs are folded because of Pombeism.” They were no longer allowed to go and have lunch in the restaurants and spend a lot of time there.

There were mitigation measures for people to get lunch close by. The civil servants were also alleged not to have extra cash. Because travel abroad is one of the ways in which people make extra money and it had been cut. 

Like the Leader of the Opposition has said, that he postponed the celebration of some national functions in preference for another activity. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to pose this question: How much money do we sometimes spend on national functions? As a Government, do you know that officers of Government spend some time preparing for these functions and on the day of travel, all government officials and cars lead to that area? What is the productivity of people sitting there and listening to a few speeches? How about that money was channeled into something else? 

To that, the lesson we have as Parliament, and as leaders, is to prioritise. We have many challenges but we are not setting our priorities right as a nation. 

Why don’t we prioritise like John Pombe Magufuli, then his legacy and transformational leadership will not go in vain? Thank you.

3.10
MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this moment to thank the Prime Minister for bringing this motion as we remember a great Pan Africanist, one of the heads of state of this continent, a very loveable man, a man who lived and believed in what was right and practised what he preached; that is none other than John Pombe Magufuli.

I am very honoured because he was one of the heads of states that I came closely in touch with. I met His Excellency Magufuli in Tanzania with the Tanzanian delegation to the Pan African Parliament and he was so simple. We could meet him and talk freely.

The continent has lost a very good person. I believe there is no big difference between Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania. I would be glad if we had a day of mourning specifically dedicated to Magufuli. He has not died like a normal man; he died at a time when everyone in Africa still wanted him to live. If you were in Tanzania now, you would feel it; even here in Uganda, we feel it.

This is the opportune moment. It is written that it is always good to die when you are still loved so that you know that you were very important. Magufuli was 99 per cent on the wanted list to serve the continent of Africa. It is unfortunate that we do not know the day nor the hour, otherwise, we would have merged as the whole of Africa to ask God to give Magufuli some extra time to be on earth, so that he can achieve whatever he wanted for the Tanzanians and for the continent.

We, the young people seated here and outside there, have to look at what is good for the continent, our families, our nation and for our people. His Excellency Magufuli took very simple steps; for example, when he had just become the President, in his first 100 days Magufuli took the initiative to enter a classroom and declare that no child shall study while seated on the floor or under a tree. Some of us still have children studying under trees, yet we are very smartly dressed in suits and ride in very expensive cars. Magufuli appreciated whatever he had and that is how he saved money. 

We interact a lot with members of the Tanzanian Parliament when we meet at the Pan African Parliament. It is only them that were given the leeway to travel because their work was always abroad, but any travel abroad had to be verified by the President himself and he would never be too busy for that. Hence, a lot of money in Tanzania was saved from travels and wasteful expenditure. Today, Magufuli is being laid to rest; if we checked the wasteful expenditure in the different ministries in Uganda, do you know how much we would save? 

In the fight against corruption, Magufuli takes about 100 per cent. I would like us to appreciate that Magufuli lived his life. If you are feeling that God still has time for you to fulfil what you want, there will be no time; the time is now. Let us take up the mantle and do the simple things that we shall be remembered for. Magufuli will be remembered as a statesman of Tanzania and a Pan Africanist, who would not spare anything or compromise for his people. Thank you.

3.16
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nabilatuk): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion brought to us by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to pay tribute to the late President of Tanzania, John Pombe Magufuli.

On a day like this, for young people like me, when an elder dies, you would try to talk about what you will miss - his company and the way he treated you as a parent. For East Africans, we shall miss Magufuli for going out of his way to defy the western perception of lumping Africans as failures, as people who are not focused on determining their own future. 

Magufuli brought hope to the Africans and to the African continent - that we have a right and space to make things work for our people. That is what he did with the so many projects, whether in education, health or infrastructure. 

For a scientist – a classroom teacher - to do that, I think he followed practical steps. I do not know how many scientists in our country are practical enough to provide solutions to the so many problems that we face in our continent and country.

I am touched by the many works of Magufuli with respect to how he handled corruption. He went for non-conviction-based asset recovery. He put in place a bureau where civil servants and other individuals who were suspected of corruption would be investigated and forced to bring back what they had stolen.

In the case of Uganda, we treat people with gloves; we tell them that they have a right to be heard, we take them to court, try them, listen to them and they argue. Even when someone is convicted, it takes years to recover what was stolen from the people of Uganda.

If there is anything to learn from the approach of Tanzania, Uganda has a window of opportunity to adopt the Tanzanian approach; they have the Prevention of Corruption and Combating of Corruption Bureau (PCCCB). It is like a tribunal that handles some of these things administratively, and there are so many results to that approach. 

We, the young people in this Parliament and the people out there in East Africa, still have room to find a way to fight corruption. In many of our districts, corruption is in the procurement exercise and we know this. In ministries, a lot of money is stolen by our people through procurement and exaggeration.

We know all this; why can’t we do something? Maybe if we went for the non-conviction-based asset approach rather than the court approach, we can achieve a lot for the people of East Africa and the people of Uganda. Thank you.

3.19
MS VERONICA ERAGU (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion by the Prime Minister to pay tribute to President John Pombe Magufuli, a person I got to know personally.

President Magufuli was a leader who loved his people – the Tanzanians – and did everything good for them and their welfare. The list of his achievements, within the five years that he was President, are uncountable. He had zero tolerance for corruption. If I am asked what leaf to pick and emulate from his leadership, I would choose and recommend that Uganda picks the hate that President Magufuli had for corruption and the way he managed anti-corruption.

Madam Speaker, I pray that the Almighty God rests his soul in eternal peace.

3.21
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWDs Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of my constituency, my family and on my own behalf, I would like to support the motion paying tribute to His Excellency, the late John Pombe Joseph Magufuli.

Madam Speaker, this man was a distinguished son of Africa. He is a man who strived to make sure that his countrymen and women benefitted from whatever came from his country. No wonder he put in a strong firm decision. I would like to say that his administration did not please some people within and without Tanzania.

If we want to talk about corruption in Uganda, I think we need to borrow a leaf and become firm. In administration, you can never manage to please everybody otherwise, we shall never succeed.

The firm decision of His Excellency the late John Pombe Joseph Magufuli has delivered a lot of things in five years. We have seen on TV and you wonder where they have passed with his body. The roads are marvellous. We have seen the train moving very well. We have seen the bridges. We have seen hospitals and schools in five years, moreover with money generated within the country. Every day, we are passing loans here. I think we need to wake up as Ugandans and ensure that something is changed.

Even though he has gone, his country remains proud. People in Tanzania have mourned; we have mourned. On the first day, my family and I mourned in the sitting room and I said, “This was a powerful man.” If you are an outsider, you would think he was a dictator but the results of his work have been shown.

The Prime Minister has told us about electricity coverage. Honourable Prime Minister, towards elections in Uganda, poles are dropped. I think we dupe the population that we are bringing electricity -(Laughter)- but at the end of the day, there is no electricity. We need to change.

I want to think that this man had a strong vision. He would renegotiate agreements, including those dating 20 years back. One of the stories I heard was that people wanted to import coal to run their factories. He said, “No, buy the one of Tanzania. After all, it is us who will benefit.” I think we need to begin thinking about that kind of negotiation as the Government of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, it is my prayer that some of the good – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please close.

MS ASAMO: I am closing, Madam Speaker. It is my prayer that the Government of Uganda borrows some good lessons from His Excellency the late Magufuli to ensure that our economy gains the tribute it used to have and we should do this without compromise. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, I rise with humility to join my countrymen and women, through this motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda, to pay tribute to the fallen Head of State of the United Republic of Tanzania, His Excellency Dr John Pombe Joseph Magufuli.

During my lifetime, I have never seen a sitting President pass on and the entire country weeps like the people in Tanzania are doing at the moment. In John Pombe Magufuli, we saw a Pan Africanist who believed in African solutions and African problems being solved by the people of Africa.

He was an action-oriented leader; where directives were needed, he directed. He was result-oriented; where he needed to give instructions, he instructed. 

Madam Speaker, the death of John Pombe Magufuli leaves the people of Tanzania crying and weeping but as a nation, we mourn with them. This was a leader of a time that came to fix some of the messes that the people had in the Republic of Tanzania and he did it within record time. 

No wonder, heaven seems to be looking for good people. If you are too good in this world, you may go very fast like John Pombe Magufuli has gone –(Laughter)– because heaven is equally looking for good people, just like the earth is looking for good people.

John Pombe Magufuli was too good as President of the United Republic of Tanzania to die at the age of 61 years. At the age of 61 years, we mourn him because in the book of Deuteronomy 9:10, God has given us up to 70 years to live. If you are still strong, he gives you an additional 10 years but in the 10 years, the Bible says there is a lot of suffering.

At 61 years, I stand to mourn the fallen leader of the United Republic of Tanzania who died young. He had not yet even clocked the age stated in the book of Deuteronomy. I join you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Parliament of Uganda and the people of Uganda to mourn this pan-African leader who believed in the pan-African ideal and principle, to mention but a few.

Rest in peace, Your Excellency Dr John Pombe Joseph Magufuli.

3.29
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Indeed, it is a great loss but since the motion has come to the House, I stand to support the motion brought by the Prime Minister to pay tribute to a fallen leader of Africa, His Excellency Dr John Pombe Magufuli.

It is very difficult to accept losing the President who had just started his new term and was just six months into the new term. However, God knows how death works more than man. Therefore, we have to accept.

His Excellency John Pombe Magufuli proved to the world, to Africa and East Africa in particular, that corruption is not such a big monster that everyone should run away from it or eat with or sleep with it in the house.  It is possible to fight corruption.

Madam Speaker, allow me to tell all Ugandans who are watching and Members of Parliament who are here that all the money that is stolen by anybody, is taken away by wrong people from that very person and that person remains with only curses and the money goes. Therefore, anybody who has been planning to steal the Money of the Government should know that the money will be taken by other people and that person will remain with only curses. That is why His Excellency Pombe Magufuli has been mourned by so many people; Africans and the globe. I don’t believe that he has gone with any curse.

Madam Speaker, it is so challenging in Uganda here, where you find that for so many years, we have failed to work on the railway which would reduce the cost of transporting our goods from Mombasa to Uganda and other areas. That comes from efficiency.

The Prime Minister is here and he is the Leader of Government business. It is high time we decided to accept that the Government business is also a business. We get revenue from taxes and we should spend that money and remain with some balance. However, the Government just-

Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to emphasize this that if we are to have a Government that Ugandans can like, that can transform Uganda; we need to consider the Government business like any other business. Good enough, most of the permanent secretaries have done management in terms of Masters in Business Administration (MBA).

Therefore, they should know that we have to make profit. We should not spend more than we earn such that Uganda can be transformed. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.32
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you Madam Speaker. I thank the Prime Minister for the motion and I also support it. I am here to pay tribute to His Excellency President John Pombe Magufuli; my condolences to the people of Tanzania, the people of the East African Community and to Africa at large.

Madam Speaker, the former President of Tanzania, the late John Pombe Magufuli was a transformative figure who achieved many successes for the people of Tanzania. He used a people-centred approach to serve the people of Tanzania and this helped him to uproot the decayed political system in Tanzania at the time he took over office.

Madam Speaker, we saw him at one time take a firm stand to fire 10,000 employees who did not have qualifications but were drawing money from Tanzania. At some point he had to cancel contracts of companies which he deemed exploitative to the people of Tanzania.

Madam Speaker, it was his dream to see that the whole of Tanzania was lit. At this note, I congratulate Her Excellency President Samia Suhulu Hassan; she has a big mantle to carry on. It is my prayer that she works with the people of Tanzania to carry forth the vision of President John Pombe Magufuli. 

President Pombe Magufuli in his quotation said that one day he wanted to be remembered not for the bad but for the good deeds. Indeed today, this also applies to us as leaders of today. How shall we be remembered? How do we wish to be remembered as leaders in this generation? Thank you so much. 

3.34
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga East County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Buyaga East, and my own behalf, I would like to pay tribute to one of those strong men we have in Africa who has contributed to the Pan Africanism Agenda.

Madam Speaker, when you look at what is going on and the debate about President Magufuli, the highest debate has been on his excellent efforts in fighting corruption. We know very well now that corruption has been a very big problem not only for Africa but also across the globe.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there is something we need to learn from the efforts of President Magufuli. He used to take action there and then. This is the time to learn from his actions. The Government of Uganda is doing great work but we are taking long to take action. President Magufuli would take a judgement there and then. 

How I wish Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we celebrated the life and achievement of President Magufuli by just testing what he has done for his country Tanzania. I mean, we can talk about President Magufuli here, fine, but can we just celebrate his life by testing part of what he has done. 

For example, in construction, we are talking about infrastructural development in Uganda; that is very good. How can we adapt that approach and we go to a construction and we find shoddy work and we take action? If you are talking about civil servants or even the Government workers not being so productive, how can we celebrate this life? We can talk about this but if we take action that will be very okay.

Now, there is an issue of this word of Magufulification, it is coming everywhere. I have seen it on social media, in the media and we are talking of his way of life being so pro-people and pro-poor that would be the best way out.

Madam Speaker, President Magufuli used to make unpopular decisions popular making a statement, taking an action that people would think that it is irrelevant but later on, it becomes to be the most appropriate for the entire world. I think –(Member timed out.)

3.38
MR CHRISTOPHER KALEMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I stand here to support the motion for the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to pay tribute to the fallen President Dr Pombe Magufuli. On behalf of the people of Kakuuto and on behalf of Ugandans, and being at the border of Uganda and Tanzania in Kakuuto, we mourn Pombe Magufuli. 

I remember when he came to Mutukula in Kakuuto in 2019 on the issue of the pipeline; he was telling our President that Uganda is delaying because of the bureaucracy to award these tenders. He said, “Do not delay, you award this tender and start the project and recruit Ugandans”. However, it was in 2019 and now 2021, the project of the pipeline has not started and the great man has gone.

Therefore, I appeal to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to have this project started.
Secondly, he helped us in Kakuuto Constituency. There is a subcounty where one has to go over water to get there. However, electricity was extended to Nangoma Subcounty. One has to go via Mutukula and about 140 kilometres in Tanzania to access Nangoma. He allowed electricity to be connected to that subcounty.

Here in Uganda, we lack supervision. We give people contracts to work but supervision is very poor. President Magufuli was doing supervision himself. He had respect for leaders at the lower local governments such as the sub-county. In Tanzania, decisions made are respected at the national level. However, here in Uganda, some Members of Parliament conflict with the Local Council III (LC III) chairpersons or some councillors. Sometimes the President makes statements, which conflict with Parliament, but Magufuli was not that kind of leader.

Therefore, I appeal to the leaders in Uganda to respect fellow leaders, right from village to national level, and their decisions. That is how Magufuli became successful. I urge Parliament, the Prime Minister and the Leader of Government Business to respect the lower local governments. We have made decisions in Parliament but they take long to be implemented. What is happening here? Thank you.

3.41
Mr Geoffrey macho (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, the world, Africa, the East African Community, and Tanzania in particular have lost a great leader who cannot be replaced. 

Dr John Pombe Magufuli has been a role model not only to Tanzanians but also to the whole world. I kept calling him a grassroots leader, one who ran to where problems were at the time when people needed him.

The fact is that if Dr John Pombe Magufuli was a minister, prime minister or president in Uganda, the people of Busia and the traders who are suffering with maize in their stores would have seen him.  This is because he was a leader who ran to where problems were. However, as I speak, two weeks down the road, every minister who is here looking at me has never moved down to see how the people who gave us votes in the National Resistance Movement regime are crying to God with their maize because they see no help.

I wish the spirit of the late Dr John Pombe Magufuli could duress the leaders of this country so that they can behave the way he did. I do not know what miracle was in Dr John Pombe Magufuli. In just five years, he did things that have taken us 20 or 30 years to do in our country. Every year, things do not come to their fullness. We make manifestos for five years but at the end of every term, we come with stories. Dr John Pombe Magufuli, wake up and tell us how you were doing this so that Uganda can also fulfil her manifestos. 

Some people thought Dr John Pombe Magufuli was a joker, yet he was a leader who I think was sent by God to make sure he transforms Tanzania into a middle-income country. This has been the talk by Ugandan leaders but it has not been fulfilled. 

I keep saying that the dead in Samialand do not die. Dr John Pombe Magufuli, tell our leaders how you built the Standard Gauge Railway (SGR) and how you pushed your country to a middle income status. Tell us how your 25 –(Interruption)– have managed the population that is bigger than that of Uganda.

This is a reality; Africa must wake up and copy the attributes, character and values of leaders like Dr Pombe John Magufuli if we want to see East Africa, Africa and Uganda in particular change. 

As I summarise, tell God that we are praying for Kenya to change its character so that it can allow the East African Federation to be true and not pretence. You cannot have a wedding with your wife and then decide to go to bed in the wedding gown until morning. This is what Kenya is doing to us.

I would like to rest my case and pray that all leaders in this country, from LCs I to the top, learn from the late Dr John Pombe Magufuli. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I invite you to Busia to see the maize rotting in stores. Thank you.

3.45
Mr George ouma (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Committee of the East African Community Affairs in the Parliament of Uganda, my constituents and on my own behalf, I join the people of the United Republic of Tanzania in mourning the death of their beloved President, Dr John Pombe Magufuli. 

There is a saying that when your absence cannot be felt, then your presence was worthless. When we look at the sombre mood that the people of Tanzania are in, you realise that it shows that they have lost a leader.

Dr John Pombe Magufuli failed to play ball with the local, regional and global cartels. I recall very well that he said he was going to demystify procurement. Indeed, during his short time, Tanzania got over 70,000 kilometres of road network. We must thank this gallant son of Tanzania because he put the people of Tanzania ahead of everything.

It is my humble prayer that Ugandans also respect our country like John Magufuli did. My constituency has borders with both Tanzania and Kenya. Indeed, when you go to Tanzania, you feel that Dr John Pombe Magufuli was a man of the people, a patriot and one who loved his people.

I pray and also congratulate the people of Tanzania for the maturity they have shown during this time when there is grief and shock. Many countries fall apart when this kind of shock happens. However, when death knocked at the door of Tanzanians, they showed maturity.

Therefore, I thank the Prime Minister for this motion to pay tribute to the President of Tanzania, the late Dr John Pombe Magufuli. Also, as my colleague hon. Macho has said, may all his good deeds give us a lesson to learn from as Ugandans. May all his shortcomings be a lesson to us to improve on what we have.

As a good Christian, I may not say “may God rest his soul in eternal peace” but I will only say that God knows where to put him. May God bless the people of Tanzania and Uganda. Thank you.

3.48
Mr Charles ngabirano (NRM, Rwampara County, Rwampara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I grieve with the people of Tanzania and East Africa.

Since the passing on of His Excellency Magufuli, I have been watching Tanzanian channels every night. Yesterday, it was Mwanza that was in a very sombre mood. People are very grieved and we condole with them.

I would like to congratulate John Magufuli for showing us that we can come from humble beginnings and do great works in this world.

We have talked about his personal performance. I would like to congratulate the United Republic of Tanzania. When I look at what has happened in Tanzania after the passing of Dr John Pombe Magufuli, I look at Uganda and shudder. Madam Speaker, in 1979, Tanzania saved Uganda. They led the liberation of this country and we learnt something from them. On the death of Pombe Magufuli, we have become dwarfs.

Honourable Prime Minister, you are here; we have become dwarfs in this region to see that smooth transfer of power from one President to another peacefully. Ugandans could not believe what they saw in Tanzania. We are all in shock because of what happened and we must do it here, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

As the mover of the motion, we have done many tests – exams – but we are failing on that angle. The death of Magufuli and the transfer of power that has happened in Tanzania should be a wakeup call to us as Ugandans to learn from this experience and all the other lessons of John Pombe Magufuli so that we can move forward.

I admired John Pombe Magufuli as a person. I followed him. I was his supporter. I neighbour Tanzania because I am near the Tanzanian boarder and I know what happens there. As Uganda and East Africa, we have lost.

Yesterday in the committee when we had discussions on the Uganda National Oil Company (UNOC), I observed that with the passing of Magufuli, the pipeline project needs very serious input from us because he was the anchor. I pray for his soul to rest in peace and pray that Uganda learns from the experience of Magufuli and Tanzania so that we can move forward. Thank you.

3.51
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues in paying tribute to Dr Pombe John Magufuli. Africa is mourning. When you take time to watch the journey of John Pombe Magufuli as he goes to meet his creator, you feel that Tanzania and Africa has really missed a leader.

Madam Speaker, the love that the people of Tanzania have showed during Magufuli’s last days leaves a lot for us as leaders to admire. We need to reflect as leaders who are here and those that are not here. Those that are in small offices and those that are in big offices should reflect on that day as we take you back. I shall be taken to Kamuli – I do not know where Dr Ruhakana Rugunda shall be taken. However, as you go, how will people behave during that day? Even for those that are not here, how will it be on that day when you are being taken to rest forever?

Madam Speaker, it is no wonder that Dr Pombe Magufuli did what he did, given his background – he was a teacher, a minister and so forth. I just want to challenge the ministers we have here, that if you reflect on the fact that Magufuli was one day a minister and did what he did, what are you doing now and what do you intend to do in future?

President Magufuli came and reduced the size of his Cabinet. Tanzania is very many times the size of Uganda but he reduced the Cabinet of Tanzania to around 25 ministers. 

I think that removed the fear - you see now, as people are campaigning for Speakership, others are promising others to be ministers. Someone is just coming to be a Member of Parliament and you say, “When you elect me as Speaker, I am the one that will talk to the President to make you a minister.” Possibly, if we had 20 ministers, this story would not be there. (Laughter) However, now people know that there are many ministers and so they are promised they will be made one.

Madam Speaker, President Magufuli managed the mafias. One of the greatest challenges and the viruses that we have here around our President are the mafias – he is rightfully thinking of this, mafias surround him, confuse him and tell him different stories. President Magufuli managed the mafias. He handled them very well and said, “This is what I want, whether it is the right decision or not –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR KIBALYA: As those mafias continue confusing Ugandans – the Prime Minister is here – we also need to see our President walk the talk. When he says, “I am fighting corruption”, let him not only come for celebration of fighting corruption; let him chase those mafias. 

What clay were they made of? What stake do they have in the country that every time they are the ones to confuse the President? Now, we have the virus of CEC (Central Executive Committee) – “CEC is saying this…” – they are the mafias that are confusing the President. 

We just have to say that let the soul of President John Pombe Magufuli rest in peace. Since the Prime Minister is here, please, convey our message to the President that we have mourned Magufuli and we want that time – I do not want to say what I want to say – to have the President also celebrated during his last days in the way we are celebrating the last days of John Pombe Magufuli. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.55
MR JOHNSON SSENYONGA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to support the motion to pay tribute to H.E Pombe Magufuli, the former President of Tanzania.

Good enough I worked as the Chairman of the East African Local Governments when I was still a mayor. A lot has taken place in Tanzania and we all accept that. However, H.E Magufuli was not alone. The people of Tanzania, the civil servants and Parliament all supported his new policies. I wish this becomes a lesson to the NRM Government that has renewed a term for five years. Why don’t we borrow a leaf to fight corruption and reduce unnecessary expenditure so that we can also be seen as people who can borrow good experiences from our neighbours?

This business of coming here and blaming the Government – we are also part of the Government. Let us blame ourselves. We see whatever is taking place and we keep quiet. Corruption is taking place everywhere in local governments and Government offices but nothing is being done. 

Let me hope the President is watching. Let this wake us up as Ugandans and say no to corruption. Good enough, we launched the “Say No to Corruption” campaign last year. I think something good can be done to change this country for good without saying “this is the Opposition, this is the ruling party”.

As Ugandans, we need panel-beating so that we go back to our normal shape so that we can see a better Uganda. For God and my Country, as we mourn H.E John Pombe Magufuli.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.58
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and join my colleagues in paying respect to the great leader, the late John Pombe Magufuli. 

In the late Magufuli, we see the power of humility. He was a man of all seasons. We saw him on the streets talking to beggars and sitting down to pose with them. We saw him take the initiative to take collections in the church. He was a man for all seasons. His greatness as a leader did not stop him from relating with his people. 

He was developmental and he fought corruption with the intention of making sure that every coin had its worth and benefited the people of Tanzania. 

He made sure that the laws of Tanzania were enforced without fear or favour and they were not enforced selectively, as we sometimes see. The punishments were deterrent and that is why he was indeed able to fight corruption. 

We need firm enforcement of our laws in order to curtail the corruption that has eaten us to the roots. We all need to put our weight behind the fight against corruption, if we are to be able to transform our nation into middle-income-status as His Excellency Magufuli, was able to do for the people of Tanzania. 

He will remain a huge role model with lessons to emulate. Rest in peace, John Pombe Magufuli. For God and my country. 

4.00
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you and the Prime Minister for moving this tribute seconded by the Leader of Opposition. I bring condolences from Bunyoro Kingdom, Bugungu in particular. 

You are aware that the greater Bunyoro-Kitala Kingdom went as far as Karagwe. We had a vision for the integration of the Great Lakes much earlier. That is why we were welcoming DRC to also come on board. 

The first time I got closest to President John Pombe Magufuli, it took us three hours from our hotel to go to the reception, which he was holding. But today, that is history. Rapid transport in Dar-es-Salaam is real. 

That time, we had also talked of Kisanja Hakuna Mchezo. John Pombe Magufuli cleaned the public service. We said Kisanja Hakuna Mchezo, rationalisation, mergers and restructuring and to-date, I hear there is another study coming. Can we get some stamina and follow what our brothers have done? 

The last photo I took with Dr John Pombe Magufuli was in Tanga. We accompanied the President when we were signing the East African Crude oil. He asked, “Can’t we do this in 18 months?” Our President promised that in 2020, we would have the first oil. Yet, John Pombe Magufuli has gone before the realisation of that. I hope they will name that pipeline after him. 

The most important is that Tanzania gave us a concession of very good terms and over 1,000 kilometres. This pipeline is largely a Tanzanian pipeline. Uganda is contributing a much smaller size of land. That also gives us a very big lesson.

Remember that H.E John Pombe Magufuli is Chama Cha Mapinduzi No.5, in the queue as the President. What lesson do we, as Uganda and NRM learn? That leaders can be prepared, they can be mentored, there is cadre placement; you serve as a minister and you are in the queue to become a president and it is predictable. 

I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate our first East African Woman President, Hajjat Hassan for achieving that. The party prepares people to come into that. It is not good for the country to live in guesswork and uncertainty. 

H.E John Pombe Magufuli leaves local content. On the Order Paper, I am still seeing that we seem to be undecided on the Local Content Bill. H.E John Pombe Magufuli reeled off real local content. Companies were forced to give local companies a big latitude. You cannot come from a foreign land and you own a big company without having partners, who are Tanzanians. That is a true son of Africa. 

We shall miss H.E John Pombe Magufuli. There is a lot we can learn from him. As neighbours, we need to ensure that the Government can live within its means. Otherwise, we have a lot of resources in this country. Corruption can be fought. 

These Nasser Road papers – in one month, whoever had false papers in Government had to leave and private sectors followed. That is how corruption can be fought. We pray that the Lord gives him a befitting rest.

4.04
MS ALUM SANTA (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Spear. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to H.E John Pombe Magufuli. 

The late John Pombe Magufuli left an encyclopedia within a very short period of time. As a leader in the sports fraternity in this Parliament, I should not leave this place without thanking him for supporting, widening and deepening the co-operation among the East African countries. 

As a leader in the sports parliamentary games, we were very worried because of the budget cuts and cuts in foreign trips. Our Tanzanian colleagues would not come and participate in the East African Parliamentary Games. However, the late Magufuli surprised us by sending our colleagues for the meeting of the East African Community Parliamentary Games. I would like to salute him for supporting the EAC games. 

As we mourn the departure of H.E John Pombe Magufuli, the mover of the motion cited that he was very instrumental in widening and deepening co-operation among the East African states. He went ahead to mention that he was also very instrumental in the construction of the Standard Gauge Railway. As we mourn his departure, our Government should therefore fast track the East African Standard Gauge Railway because this is the demand of our people. 

When we had the railway transport functional in many parts of the country, our people engaged in a number of activities and business was booming. Because of that, people would easily transport themselves and their goods to various places. I would like to urge our Government that as we celebrate and remember his contribution, a true son of Africa, let us fast track the railway transport so that we empower our people and the economy of Uganda. 

I was also touched by his humility, participation and commitment in church activities. It is very rare for us leaders at this level and even above –(Member timed out.)

4.07
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to pay tribute to the late John Pombe Magufuli. 

I would like to first quote one of the professors who spoke good things about John Pombe Magufuli. Prof. Lumumba defined Magufuli in terms of Magulification. He said, “I wish the whole of Africa could be Magulified.” What did he mean? We need leaders in Africa, who are corruption-free, and who walk the talk. 

The “Magulification” of Tanzania was because the late H.E Magufuli had zero tolerance on corruption and he would walk the talk. If you look at the five years he has been in power, there have been over 500 kilometres of road tarmacked, he made the Tanzanian airport bigger and better at a very low cost, he made the railway much better. 

Madam Speaker, if we could look at ourselves as leaders – Rt Hon. Prime Minister, how I wish we could Magulify your Cabinet, the civil servants and the Parliament. I know you are going to be Speaker again, for we have trust that you will be; how I wish your zero tolerance to corruption would be stronger in terms of Magulifying it.

Madam Speaker, when Magufuli would go to any work place, people would know that if they were got on the wrong side, that day would be the end of their stay on the job. If you were right, you would know that this time, they would praise you. Also, you would not take what does not belong to you.

I, therefore, think that we need more Magufulis in Africa and in business. If a businessman in Tanzania is doing business, he cannot try to cheat his way around because when Magufuli would get you, you would know that you are gone. You have to pay all your taxes. Rest in peace Magufuli. Thank you.

4.11
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand together with colleagues to join the rest of the nation to appreciate the motion that has been tabled by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. My condolences to the people of Tanzania, the East African Community and all mankind.

To talk about the life and the reign of John Pombe Magufuli, the departed President of Tanzania, to give a graphic account of his reign as President of Tanzania is like auditing the presidents and leaders of Africa.

Just like every person needs to learn, great lessons must be taken from the Tanzanian fallen President - his approach towards corruption; real development in terms of infrastructure, roads, harbours, electricity, airports; the leap of the country into a middle-income economy, in short period of time without oil. We need to appreciate this President. His death is such a great loss to Africa.

Madam Speaker, I would like to talk about the faith of the departed President - his faith in the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. It is rare for leaders to talk about God, about the Saviour Jesus. However, when the COVID-19 pandemic started, John Pombe Magufuli chose to trust in the Lord, something for which some people may have judged him wrongly. The Bible says the wisdom of God is foolishness to the world. He was a man of faith; he believed in his God and His power to save. I would like us to carry the same faith to continue believing in our God. 

What is the implication of the departure of this great man? All of us will depart one day but one question is: what happens next? You can never understand it unless you understand the Word of God. You can never understand what is going to happen unless you understand Jesus Christ and His power to save. When all has happened, you have to be judged, but John 3:3 says “No one… (Member timed out_)

4.14
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach): Thank You, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to this great son of Tanzania. As a Catholic, I feel very proud because we had a leader who practiced our religion to the last. 

I also mourn together with the people of Tanzania. On social media, I could see how the body moved and how people mourned, ladies pouring flowers on the road; I shade tears because I knew this was a great man.

Madam Speaker, as members of this Parliament, I would like us to know that we can only say we are genuinely paying tribute and mourning with the Tanzanians if we transform the things that we mourn him for to make better the lives of Ugandans. 

I know that my colleagues have already spoken about many aspects, but I want to go onto one. Do we know, for instance, that Tanzania, by chance, got Magufuli through a change of leadership? They trusted that somebody else can do something and can also lead, and that is how they found John Pombe Magufuli. But for us, we are stuck.

I am happy about what my colleague, hon. Muyanja, said, that sometimes we want to blame other people when actually we are the problems ourselves. As Tanzanians were trusting that other people can lead their country, just a few years ago in this Parliament we were saying, “there is no other person who can lead us” and we were changing our Constitution here and there because we wanted one person to continue to rule. Today, the lady who has come in as the President has come in so –(Member timed out.)

4.17
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving us the opportunity as Parliament to pay tribute to a great son of Africa. 

Ugandans have every reason to envy Tanzania. Their first President, the late Julius Nyerere, left a giant footprint on the soil of Africa. I am glad that the President we are morning or celebrating today walked in the footsteps of Julius Nyerere. He followed his nyayo and if we were allowed to give him a title today, as Mrs Ogwal, I would have proclaimed him the first President of the Republic of East Africa because he would have transformed East Africa with his management style of  the economy and state affairs that he was able to demonstrate in just five years; to move Tanzania from a third world economy to a second world economy. 

We have been singing about moving Uganda to a second world economy. We have failed but he has given us the solution. Young as he was, he has been able to show us who are older that you can do it. Simply check your excesses; too much greed for money, too much expenditure where there should not be expenditure and unnecessary budget on unnecessary expenditure. We can eliminate that and redirect resources to building infrastructure and touching the lives of the ordinary people.

Madam Speaker, if there was a way, I would call Magufuli back and ask him to adopt that ideology to transform the entire East Africa and then we move on to Africa. Africa has continued to mourn for Julius Nyerere. Africa has continued to mourn for Nelson Mandela. I believe that all of us can make it if we change our way of doing things.

I have also learnt that he had a simple way of being an African. He was not anything special, even with the fact that he has achieved so much. He was so humble. Whenever he went to church, he would enter like any other person. There was no AK-47 around him; no siren vehicles around him. He was an ordinary person, first among many.

What makes it difficult for us to be ordinary, Madam Speaker? This is my last point. While we mourn the fallen President Magufuli, we should celebrate as Ugandans. I am very proud and humbled to see a humble woman, walking in the footsteps of Magufuli.

I can assure you and I believe that God will demonstrate that putting a woman, at a time when Tanzania and Africans are looking for qualitative leaders, I believe by faith the newest President in the region is going to make it. I pray that we all pray for her. May God bless you, Madam Speaker.

4.21
MR EDWARD MAKMOT (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Madam Speaker, I rise to pay tribute and thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for this motion, specifically defining President Magufuli as a functional and pragmatic leader, who had a people-centred approach to his leadership.

I know that a lot has been said about what he has done. My thinking of what probably defines this man’s success is that when I initially heard the word “Pombe”, I actually judged the book by the cover. My mind went elsewhere.

However, this was a serious man and his life is an oxymoron. This is a man who defied conventional wisdom. This is a man who did not walk a fine line. I think this is a challenge for us in leadership today. I believe he was also a victim of the law itself. 

Madam Speaker, I think we have the will. We can take an act of faith, as stated in John 12:24. With the leadership of the Speaker that you have been, with the presidency that we have and with the power that you have built, I think if you take an act of faith, we can make the reforms that are necessary. 

We do appropriation in this Parliament. We make laws in this Parliament. In most cases, it is the way we use public resources that really makes things go the way that we have been complaining about.

Madam Speaker, my appeal to all of us is that let us “Magufulify”. Thank you.

4.24
MR FRANCIS GONAHASA (FDC, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A lot has already been said but I join Members of this House to mourn with the people of Tanzania. I thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for moving this motion.

In my mind, Magufuli would be described by four words; integrity, compassion, responsibility and excellence. His integrity was shown when he first reduced his salary from $15,000 a month to $4,000 a month and he lived all the way with that.

He cut all the unnecessary international travel. He made sure that meetings are held in office boardrooms, not hotel boardrooms. He cut all these public holidays; Independence Day, Women’s Day, Youth Day and other days and saved money. When he saved money, he used it for the good of his people.

He was a man of compassion. All the money that was saved was used for the good of the people, not for the good of himself or the leaders. Whatever he did, using this money, he built schools - we know about them. He built district hospitals. He built subcounty health centres. He built referral hospitals. He built roads. He built the electricity extensions and so on.

One great thing about him is that he knew there was no tomorrow. He lived for today. He did not procrastinate like we do. Many of my friends have already said this. I wish that in this country, we learn to be men and women of integrity, save the little we have for the good of our people. 

Be men and women of responsibility as leaders at our various levels. Most of all, whatever we do, let us do it with excellence, that when they said Magufuli was “His Excellency”, he actually did things the excellent way.

I would like to say that if there is anything we have to learn, let us try to be one of the four words I have mentioned. Integrity is key, compassion is and greatest, of all, is excellence. It is only in Africa that everything is done the way we do it but he showed that you can do things the excellent way.

May his soul rest in peace. Thank you.

4.27
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me join colleagues - but I commence by saluting the mover of the motion, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, who ably enumerated the remarkable performance of the late John Pombe Joseph Magufuli.

All the infrastructure development that you enumerated was achieved in a time of five years. Fundamentally speaking, even Tanzania becoming a middle-income economy was in one single presidential term. How I wish that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister would realise that these did not take donkey years of 35 years or even more to achieve.

Madam Speaker, as a country, the broom that the late Dr John Pombe Magufuli used to sweep corruption out of Tanzania is an olive branch that we would borrow. He never tolerated all forms of corruption, including nepotism. By the way, just the other day, I learnt that even his wife is a master’s holder. But none of his relatives including his wife, held any Government office.

Madam Speaker, the late Dr John Pombe Magufuli, promoted culture. Kiswahili language, for instance, he has left his country when even courts of judicature advocates argue cases in Kiswahili. I remember when he visited Ethiopia, which is a non-kiswahili speaking country, they had to get an interpreter because he made his submission in Kiswahili. That was a demonstration by word and deed that he loved his culture.

This is a man who believed in himself, his people and he was loyal to them, a patriot and he also believed in Tanzania. He hardly believed in neighbours. That is why the economy of Tanzania benefited from him. By the way, as we talk, the current balance of trade is in favour of Tanzania and if had completed his tenure of office, Tanzania would be the largest economy in the East African Community.

Madam Speaker, he refused to bow -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, 24 Members have contributed to this motion and I put the question that the question be put?

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before I put the final question, I just would like to say that we should pick a leaf from Hapa Kazi Tu because for a country almost four times the size of Uganda to have 80 per cent electricity in the rural area and 79 per cent in the urban area, what more can we say?

Yesterday, I went to the Tanzania High Commission and wrote in the condolence book, that we owe an obligation to the President John Pombe Magufuli to ensure that the pipeline project takes off.  Rt Hon. Prime Minister that is the best you can do for him because he wanted it.

Therefore, I put the question that this House do approve the motion as moved by the Prime Minister?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Clerk is instructed to extract the tribute from the Hansard and send it to the Tanzania High Commission for transmission to the United Republic of Tanzania.

THE SPEAKER: Can the people come into the galley? (Applause) Honourable members, as we go to move the motion, I would like you to join me in welcoming the following members; the U20, National Football Team, the  “Hippos”: Mr Rogers Mulindwa head of delegation, Mr Byekwaso the head coach, Mr Nyima Jackson team manager, Mr Bashir Mutyaba Youth football development manager, and the children themselves, Mugweri Kizito the captain, abdulaziz Kayondo, Musa Ramathan, Kenneth Semakula, Byaruhanga Bbobosi, Mugulusi Isma, Kakooza derrick, Ivan Asaba, Iga Najib, Jack Komakech, Dalton Oyo, Richard Basangwa, Faizal Wabyona, Davis Sekajja, James Vegisa, Alpha Thierry Ssali, Simon Baligeya, the media team of FUFA; Alex Kasirye, Reagan Mulekezi, Conrad Musiime and John Musisi, welcome. (Applause)

A number of officials are absent: Steven Sserwadda, Joseph Bukenya, Andrew Kawooya, Denis Ssenyonga, Samuel Ssenyonjo, Ivan Eyam, Joseph Kafumbe, team officials; Simeon Masaba assistant coach and Seth Billy Kiggundu, goalkeeping coach.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE UGANDA HIPPOS UNDER 20 FOR THEIR EXCEPTIONAL PERFORMANCE AT THE 2021 UNDER 20 AFRICA CUP OF NATIONS IN MAURITANIA

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite Hon. Basalirwa to move the motion?

4.34
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the Uganda Hippos under 20 for their exceptional performance at the 2021 Africa cup of nations that took place in Mauritania.

Madam Speaker, the motion reads:
“WHEREAS the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda 1995, under the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy mandates the state to promote recreation and sports for the citizens of Uganda;

AWARE THAT Uganda’s under 20 national team for boys, the Uganda Hippos, made their Debreu appearance at the 2021 Africa under 20 Cup of Nations which took place from the 14 February to the 6 March 2020 in Mauritania;

RECOGNISING THAT despite being one of the unranked and poorly facilitated teams at the tournament, the Uganda Hippos beat all the other teams in the group stages at the semi-finals to play against Ghana’s Black Satellites in the finals;

APPRECIATING THAT the Hippos were the second-best team at the tournament, which performance underscores their determination, faithful persistence and patriotism;

ACKNOWLEDGING THAT this achievement presents a unique opportunity for the Government and all stakeholders to further the promotion of physical education and sports in Uganda, especially among the youth;

CONCERN THAT once the Hippos were away on national duty, the Uganda certificate of examinations commenced on 1 March 2021 and some of the players who are senior four have missed sitting for these examinations;

NOW, THEREFORE, be resolved that:

    1. Parliament pays a glowing tribute to the Uganda Hippos for their outstanding accomplishments at the 2021 Africa Under 20 Cup of Nations in Mauritania.
    2. Parliament urges the Government to allocate adequate resources to the development of sports in Uganda.
    3. Parliament urges the Government to expeditiously meet all outstanding benefits and bonuses due to the players.
    4. Parliament urges the Government to consider administering special examinations to the players who missed the examinations because of their participation in the tournament.”

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by several members of the House. Justification-

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The 2021 Africa under 20 Cup of Nations was the 16th edition of the Bi-Annual International Youth Football Tournament organised by the Confederation of African Football for players aged 20 and below.

This particular tournament was expanded to 12 teams from the eight that were there before. It was introduced in 1991 and Uganda was appearing for the first time. Uganda defeated traditional giants and favourites; we beat Mozambique, Mauritania, Burkina Faso and Tunisia that are known as traditional giants in the football of this continent. 

Although we lost the finals on 16 March 2021 by 2:0 to Ghana, the Uganda Hippos left with their heads high. Uganda Hippos were named the CAF team of the tournament by winning the award of the fair play team. Those of us who play football know that if you are rated as the fair play team of the tournament, it means that you have exhibited the best discipline and best play at all times. It means that we had the minimum number of yellow and red cards and our players were the most disciplined at the tournament. 

Our coach, Molly Byekwaso, was selected as the best coach of the tournament. (Applause) At a personal level, I would like to mention that I play with Coach Molly Byekwaso at Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) Corporate League. I am proud that he was named the best coach of that tournament.

Two of our players, Aziz Kayondo and Derrick Kakooza, were named in the team of the tournament that was selected by the Confederation of African Football. This is not a mean achievement; Aziz Kayondo is a defender while Derrick Kakooza is a striker. We also had the top scorer of the tournament, in the name of Derrick Kakooza, who is also in the gallery as part of the delegation that is here today.

Ghana may have won the tournament but Uganda did not lose. We stole the hearts of very many people across the nation. It is only befitting that this honourable Parliament takes cognizance of this tremendous performance and does recognise the contribution of these young people who are the foundation of the future Uganda Cranes. The Hippos are the young Cranes. The national team is the Uganda Cranes. By emerging runners-up in Mauritania, that potential is likely to be replicated in the national team and the future is very bright.

I, therefore, have no reservations in asking this august House to pay tribute to these young boys and ask that the prayers in the motion be considered by this august House. I beg to move.

The Speaker: Thank you. Honourable members, the Prime Minister has gone but last week, I received a delegation of the parents of these children who had come to petition Parliament to support them so that the children can be given special examinations. As you know, were it not for COVID-19, the examinations would have been taken last November. However, March became the final term and that is how they got caught up in this issue. But they were on duty for Uganda; I hope you can consider that.

4.42
Mr silas aogon (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. If God has been on their side, who am I not to be? 

I stand here confidently to second the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the Uganda Hippos (U-20 team) for their exceptional performance at the 2021 Africa U-20 Cup of Nations in Mauritania. They have done us such a wonderful thing and they deserve our flowers. We have done great as Uganda through this team.

Hon. Basalirwa and I do play in the parliamentary football team. When I give a pass to him, you can be sure that it is a goal. Therefore, when we bring hands together as a country, we shall be scoring the highest even at the world level.

The Uganda Cranes will not perform very well if we do not nurture the U-20 teams and build football academies in Uganda. Therefore, it is a call to Government to establish academies in all regions in Uganda so that we can attract talent from across the country.

Our team at the national level needs to take that nationalistic character. Therefore, this can only start well from this level. This team has done us proud just like Joshua Cheptegei is doing a lot of work. They are doing their best for this country.

Going to West Africa and those countries where football is the song of everybody, it is not easy to beat them; talk about Burkina Faso, Nigeria, Benin and Tunisia. When you are a debutant and then you win and go to the level of the finals, moreover recalling that they beat a certain team by 4:1, - I do not remember, I think it was Tunisia, - that is a very big achievement. That was not easy. 

I have played football and I know what it means. For you to run well – sometimes people want to enjoy at the side-lines and then complain that you should have passed the ball to the other one, but they do not know what it means to make that pass to the next person. Sometimes, you can get confused; these boys never did.

This team did their part. As a country and Parliament, ours is just to energise them through this resolution; to recognise their effort using this as the fuel so that they go along and see the country win at greater and higher levels.

Before I sit down, we cannot go without thanking the Minister of State for Sports. It is beautiful to make changes sometimes. We have got a new minister and things are starting to happen as well. Some people have talents that are hidden. For example, there is a talent in me which you have not yet known but I am talking about the minister’s talent right now. (Laughter) Hon. Obua, we would like to salute you. From the time you joined that docket, things are already taking a certain shape. By the time you make 20 years there, I am quite sure we shall be winning the World Cup.

We would like to also appreciate the head coach and the cooks. If players eat bad food, I can assure you that they will fail on the pitch. It was a contribution of everybody and not just one person. I beg to move.

4.46
The minister of state for GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (youth and children affairs) (Ms Florence Nakiwala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to add my voice to the efforts of Parliament to pay tribute and congratulate the Hippos and the entire country upon our recent success in the games. 

The country will recall that when the Hippos left through Tanzania to Mauritania, there was also a debate in Cabinet. Tanzania was experiencing high levels of COVID-19 infection. It was, therefore, a high risk for the young boys who are in the House today to take a decision at their age and travel through Tanzania to Mauritania to participate and represent the country in the Africa Cup of Nations games. I wish to congratulate them, quite frankly, for that bold decision.

I also wish to pay tribute to the parents. These are our children, according to the Ugandan law, and a majority of them are still dependant on their parents. The parents signed agreements with FUFA and I wish to thank the parents of these boys. They did a great job to add to the fame that we acquired, as a country. 

Madam Speaker, we cannot hail the Hippos in isolation of FUFA. It has had back-to-back qualification in recent years. You know pretty much that we are running a programme based budgeting as a country and we heavily encourage all expenditure units to ensure that as they get money, they should show results. In this, the federation has shown that it has properly utilised the funding that was given to the Hippos, by coming back with a second runner up position in the games.

I urge the youth of this country to engage in sports because sports worldwide has turned out to be more commercial than luxury. Therefore, as we yell about unemployment in this country amongst the young people, let us encourage our boys and girls to participate in soccer and other games as a whole.

I also encourage Government to invest more in football and to ensure that as teams go outside the country to represent, we prioritise them so that we can match with the excellence and the mood that we take to this foreign participation. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. I convey the apology of the Federation President and MP elect, Eng. Moses Magogo, who unfortunately would not make it today but sent me to stand in for him as his Vice Chairperson. Thank you.

4.50
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion about sports. I am so delighted we have two different sports categories today. We have football and athletics (Track and field).

I would like to congratulate our Team Uganda Under-20 (Hippos) for their extra ordinary performance - they did us great. As we are all aware, in the whole world, people are worried about the COVID-19 pandemic but it is very surprising to hear that Uganda is performing well in this terrible situation, yet the world is mourning. I would like to thank Team Uganda for their struggle and the coaches and the sports men and women as well.

Madam Speaker, I always want to argue that our sports men and women come from deplorable life. When you see the background and conditions are not good at all. If the Government could only afford to pay for food for them to eat because I know, we cannot afford salary, which for many years has been of complaint. I think if they eat, go, and play, I think we would dominate the whole world. If you inquire from all players who are here, you might find that they have not eaten since morning. They walk miles and miles and they still live with their parents.

Madam Speaker, I would ask this House and the Government to try to sponsor our sportsmen, mostly if they can afford food. It is the main challenge. I experienced this during my time.

I would like to conclude by saying that Uganda used to be known in politics in the early 60s. I am grateful for the past 10 years; people want to see Uganda because we have been performing so well- Cheptegei did multi-world records in both road race and track. Kiprotich did so well in the London Olympics 2021, which put Uganda on the map. Each time, people want to find where Uganda is located. We are overpowering Kenya and Ethiopia. If our Government could really support us- (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR ACON: As I conclude, I ask that Government should come and support our team with the minimum that they can afford so that they continue lifting our flag higher and higher. Thank you very much.

4.53
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to join colleagues here who have congratulated the U-20 Hippos national team. I would like to thank the Government, in a way, for promoting sports. 

Allow me again to say that there are many young people out there that have the potential to come and play up to the level of the U-20s. However, because of the poor conditions out there, especially at the local district level - the support to schools and even different teams in the communities is still lacking. 

This is so because of the cuts that we get in the budget. After approving the budget, along the way as they are implementing it, it is cut. I would like to implore the Government of Uganda, after this good performance by the U-20, that the sports ministry be supported and if there are any budget cuts at all, it should not affect the sports ministry. Sporting promotes and markets Uganda just as tourism does.

Therefore, I would like to implore Members here that we should support this activity and the ministry more seriously, now that we are in the budget process. Thank you and I congratulate the Under 20.

4.55
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to support the motion and thank our U-20 team for the performance. I was impressed by the performance of our team against Tunisia in the semi-finals. 

Tunisia is one of the traditional giants in this field on the continent. However, our team, specifically our striker, Richard Basangwa, opened this match by scoring four minutes into the game followed by Kakooza Derrick, who contributed a hat-trick. You deserve a standing ovation. That performance was colourful. 

You defended your country under Article 17 of the Constitution, which says that it is the duty for every citizen of Uganda to defend Uganda and to render a national service when necessary. You exhibited this when you demonstrated a wonderful performance especially in that match. Thank you so much.

Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the minister responsible to invoke your powers under the UNEB Act, the Ministry of Education Act, somewhere under the guidelines - to invoke your powers so that these children, who missed their exams while rendering a national service, do their exams in a special way. Set a precedent so that they can do their examinations; they were doing a national duty.

Madam Speaker, on another cause, there are so many talents in the country. We need to set up training grounds. Hon. Denis Obua, I have no doubt that you are experienced this field. It is during your term here that you are in this docket. Just like the late President Magufuli did fundamental things in one term, under your one term, we can have regional training centres created all over the country. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.58
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to second the motion and to pay tribute to our national team, the Hippos and to congratulate them on having brought us pride in our country. I congratulate you, my grandchildren and thank you very much. 

I may be old but I would like to inform you, like I did last time, that I am a former national netball player. When I see grandchildren coming up;they are not netball players; they are only still active in games. I would like to encourage you to continue with the same spirit. 

What is going to discourage these young people are things like missing their exams. How will they get the courage and the heart to represent our country again? This is really embarrassing. These senior fours are going to repeat a class because in Uganda, our exams are for promotion. So, are these children going to repeat a class? What is going to happen to them? 

This is also going to discourage parents who have been allowing their children to go for practice to play for the country. How shall we persuade the parents when they are going to pay school fees again for the children who have missed their exams? 

Madam Speaker, I am sure you can do something by ordering the minister to direct UNEB to somehow give these children their exams. 
We need to tap the talents from upcountry but our stadia in different regions are below standard. If you do not play in a big stadium, you cannot compete in a big stadium outside the country; you will not have the stamina. I request the minister for sports to make sure they bring a budget here so that we can improve our stadia regionally. For example, the stadium of Mbale was left to the dogs. 

The minister for the youth mentioned only football. There is also netball. We always have a crash programme to have the netball team – (Member timed out.)

5.01
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate our under-20 team for a stellar performance. 

I must say from the onset that this is the first time the team we sent out was really an Under-20 team. If you look at the faces of the boys, you agree that they are young people, contrary to some of the teams that came from other countries that were visibly older. 

I would like to congratulate the coach for selecting a young team. You have seen the vibrancy that was brought into the team by the young people. 

I watched a number of games that they played. For a long time, Uganda has not played football that is convincing. This was the first time I saw a team that was playing with purpose, flare, beauty and attack – only comparable to Arsenal (Laughter) – I support Arsenal.

I would like to congratulate the coach for setting up a team that is vibrant; a team that can entertain and can go forward. That is the brand that will market these footballers across the world. 

I would like to thank the coach and add that for a long time, we have been looking to foreign coaches. When it comes to the national team, we go to Nigeria and get somebody and give him a huge task. 

Now this coach has demonstrated that we have the capacity locally. That they can do it and do it at the continental level. This is now the time we should be looking at recruiting a local coach to take over the cranes. I saw recently that a coach had been suspended because of poor performance. Why don’t we give our own people opportunity? 

Lastly, I would like to call upon Government to really invest in sports. I can tell you, when the team was playing, the entire world was viewing. I know that this team marketed Uganda more than many of the initiates we waste money on. 

If we put in money, we are going to harvest the returns. My only caution is that the opportunities that will come to these young people should go to them. I am saying this because corruption has been killing our football. 

In 1996, FUFA went to Lango and did a camp at Canon Lawrence Boroboro. It was supposed to be for Under-17. I personally went there. I was 15. I found people who were 35 and they were selected ahead of us. If old people continue to dominate and frustrate the young people, we are not going to go far. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I now would like to invite the minister for sports to say something. 

First, we recall that we gave you an assignment concerning the examinations for the children. 

Secondly, they are now silver medalists and there is a standing pledge by the President that all silver medalists must receive a monthly stipend. We would like confirmation about that and an assurance that it is going to happen. 

5.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Dennis Obua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

Before I answer the two questions, let me also join colleagues in saluting our under-20 football team for the performance that they exhibited that went up to finals. Uganda is currently rated as the second best country in the Continent of Africa when it comes to football of the under-20. 

For a long time, this Parliament has emphasized the grooming and nurturing of talents. When our country participates for the first time in the under-20 and they proceed up to finals, I believe that this is action in terms of grooming and nurturing future sportsmen and women of the country. 

Permit me, to also salute the stakeholders. This Parliament, under your leadership, Madam Speaker, Cabinet, under the leadership of H.E the President, the Ministry of Education and Sports under the leadership of the First Lady and Minister, the National Council for Sports under the leadership of the chair and the general secretary, the Federation of Uganda Football Association under the leadership of the CEO and the FUFA president, team Uganda, the coaches, the medical and the players. 

This team presents an opportunity for a very bright future for our country Uganda. We are optimistic that if the team maintains its team spirit coupled with discipline, it will be able to transform itself from Under-20 to Under-23, then from Under-23 to the senior team called the Uganda Cranes. We hope and pray that the team, young as they are, should listen to the wise counsel of this Parliament. 
Some of them will already be taken up by clubs outside Uganda. We are optimistic that they maintain the team discipline. 

There is no doubt in our minds - even when there was a discussion in Cabinet about the team going through Tanzania as highlighted by the minister of state for youth, Confederation of Africa Football has very tight guidelines. This team was tested before they departed, on arrival, during their stay and as they departed.  In total, they underwent over five COVID-19 tests and for all the tests, members of our national team all tested negative for COVID-19.

Madam Speaker, it is also important for us to note that much as there is a wakeup call for Government to fund sports, this Parliament has a responsibility to play. On the assumption that most of the international sporting engagements had been either cancelled or postponed, while considering the budget for this financial year, the sports subsector of the Republic of Uganda suffered a budget cut to the tune of Shs 8 billion by Parliament.

It is the plea of the sports subsector that as we consider the budget for the next financial year, let us rescind our decision and vote back the Shs 8 billion that was cut and reallocate it. This is not my plea but the plea of the sports subsector of Uganda.

We have engagements before the end of this year. Sport is opening. Olympics are coming and we have a team; over 20 have already qualified and we are expecting more. My humble appeal to this Parliament is that there are only two areas that we must invest in as a country. One, let us better the funding for sports. There are 51 registered sports federations in this country. The other area is on infrastructure.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of the stipend, this was a pledge by His Excellency the President and it targets performances in certain categories - Olympics, Commonwealth Games, All Africa Games, to mention but a few. This budget item is not managed by the Ministry of Education and Sports. It is State House that manages it. I know a few people under those championships are benefitting. There are those who are not yet on the payroll. For those falling in that category who have always come to us, we have recommended them for consideration by State House through this goodwill initiative by the President.

On the question of the examinations for the four students, it is work in progress. Last week, the National Council of Sports, through the general secretary, communicated in writing to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education and Sports.

Consultations are still on-going. I cannot affirm but I am also optimistic that this resolution of Parliament will definitely be extracted and shared with the relevant ministry or organ of Government. I am optimistic that once that is done, it will add value. 

For now, I cannot commit because a decision has not yet been taken in the affirmative to either give supplementary or special examinations to the four boys who missed the Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB) exams that were sat in March 2021.

Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving us an opportunity. Thank you, Parliament, for hosting the young boys. These boys must move out motivated that the country is behind them and we are optimistic that they will be able to graduate and maintain this performance.

Yesterday, the senior team had a match against Burkina Faso and it ended in a goalless draw. Uganda plays the last game on Monday and by the grace of God, a draw or a win will take the senior team back to the Africa Cup of Nations for the third consecutive qualification after 1978, where our team played up to the finals. Kindly, continue praying for team Uganda. 

The national netball team is also in South Africa. We are optimistic that their rating in the world will continue to get better because currently, they are rated No.6.

Another motion is coming for another roaring lion in the sports subsector of Uganda, Joshua Cheptegei. We will cross the bridge when we get there.

Congratulations to the U-20 team. I told you two things - discipline and team spirit will either make you or break you. We pray that you are made but not broken because you are the future of Uganda. God bless you and thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I reiterate that you are our envoy at the Ministry of Education and Sports, especially since you used to be the chairman of the parliamentary sports club. Please, speak for us on the issue of the examinations and funding for the young people. 

I now put the question that this House adopts the motion as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, the tribute should be extracted and sent to the Ministry of Education and Sports for transmission to the National Council of Sports and another copy to the Uganda National Examinations Board. Thank you.

MOTION OF A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO MR JOSHUA CHEPTEGEI UPON ATTAINMENT OF THREE WORLD RECORDS AT THE WORLD ATHLETICS CHAMPIONSHIPS IN MONACO AND VALENCIA IN 2020

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you recall, good news came from Mr Cheptegei in very difficult times. He is not able to attend today’s sitting as he is in Kapchorwa undergoing very serious training for the Tokyo Olympics, which are going to take place in a few months. To represent him are Mr Dominic Otuchet, President of Uganda Athletics Federation; Mr Lawrence Kawuma, Vice-President of Uganda Athletics Federation; and ASP Miria Nabuyondo, administrator in police athletics. 

5.16
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I rise to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to Mr Joshua Cheptegei for his tremendous feat of setting world records and winning medals at the athletics world championships. This motion is moved under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament. The motion reads:

“WHEREAS Objective XVII of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda enjoins the State to promote recreation and sports for the citizens of Uganda;

AWARE that Joshua Cheptegei, a Ugandan of humble origin, has had an enviable career in athletics over the years and still winning to date;

RECOGNISING that Joshua Cheptegei has set the following world records and personal achievements; He was a gold medalist at the:

    a) 2014 World Junior Championships, held in Eugene, USA.
    b) 2015 Africa Junior Championships, held in Addis Ababa. 
    c) 2018 Commonwealth Games, held in Gold Coast, Australia.
    d) 2019 IAAF World Cross country Championships in Aarhus, Denmark.
    e) 2019 World Championships in Doha, Qatar.

He has set the following world records.

    1. In 2018, he set a world record for the 15-kilometre-road race, when he finished in 41.05 minutes, and improved the World Record by eight seconds, formerly set by Leonard Komon at the Zevenheuvenloop in 2010 and is a four-time winner of the same competition of 15-kilometre-road race in Nijmegen, Netherlands.

    2. On 1 December 2019, he set a new 10-kilometre-road race record in Valencia, Spain, beating the previous World Record set by Leonard Komon in 2010 by six seconds.

    3. On 16 February 2020, he set a new five-kilometre road race World Record in Monaco, France with a time of 12:51 minutes, beating Robert Keter, the previous World Record holder.

    4. On 14 August 2020 at the Diamond League in Monaco, he set a new World Record in the 5,000 metres race with a time of 12.35.36 minutes, which broke Kenenisa Bekele’s 16-year-old record, the longest duration in the history of the event by almost two seconds.

    5. On 7 October 2020 in Valencia, he set a World Record time of 26.11 minutes in the 10,000 metres race, beating Kenenisa Bekele’s 15-year-old record by more than six seconds;

RECOGNISING that Joshua Cheptegei is the 10th man in history to hold the 5,000 metres and 10,000 metre World Record concurrently, both set in 2020;

ACKNOWLEDGING that the accomplishments and triumphs of Joshua Cheptegei present a unique opportunity and platform for national pride, unity patriotism and an inspiration to Uganda’s youth;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved as follows:

    1. That Parliament collectively applauds and congratulates Mr Joshua Cheptegei for his tremendous feat of setting World Records and winning medals at the Athletics World Championships;

    2. That Government honours the achievements and sacrifices of Joshua Cheptegei as an international athlete and offers him financial and material incentives;

    3. That Parliament urges the Government to increase the budgetary allocations to sports to promote talent development programmes, enhance sports competitions and development of sports infrastructure.” 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, is the motion seconded? It is seconded. 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, justify.

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, as we speak, I know everybody expected to see Joshua Cheptegei here. However, because of the level of focus on him, he has decided to stay at the training base in Kapchorwa. 

I have laboured to make sure that he comes but the team around him has told me he will not be able to come because he is concentrating for yet another competition. What a heart! What focus! What vision!

Madam Speaker, I think I have learnt something from Joshua Cheptegei. You can achieve what you want, as long as you are committed and remain focused. How many of us maintain that focus? Some people get derailed by small things. 

If it were me and Parliament called to pay tribute to me, I would have left whatever I was doing and decided to run and come here immediately. However, Joshua Cheptegei has decided to stay focused, to show the kind of character, focus and commitment, not because he does not respect this House but because he is focused on the next event and he must win for Uganda. I know he is going to do it.

If you talk about the track records and road races - I have learnt that it is very easy for one to break the road-race-record. Yet, to break a track record is not easy. Any of you can Google to check and see what has happened in the past.

In Uganda, we have only two World Record holders in sports; Joshua Cheptegei and the late John Akii Bua. In 1972, the late Akii Bua won at the Olympics in Munich, Germany and it took time for someone to break that record. It was only broken by a one Edwin Moses of the USA. Ugandans have failed to break that record from 1972 to date.

I can tell you, Madam Speaker, that Joshua Cheptegei has done something that the world will take a very long time to break that record. Akii Bua set such a record but what does this House say about remembering his efforts? 

There is a man called Usain Bolt. That man set a world record at the 100-metre but there is somebody called Mo Farah – some of you know him – who tried his best to break that record but he has failed. This is just to show you how hard it is to break these track records and to show you the kind of achievement that Joshua Cheptegei has brought to Uganda.

Madam Speaker, there is no other time better than now, for us to recognise the efforts of Joshua Cheptegei; a man who has broken all the records that other people have failed to break. Our neighbours, the Kenyans, used to shine a lot. Cheptegei has brought a new dimension into these competitions. The superiors in athletics - the Bekele, Komon of Kenya, and Farah’s - used to be the ones. Today, the name that is flying world over is Joshua Cheptegei. 

What else do we need to do, apart from paying tribute to such a man; saluting him and according him all the necessary and possible support that he needs so that he keeps our flag flying? Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Is Hon. Basalirwa here? Can I have hon. Acon Bua, the seconder.

5.26
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I second the motion to pay tribute to Mr Joshua Cheptegei. This has been a routine; it is not something new. I want to make a summary. 

Sports, as we are all aware, is one of the richest institutions in the whole world. However, in our country, we still do not have that kind of motivation. When they see you are doing sports, they think you are playing. Our parents, teachers cannot encourage us.

Whatever Joshua did, all these three records which he broke - if you are driving a car at 40km/h, in 15km that he broke in 41 minutes, 10,000m in 26.11 minutes and 5km which he ran in 12 minutes; assuming you are driving, you are at the speed of 40km per hour towards Mukono.

What I would request from the Government is to increase support. We have so many young talented sports men and women at the grass root level. However, what makes Cheptegei to push on - he was so lucky to make it to the top of the world, courtesy of the footwear or shoe company that pays him. However, if you do not reach at that level, it is very difficult to keep training and pushing on.

I would also urge Government to fulfil all the promises and pledges that it makes. This would encourage our young sports men and women. For instance, when John Akii Bua ran in 1972 in Munich Germany, up to today, the promise which the Government made; to buy him a house which was owned by Indians, it is not fulfilled up to date. A stadium which is supposed to be built and used by everyone, in memory of John Akii Bua, is not yet built up to date.

I, myself, I ran and broke the record in 1994, it lasted for 21 years, but the promise which was made by this country has not yet been fulfilled, but still I did not give up. I am here today to represent all those people who are going through the same suffering.

I would like to thank the coaches and the national council of sports for their generosity; they have been trying. I have repeated many times that if this Government could cater for food- I remember during my time, I would eat one meal a day, and then I would walk 7kms to go and practice. That is one way and walk the same distance when going back home.

I have also heard that these sports men come from poor backgrounds. The Government should make an effort and ensure that these sports men and women go to school. Assuming that Cheptegei want to go back to school on his retirement and the money is not there – but they cannot go to school, because they do not have the money. We should locate some high schools or universities, where these children can go to and continue with their education.

Madam Speaker, I do not have much to say. I am very delighted to second this motion. Thank you. (Applause)

5.31
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the motion to pay tribute to the gallant son of this country Joshua Cheptegei; who is breaking record after record, especially in long distance running.

Madam Speaker, in recognising and appreciating the likes of Cheptegei and the others, as a Parliament and as a country, I would like to make the following observations:

    1. It would be important for us to begin considering establishing a sports university in this country. A sports university that specifically targets talent recruitment, identification and development.

Madam Speaker, we have a history. For example, we have army and police schools. It would be better as a country, we begin considering having sports schools and universities.

In this era, there is virtually nobody earning better than a sports man or woman. We have just been talking about sports. If as a country, we focused on developing sports, our GDP would significantly be enhanced. This is because, most of these sports men and women are earning a lot of money; moreover on a weekly basis.

Therefore, I would propose, Madam Speaker, and the Minister for Education and Sports is here, to begin considering developing an idea of having a sports university.

Two, to begin nurturing our sports men and women who have retired, into becoming professional coaches. My brother Hon. Acon there, a very talented runner. We do not want that skill to die with him. We should provide an opportunity - I know it is happening in football, at least a number of ex-international players have gone to upgrade their skills, and are now managing the national teams.

We want to see this kind of attitude replicated even in athletics. The idea of us relying on foreign coaches for the different disciplines, should become history. I am not saying so because I do not believe in internationalisation or regionalisation, but we should be proud of ourselves in building our own talents and skills.

Finally, we should be part and partial of the journeys of our athletes. As Government, Parliament and the country, we need to interest ourselves in the lives of these sports people at a very tender age. Let us begin to scout for them in primary, so that by the time they come to secondary or university, we are part and parcel of their lives.

This idea of jumping onto victory is not something very good. We appear very opportunistic, as a country. Therefore, we need to be part and partial of the lives of these people right from their infancy. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.35
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me join colleagues in saluting Cheptegei Joshua for the starring record of achievement that he has made for this country.

Madam Speaker, my good friend Hon. Basalirwa has just mentioned the need to have a sports university; which is a good idea and it is long overdue. However, first things should come first.  There was a brilliant idea to establish a high altitude training centre, in Teryet. Its construction, I am reliably informed, being in the neighbourhood, commenced this year, in January. However, it is moving at a “snail” pace.

This is the more reason why Mr Joshua Cheptegei embarked on constructing his own training camp, and that camp is paying off. By the way it has been an attraction and he is tapping the vast talents, not only in Sebei, but even in the neighbourhood. He is spending about Shs 60 million, compared to the one that the Government is to construct with Shs 25 billion; high altitude training centre, in Teryet.

Madam Speaker, the pledge to construct was made way back in 2010, when one of the athletes Mr Moses Kipsiro also made a starring performance, and later this was buttressed by another pledge in 2012, when Stephen Kiprotich also made it, but it has dragged. If you go and see the simple one, which Cheptegei is constructing - He has done that because this talent in sports drops off with age. He cannot go to Kenya or wherever to train. That is why he was compelled to get all his savings and construct a training camp. Now, it has become a tourist attraction. People come all the way from Manjiya to see or even train at that training camp that is being established by Mr Cheptegei. 

I am also reliably informed that an investor has been attracted to help. If we had efforts concentrated in honouring that pledge that was made by His Excellency the President to construct that high altitude training centre, many investors would have been attracted to that region.

Most importantly, this House must work together with the powers that be to ensure that taxes are waived for sports equipment and facilities. These taxes are an impediment to the promotion, nurturing, grooming of the sporting skills in our young people. Therefore, if these taxes could be waived, it would promote and encourage the flourishing of sports in the country. Thank you.

5.39
The leader of the opposition (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also pay tribute to Mr Joshua Cheptegei for the work well done. He has made us proud. 

The Minister of State for Sports said that his budget was cut. I do not know if you have realised that even in primary schools, those days they used to have very big playgrounds. I do not know if that policy is still on, and it is the Ministry of Education and Sports to enforce it.

You should know that we have Ugandans who are talented but their talents are buried. Their talents have to be built in order for them to come out like Cheptegei. Otherwise, sports has not been prioritised. When we talk of sports, it is all the games.

I would like to also buy the idea that there should be a university or schools set up for sports. However, even before going to that level, I would have loved to see that we have the faculty of sports in the universities. Put in deliberate efforts to try and promote sports in Uganda.

At a certain time, I could see that some schools were able to go and look out for good students and pupils who did sports very well – football or athletics – and offer them an added advantage. They take them to senior secondary school or sometimes A-level. 

I think that should not be just an informal arrangement. It should be formalised. For those children who are highly gifted with that kind of talent, the talent should be built and exploited. A lot of it is not. They remain there and die with it.

When people like Joshua Cheptegei grow old, something must be planned for them. There was already a cry about our first Olympic gold medallist, Akii-Bua. Nothing was done for him and he died poor. We should be progressing instead of putting on the reverse gear. We should always move forward.

Honourable minister, you need to plan better for Uganda. Ugandan children are highly talented. In that area of sports, they can get a lot of rewards such as being away from over drinking and bad groups. They can be very healthy children when they do their sports.

However, if we do not provide sporting activities, facilities and opportunities, those talents are going to be buried unexploited. It will be just like in the Bible where God says, “I gave you a talent; what have you done with it?” God is now asking you, “What are you doing with the talent I have given to the children of Uganda?” Let us see how to exploit that potential to be useful to Uganda, just as with Joshua Cheptegei. Thank you.

The Speaker: Can I now invite the Minister of Education and Sports to respond to those proposals. Tell us about the Teryet high altitude training camp.

5.44
The Minister state for Education and Sports (Sports) (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, once again, I thank you for dedicating this afternoon to two motions related to sports. We do not take it for granted as a subsector.

In the post-independence record of Uganda, the late John Akii-Bua and Stephen Kiprotich are the greatest athletes, arising from the fact that they won gold medals at the most prestigious level of sports in the world, that is, the Olympics. For Joshua Cheptegei, we are optimistic. 

Whereas the Rules of Procedure of this House would not warrant me to talk in anticipation, Madam Speaker, I invite you to invoke that rule and allow me anticipate. By the mere fact that Joshua Cheptegei has risen from bottom to top through his accomplishment, he is only left with one option, which is winning a gold medal at the Olympics, and he will make history as the greatest of all athletes in the post-independence history of Uganda.

Joshua Cheptegei has already broken three world records and set three new ones. I would like to pick one particular record - the first that Joshua Cheptegei broke. That was the most difficult time. The country was in a total lockdown. Our airport was closed. Team Uganda, comprised of four athletes, received an international invitation. 

I would like to put it on record that for the first world record broken by Joshua Cheptegei, I salute H.E the President because the airport was not operational but he offered, through his budget in State House, to charter a plane that took only four athletes. They were flown from Entebbe to Nairobi to join their connecting flight. That is where Joshua Cheptegei broke the first world record.

I thank the First Lady and the Minister who hosted them before they left because that was a very difficult time, they needed some motherly advice and counselling because COVID-19 was at its peak globally and Joshua Cheptegei pledged that I am going for nothing but to win and break the world record and indeed, he did it. I salute him.

Madam Speaker, you need to get time and talk to Joshua Cheptegei. He has very rare traits. To me, he is one of the most disciplined athletes I have ever met; a simple young man with a simple profile but very progressive. 

Whenever he returns from international engagements, Joshua Cheptegei will not take three nights in Kampala; he is always talking about Kapchorwa. His major focus is on the 2020 Olympics that will be held in July-August 2021. 

We are optimistic, in the post-independence history of Uganda - we have only won two gold medals at the Olympics - we are optimistic that in this year’s Olympics, we are looking forward to at least two gold medals or more. In addition, by the grace of God, probably one or two will come from one gentleman. However, Team Uganda, as I stated, has 26 athletes who have qualified, 23 from the main stream Olympics and three from the Para-Olympics. Madams Speaker, Para-Olympics is the Olympic component for the disabled and so far, three of our citizens have qualified.

Madam Speaker, on the high-altitude training centre in Teryet, this is a three-phased Government project aimed at establishing an international training centre for Uganda and the world. The first phase was delayed but I want to give assurance that from the time I joined and with the support of the senior minister and the entire Ministry of Education and Sports, I am happy to hear a Member of Parliament stating that there is some progress at the moment. 

The 11-kilometer road from Kapchorwa Town to Teryet High Altitude Training Centre was impassable. Madam Speaker, you have been to that part of the world. As I speak, UNRA is on the ground. That road has been annexed to the Kapchorwa-Suam Road and it is being worked on because even the contractor could not ferry material to the site.

We are optimistic that before the end of the year, we will be able to finish phase one. As I speak, the Athletic Federation of India has already forwarded a request for two of their athletes to come and train at the Teryet High Altitude Training Centre for the Olympics of this year.

Therefore, there is work in progress and we hope that when we get done with phase one, we will move to phase two with the support of this Parliament because this is purely the Government of Uganda funding this three-phase project.

I admit that there was slowness in terms of progress at the site but to every dark cloud, there is always a silver lining. As I speak, there is now a silver lining as adduced by the honourable member, who comes from then region.

Madam Speaker, on the other proposals, how I wish the minister of finance was here on the tax waiver for sports equipment, donated or procured by National Sports Federation. This has been a battle. However, honourable colleagues, we are about to consider the budget including the tax related laws. I believe this Parliament can still invoke its powers of legislation to ensure that sports equipment benefit from a tax waiver in the tax related laws that are amended every year.

The proposal for a sports university is not a proposal for the Minister of State for Sports. This is a huge burden but I think it is a very brilliant idea for the entire Government of the Republic of Uganda, Cabinet, Parliament and all of us because Uganda is a sporting nation - there is no doubt and we are on a journey of faith as a sports subsector of the Republic of Uganda.

Once again, I salute my younger brother, Joshua Cheptegei and the entire Team Uganda that is set to represent, participate, and compete in the Olympics that is due to be held this year.

Let me end with one humble appeal; just as I stated that we suffered budget cuts, I should also state that we as a subsector have put forward a request for consideration in terms of a supplementary budget. One of the key items is for the 2020 Olympics scheduled for July-August 2021. 

I hope, pray, plead, and request that if this budgetary request comes to Parliament, honourable members, you already know the genesis. Kindly support us in order to ensure that team Uganda participates and competes in the Olympics. 

Thank you for all the kind words, honourable members. We hope and pray that we will be in position to work together and collectively to better the sports subsector. I would like to salute the Uganda Athletics Federation for providing leadership represented here by President Otuchet, the National Council of Sports represented in the House by the General Secretary Dr Patrick Ogwel and all the key stakeholders for making it happen. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. God bless team Uganda, God bless this Parliament and God bless our nation Uganda. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Clerk is instructed to extract the tribute as well as the Hansard and ensure that they get to Mr Cheptegei as quickly as possible.

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to item six.

PERSONAL EXPLANATION ON ALLEGATION AGAINST THE HONOURABLE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES THAT HE TOOK BREEDING COWS FROM LUSENKE STOCK FARM

5.55
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for according me this opportunity to respond to allegations against me. 

I would like to say that the report I presented to your Office on 17 March 2020 is the same that I am going to present. One year ago, the truth has remained the same. Thank you, for according me this opportunity to clear my name.

Madam Speaker, the allegations were that the honourable minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries took breeding cows from Lusenke Stock Farm for his personal gains. This is to respond to your communication that I should explain to the country the manner in which cows from Lusenke Stock Farm were taken and eaten during a public function that was organised to publicise Government achievements by the leaders of Greater Masaka.

Background 

The issue of popularising Government achievements has been of concern to Government and has been discussed severally in Cabinet. 

For quite some time, Government has been encouraging Members of Parliament, Government officials and ministers to make sure that Government programmes were properly monitored, coordinated and whatever achievements have been attained to be publicised or popularised as a way of accounting to the public. 

This matter was brought to the attention of the Members of Parliament in November 2012 by the office of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. 

In order to popularise Government achievements, the leadership of greater Masaka decided to organise a public function to thank His Excellency the President for his stewardship of the country, and the Government for achieving significant milestones. 

Because of the importance of this function, this matter was brought to the attention of Cabinet and Cabinet discussed and supported it. 

The organising committee, in their wisdom, decided that the function should be held on 24 October 2019 at Lukaya Black Tea Grounds starting at 8.00 a.m. It was tasked to mobilise support across Government, the private sector, religious leaders, Members of Parliament, Cabinet Ministers and any other Ugandan. Indeed, many of the mentioned groups and individuals made significant contributions, both financially and in kind. 

I, as one of the leaders in greater Masaka, wrote to many agencies – including you, Madam Speaker – institutions and individuals requesting them for support. Indeed, on 8 October 2019, I wrote a letter to the Executive Director, National Animal Genetic Research Centre and Data Bank (NAGRC & DB) as I had done to other agencies inviting the organisation to participate, exhibit and demonstrate the achievements attained. 

In the same letter, I requested the agency to make financial contribution to the organising committee. I did not request the agency to give cows. The letter is hereby attached. 

The management of the NAGRC & DB, in their own wisdom and following the organisation’s internal management system, decided, through their contracts committee, to approve and contribute 15 steers or castrated young bulls. 

The agency, in writing, communicated this offer to the manager of Lusenke Stock Farm and instructed him to release the 15 steers/castrated bulls as approved by the agency contracts committee. I was told that these steers were delivered to the venue of the function by the agency itself using its own vehicle. The 15 animals in question were not bulls used in breeding programmes but castrated young bulls called steers. 
The impression that these steers came from South Africa is also not true at all. This fact has also been clarified by the NAGRC & DB board chairman. His letter is also attached.

The 15 steers in question were of a small type; East African Zebu cattle commonly known as Enkolomojo/Enganda cattle. 

The donation of steers and chicken by NAGRC & DB for purposes of supporting public functions is not irregular and did not start with this particular function. It has been done many times. 

I have been informed and I have also confirmed that the donated steers do not affect the multiplication programme of the NAGRC & DB. This is because the donated animals are not designed to keep in the herd for breeding. They may have some or all of the following defects: lameness, chronic impairments, total and partial blindness, infertility in both males and females, old age, very wild, poor mothering ability and so on. These conditions render such animals uneconomical to keep and are therefore curled for slaughter. 

The above curled animals were the small East African Short Zebu which yields small amounts of meat as opposed to the high breeding animals that are maintained for breeding purposes. Therefore, they were not those imported pedigree breeding bulls. 

Based on the above facts, it is clear that I did not request or even direct the NAGRIC & DB to provide or release breeding animals to be slaughtered at that function. 

It is also not true that the function was a personal one. This decision to contribute the 15 steers was independently taken by the management of the NAGRC & DB and this has been clarified by that management. 

I would like to say it was a public function that was attended by everybody; from the Vice President, ministers, Members of Parliament, bishops and other agencies that put up shows and stalls and public address systems to show the public what the Government had achieved.

Therefore, I wish to request for your kind appreciation and understanding of the circumstances under which the 15 steers were offered to the above public function. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker, and please consider my response as true and correct. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, it is a personal explanation. This is an old matter and we shall now consider it as responded to and closed. 

BILLS
THE SUCCESSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018

COMMITTEE STAGE

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had gone to Committee Stage but I think we need to start on this when we are fresh. Let us go to the next item.   

LAYING OF PAPERS

ALTERNATIVE POLICY STATEMENTS

6.06
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am doing this function as delegated to me by the Leader of the Opposition. In accordance with rule 146 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I beg to lay on Table the following alternative policy statements from the shadow ministries as follows: 

    1. Shadow Ministry of Presidency, shadow Ministry of Foreign Affairs; 
    2. Shadow Ministry of Information, Communication, Technology and National Guidance;
    3. Shadow Ministry of Kampala Capital City Authority; 
    4. Shadow Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; 
    5. Shadow Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; 
    6. Shadow Ministry of Health; 
    7. Shadow Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development;
    8. Shadow Ministry of Local Government; 
    9. Shadow Ministry of Education and Sports;
    10. Shadow Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation; 
    11. Shadow Ministry of Public Service;
    12. Shadow Ministry of Internal Affairs;
    13. Shadow Ministry of Human Rights;
    14. Shadow Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs;
    15. Shadow Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; 
    16. Shadow Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities; 
    17. Shadow Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives;
    18. Shadow Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development;
    19. Shadow Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development; 
    20. Shadow Ministry of Water and Environment;
    21. Shadow Ministry of Works and Transport; 
    22. Shadow Ministry of East African Community Affairs.
    23. Shadow Ministry of Special Regions; and lastly, 
    24. Shadow Ministry for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. 

I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, each of those alternate policy statements is sent to the relevant sector for their consumption and possible utilisation. Thank you.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES DISCIPLINE ON PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this report has been uploaded; we ask you to study it and then we can present it on Tuesday. Thank you for the quick response.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE PROPOSAL FOR GOVERNMENT TO GUARANTEE UGANDA DEVELOPMENT BANK LIMITED TO BORROW UP TO $16 MILLION FROM THE EUROPEAN INVESTMENT BANK

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the sector minster.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, there are about three items related to borrowing. At the end of last year, the report on loans and grants kept coming on the Order Paper but we never got time to discuss it. Also, after Parliament formed a committee on COVID-19, a lot of recommendations required Government to give us the state of the economy. I am worried that we are in the budget process and loan requests are coming but Parliament has been recently updated on the status of the economy and the debt stock.

Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the Minister of Finance, prior to Members discussing the four loan requests, to at least give us a snapshot of how COVID-19 has affected us, where we are moving to, and on the question of debt? In the media, including social media, there is an ugly picture, as if we are not doing well in terms of loans. 

It would be good for Parliament and the citizens to be given comfort and the true picture. This is because the Governor Bank of Uganda and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development conflicted last week in as far as the debt stock is concerned. It is, therefore, important that this is put on record, so that when we are committing to further borrowing, we know what exactly the situation is. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether the chairperson wants to say something about the debt stock or do we need to get the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development?

6.11
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the colleague who has raised that important issue. 

The report on the debt stock, as required under the parliamentary regulations, was submitted some four weeks ago. We have not yet submitted the one on the effects of COVID-19 on the economy. We had very long deliberations; we interviewed quiet a number of agencies, both from Government and the private sector, but the team which is drafting that report has had a lot of work to do and they have not yet finalised it. We will submit it as soon as it is finalised.

However, it has also in part been overtaken by events because the stimulus package, which we recommended, is already being implemented. So, the report will not come in its original form but in bits and pieces, which have not yet been touched. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, the honourable member is saying that we should not listen to your report until the other one has come. What do you say about that?

MS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, that is work in progress but the loans are required urgently. 

We all know the importance of Uganda Development Bank in our economy today, and it is part of the stimuli package. If we decide to defer this until the other report is out, we shall be doing a disservice to the economy. Likewise, the other loan for irrigation is also urgently needed. I would request that we proceed with presenting the loan requests as we prepare and finalise the other reports. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. The minister is not here. Let us go to the next item.

RESPONSE TO URGENT QUESTIONS BY THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

6.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a response to questions raised by hon. Rwakoojo Robina Gureme, hon. Alupo Faith and hon. Hillary Lokwang on -

a) 	mitigation measures for foot and mouth disease control in some parts of the cattle corridor. 

b) 	the reported outbreak of foot and mouth disease in Pallisa District and the resultant livestock quarantine, closure of livestock markets, and the need for mass vaccination of livestock.
 
c) 	alleged institution of quarantine restrictions for       livestock in Karamoja towards the end and beginning of       every year and its adverse effects on the livelihoods of the affected people.

Background

Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) is a severe highly contagious viral disease of livestock that has significant economic impact. The disease affects cattle, pigs, goats, sheep and other cloven (two-hooved) wild animals such as the African buffalo, antelopes that are known to be in wildlife reserves.

Intensively reared animals are more susceptible to the disease than the traditional breeds. The disease rarely kills adult animals but there is often a high death rate in young animals due to inflammation of the heart muscle (myocarditis).

Madam Speaker, foot and mouth disease is characterised by fever and blister-like sores on the tongue and lips, in the mouth, on the teats and between the hooves. The disease causes severe production losses. While majority of the affected animals recover, this often leaves animals weakened and non-productive.

The organism that causes FMD is a virus with seven strains; A, O, C, Sat 1, Sat 2, Sat 3 and Asian 1, all presenting with similar clinical signs yet their different invariances with immunity are not a cross to protect you.

In Uganda, the common strains that cause FMD outbreak is O, A, Sat 1 and Sat 2 and they are rampant. These four strains are the ones that are used to make FMD vaccine that is used in Uganda to vaccinate animals against FMD.

Translation and spread of FMD

FMD is found in all excretions and secretions from infected animals, notably the animals breath out large amounts of virus, which can infect other animals via the nose and mouth. 

The significance of FMD is related to the ease with which the virus can be spread, through any or all the following:

    1. Infected animals newly introduced in the herd, carrying virus in their saliva, dung, beddings, milk, semen and even shoes;
    2. Contaminated buildings or contaminated animal transport vehicles can also spread the virus;
    3. Contaminated materials such as hay, feed, water, milk;
    4. Contaminated clothing, footwear or equipment;
    5. Virus-infected meat or other contaminated animal products if fed to animals when raw or improperly cooked; and
    6. Spread of virus from infected animals via air currents.

Animals that have recovered from the infection may sometimes carry the virus in their mouth, nose and can initiate a new outbreak of the disease. It is also known that animals which have survived after six months can still spread the disease if they are transferred from one location to another.

The status of FMD control in Uganda

In Uganda, prevention and control is achieved through animal movement control, quarantine restriction, strategic ring vaccination and awareness creation campaigns. Vaccination entails vaccinating all the immediate herds surrounding the affected herd and finally vaccinating the affected herds, so that the disease can be contained and eventually controlled without causing serious socio-economic consequences to the farmers and consumers.

The success of ring vaccination hinges on timely reporting of the disease. It is, therefore, imperative that the disease outbreak is reported as early as possible, so that measures of prevention can be instituted in a timely manner and cost-effective, since surrounding herds will be vaccinated to prevent the spread of the disease to other areas from the focal herd. The focal herd is the one which is affected.

The most appropriate approaches for FMD control in Uganda are a combination of animal movement regulation, through quarantine restriction and ring vaccination.

Madam Speaker, a number of issues have been raised on this Floor of the 10th Parliament regarding FMD control in the country. These include mitigating measures for FMD control in some parts of the cattle corridor, and asraised by hon. Rwakoojo Robinah Gureme, Gomba County West MP. 

A number of districts in the cattle corridor reported FMD outbreak. These are: Gomba, Isingiro, Kalungu, Kampala, Kazo, Kiboga, Kiruhura, Kiryandongo, Kyankwanzi, Kyotera, Lyantonde, Mbarara, Masindi, Mukono, Nakaseke, Nakasongola, Rakai, Rubirizi, Sembabule, Ibanda, Wakiso, Sironko, Serere, Kyegegwa and Ntungamo.

The ministry responded by instituting measures to restrict the disease spread that include imposition of quarantine restriction in the affected areas at the sub-county and areas within the 20 kilometre-radius to prevent the spread of the disease. This involved the prohibition of movement of cattle, goat, sheep and pig products and by-products from, to, through and within affected areas. 

Livestock markets, slaughter places, including butcheries and animal shows within the affected sub-counties were also closed. This is premised on the belief “prevention is better than cure” adage.

The ministry provided the FMD vaccine to the affected districts to undertake strategic ring vaccination on animals at risk in the affected sub-counties and they finally vaccinated the affected herds.

Sensitisation meetings were also conducted by both the technical and political leadership in the ministry and district leaders. These were intended to make sure that the stakeholders adhere and comply with quarantine restriction and other disease control measures, to prevent the spread of FMD. Farmers and producers were also encouraged to implement bio-security measures to prevent the introduction and spread of FMD virus.

I want to report to you, Madam Speaker, that we have effectively controlled the disease. I want to assure Members that the Animal Disease Act prohibits transportation of livestock and livestock products from, through or into affected areas.

On the reported outbreak of FMD in Pallisa District and the resultant livestock quarantine and closure of livestock market and the need for mass vaccination of livestock by hon. Alupo Faith, Pallisa District Woman MP. It is true that the district veterinary officer, Pallisa District reported an outbreak of FMD in Pallisa Sub-County, Alok Village on 15 October 2019. This was followed by the institution of quarantine restrictions on 15 October 2019 and the surrounding areas within a 20 kilometre-radius.

The ministry supplied the district with 10,000 doses of FMD vaccine. The district carried out vaccination of cattle at Opapai Sub-County and the surrounding sub-counties of Apopong, Gogonyo, Puti-puti and Kameke.

The district veterinary officer regularly monitors the FMD situation in the district and the situation was brought under control.

The ministry is awaiting a report from the district, requesting for final surveillance, which will inform the lifting of quarantine restrictions on the affected sub-counties. The exercise is scheduled for first week of April 2021. I can also inform you, through you Madam Speaker, which the FMD in Pallisa was controlled and the situation – as we stand – is back to normalcy.

The alleged institution of quarantine restrictions for livestock in Karamoja towards the end and beginning of every financial year and its adverse effects on the livelihood and affected people by hon. Hilary Lokwang, MP Ik County.

Madam Speaker, the ministry imposes quarantine restrictions to prohibit movement of animal and animal products, following a reported outbreak of a notifiable animal disease, as guided by the Animal Disease Act, Cap 38.

This decision is based on evidence submitted to the ministry department of Animal Health by the district veterinary officer and it follows verification of the commissioner after a quarantine restriction has been imposed.

Therefore, quarantine restrictions are not randomly imposed on the districts without justifiable reasons and neither does the quarantine restriction follow a pattern of towards the end and beginning of every year.

Impact of quarantine restriction

Madam Speaker, during quarantine restriction, trade in animal and animal products is prohibited by Animal Disease Act, Cap. 38. All livestock markets, butcheries and milk collection centres should be closed. Similarly, Uganda as a country gets trade bans for livestock and livestock products from the region and international market in line with World Trade Organisation rules and, similarly, the phytosanitary agreement. This has significant negative consequences on the people’s livelihoods and the Government revenue. In some districts, the animal market brings up 75 per cent of the revenue. Therefore, this revenue would be foregone.

With regard to the individual traders and farmers, loss of revenue impacts their livelihood, income and ability to access amenities, for example, school and hospital. Along standing quarantine, therefore, impoverishes the district, individual traders as well as famers. We as the ministry do not encourage this and we do not take pleasure in it. 

If all stakeholders work together and enforce animal movement restrictions, the outbreaks can be controlled in a very short time, enabling the removal of the quarantine restrictions and business returns to normal.

The stakeholders, however, always flout the movement restrictions and continue moving the animals and animal products, leading to the disease spread and staying longer and hence longer quarantine restrictions and more impact on the farmers.

Cost of FMD vaccine

FMD is a very costly vaccine. Madam speaker, it is recommended that a susceptible animal is vaccinated twice a year to build sufficient immunity. The cost of vaccinating one animal, therefore, is equivalent to Shs 10,000. Given the current population of domestic animals susceptible to FMD, which is approximately 40 million – that is, if you take cows, goats, sheep and pigs – the cost implication makes vaccination of the animals very expensive.

What we do as a ministry is that the Government has provided three million doses of vaccine and we utilise these million vaccines strategically and contain the disease. The way we do it is that we address the affected areas, high risk areas and transit routes.

In case all the susceptible animals are to be vaccinated twice a year, the cost of procuring vaccines alone would be Shs 504 billion annually. The strategy of vaccinating all susceptible domestic animals in the country is not feasible due to the cost and operational implication. Also, this does not consider the wide animal population which also suffers from the same disease.

Challenges faced by the ministry

In an effort to prevent and control the spread of FMD, the ministry is facing some challenges which include:

1. 	The budget provided for animal vaccination for FMD, PPR, CBPP, rabies, laboratory reagents and equipment annually is Shs 5 billion which is grossly inadequate. During the Financial Year 2019/2020 budget, Shs 10 billion which boosted the FMD vaccine - we procured 2.3 million doses which is 16.4 per cent of the required annual doses.

Conclusion

Colleagues, it is indeed unfortunate that the country has not been able to effectively control several animal diseases, especially FMD which is the most important trade-sensitive disease.

I must also, however, inform the House that Uganda was one of the first countries in East and Central Africa to be declared rinderpest-free and this gave us a mileage for our exports, especially in trade in animal products.

Madam Speaker, animals and animal products from Uganda, therefore, have not been able to access the more lucrative regional and international markets that would have earned Uganda the highly-needed revenue from the animal industry.

Colleagues, I would like to urge all of you as political leaders in the country to have a united front in creating awareness of the impact of animal diseases, revenue forgone and the importance of adhering to the guidelines of the animal disease control provided by the veterinary competent authority.

Madam speaker, I beg to move.  For God and My County and I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for your response.

COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I provided copies of my responses and I discussed with the members who raised these questions. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you very much for responding to our queries. Honourable members, we have done quite a bit of work today. However, as I was seated here, I received information about the death of a former colleague, Hon. Dan Kiwalabye Musoke. He was a member of the Eighth Parliament. I invite Members to observe a moment of silence in his honour.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 6.34 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 30 March 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 
