

Parliament met at 2.02 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As you are aware, today is World Kidney Day. I launched the activities this afternoon at the South Wing Parking. There is a motion, for which I will cause an alteration to the Order Paper to accommodate it. 

We will debate this motion first and then move on with the rest of the business that we have on the Order Paper. I do not know what item it is. It is item number 33. We will move it forward and deal with it and then move to the rest of the business. I think we need to finish with the Persons with Disabilities Bill today and also the other motion, if the Members are ready with the report that we sent them back with to finish.

Honourable members, in the VIP Gallery this afternoon, we have Miss Uganda UK, Queen Peninah Wampamba. (Applause) Now, this is one of the unique ones, having a Miss Uganda in the UK. She is accompanied by:

    1. Mr Ronald Wampamba, that is the father of the Queen;
    2. Mrs Aida Wampamba is her mother;
    3. Mr Joe Iyadda;
    4. Mr Joseph Ssebunya;
    5. Mr Stephen Mboga and
    6. Jjajja Pulisika Namwanje.

You are very welcome. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

She has visited Kidepo National Park in Karamoja; visited Papa Emorimor, the King of Teso in Serere District; donated medical equipment to Serere Health Center IV; visited St Elizabeth Girls Secondary School Kidetok in Kasilo County and also visited Nyero Rock in Ngora District. While touring these areas, she was accompanied by Miss Tourism and Miss Buganda. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. 

When you make mention of Nyero Rock, you remember the discussion we had yesterday that that rock may not be very happy and we have to find ways of making it not hurt people. So, with those remarks, let us proceed with those Members who had requested for the Floor. Member for Gomba West?

2.07
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba County West, Gomba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance to do with siphoning of fuel in Kampala. It is likely that we have a national emergency and terrible accidents waiting to happen. It is a common practice for individuals to steal or siphon fuel from trucks whenever they stop at traffic lights or when they are in slow traffic. It is very common around Mukwano Industries, Kitgum House, Lugogo traffic lights near Kyadondo Rugby Grounds and Nakawa traffic lights.

The possibility of an explosion is very real. It has happened several times in Nigeria and other places. It has to be addressed before we lose people. They normally put the fuel in plastic bags. Anyone within 200 to 300 metres of that truck is in danger. I pray the Uganda Police Force is alerted to arrest these people and that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development sensitises the public, through media campaigns and adverts, against this vice. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. What are we saying about this? I see the Minister of Energy. How do we siphon fuel from trucks in the middle of the roads with no precautionary measures, honourable minister?

2.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Fuel is transported in tankers and the activity my colleague has described is very common, especially near the depots; whereby after delivering fuel, some of it remains in the tank and you see people coming with Kaveera to siphon the remains.

As a ministry, we do not have a solution to that, except we would like to advise the fuel depot owners to be vigilant to avoid such a practice. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you taking clarifications and information?

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. Mr Speaker, we are discussing the risk of having fuel in undesignated packages or the way it is supposed to be moved. I would like to seek further clarification from the minister: when we are driving along the roads, we see fuel being sold in bottles. As I drive to my constituency, most of the houses are grass thatched and we have had incidences where the remaining fuel is taken back in the house and has even burnt homes. 

Therefore, this is not, most of the time, managed well and has caused problems. However, the clarification I would like to seek from the minister is, has Government authorised the sale of fuel in this country in bottles?

MR TUMURAMYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I would like to give the minister is that it is a common practice. Wherever you go - even in the surrounding areas, for instance, Namuwongo – drivers of Government vehicles go and sell fuel there. I have evidence. In Namuwongo, there is a place where drivers of Government owned and other private vehicles go and sell fuel. Drivers of public company vehicles also go there and sell fuel. It has been a common practice. One day, I almost arrested some individuals because they were trying to sell Government fuel. So, that is a matter you must take into account. Thank you very much.

MS RWAKOOJO: Mr Speaker, I am sorry I am dissatisfied with what the minister said. He has indicated he knows that it actually happens; now, to put the burden on the fuel-owners is not fair. As the Ministry of Energy and Minerals Development, you are in charge of fuel. Come up with notices to alert the people because some of them do not know. We do not want a repeat of what happened on the Northern Bypass when people were siphoning fuel and got burnt. Someone takes jerrycans filled with fuel and comes back for more and he gets burnt.

MR D’UJANGA: Mr Speaker, as a ministry, we regulate legal activities within the fuel value chain. If a driver of a ministry or company goes to sell fuel outside his normal duty, we have no capacity to control that one. We urge ministries and companies to find ways of controlling consumption of fuel of their vehicles. That is how they would curb this illegal practice. 

With respect to bottles along the road, this is common, especially in the rural areas. We have consistently run notices and information on the media against that practice because of the dangers involved in it. Mr Speaker, we will continue to run these notices and the rest can be done by all of us, including the local leadership in those places. As I said, my ministry has low capacity to supervise the whole country but we give standards even to the local councils and police. We give standards to the operation of the value chain of fuel. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, don’t you have authority to make regulations that can be enforced by the police? This sale of fuel can kill people. Aren’t you mandated by law to make regulations that can be enforced by police?

MR D’UJANGA: Mr Speaker, the regulations are there and all law enforcement officers have them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In other words, you are casting the burden to the Ministry of Internal Affairs. 

MR D’UJANGA: It looks like that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we need guidance on this matter. I need a clear undertaking from – you see, one day, people are going to be blown up and then, we will start responding. Can we get a direct response on this matter, Rt Hon. Prime Minister? 

2.15
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I know we are all aware of the complex activities in the Government. Fuel falls under energy and whatever goes wrong in running it becomes a security problem. We will bring this to the attention of the Minister of Internal Affairs so that he takes care of those things to prevent future hazards. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The magnitude of this problem cannot be underestimated. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that the minister comes with a full report to this House on what is happening and what measures the ministry is going to take in collaboration with the sister ministries to stop the operation of the roadside fuel dealers? As Parliament, we will act on the submission instead of casually discussing the issue when we will not give a directive to that effect.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister said there are regulations that deal with matters of handling fuel and petroleum products. That means there is a gap in the implementation of those regulations. The Prime Minister has said he is going to task the minister responsible for the enforcement of the regulations to deal with it. 

The other thing that should happen is; we need a clear brief showing that these regulations are there and how much they cover this subject. If there are gaps in the regulations, then they also have to be cured to give authority to the enforcement officers to deal with the problem. If we just handle it casually like this, one day we will all be running around when so many people have already died. Thank you.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This issue is very serious because my neighbours lost one of their children in fire from this kind of fuel. Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the ministry - since they have the regulations - to sensitise the communities on radio? It is because this is a common thing and leaving it at that is not enough. The public needs to know those regulations. 

By the way, the police may not be aware. You think they are aware but I know they are not. Recently, we found out that there are so many issues in the Children’s Act which the police do not know. They even do not know that we amended the Children’s Act. This issue is very serious. Can they take up that matter and sensitise the community?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not a procedural matter. (Laughter) You have taken the opportunity to give advice to the minister on what he should heed and that he should carry out a public awareness campaign so that the people get to know about these things and what they should not do.

In the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have students of Bugema University from Luwero District, represented by hon. John Chrysostom Muyingo and hon. Lillian Nakate. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them.

2.20
MS MARGARET ALEPER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance under rule 46 of the Rules of Procedure. It was on Sunday evening, 24 March 2019, when the boys of one Jie kraal located in the east of Katabok Parish in Morulem Sub-county, Abim District, intercepted 21 heads of cattle driven by some suspicious Jie young men. 

On the basis of suspicious movement of these animals, these peace-loving men by the names of Adungo, Losia Apaloyarakol and Apacipon - all from Potongor Parish, Nakapelimoru Sub-county, Kotido District, decided to arrest one suspect and impounded the 21 heads of cattle. 

They called the commandant of UPDF/LDU detach of Katabok and seven of them arrived the following day on Monday, 25 March 2019. On arrival, the UPDF commandant in charge of the unit demanded that they must go with 42 headS of cattle plus some of the peace promoters from that kraal to Katabok with the purpose of giving a statement on this matter. 

The innocent peace actors agreed to accompany the soldiers but to their surprise, they were tied along the road, mocked, intimidated and beaten severely. As if that was not enough, on reaching Katabok, the three boys were handed over to an organised charged mob for execution in the full witness of the soldiers. 

Mr Speaker, video clips are available of this barbaric, inhuman and unpatriotic act of the UPDF commandant and the people of Morulem who tried to lynch the innocent peace promoters of Jie. They were only saved by two police officers who were called when the trio were at the verge of death. 

Mr Speaker, my prayers to this august House are that:

    1. The UPDF leadership takes stern and punitive action against the UPDF commandant in Katabok Detach and his six men for inciting mob justice and for being unpatriotic against peace promoting Ugandans.

    2. The Minister of Internal Affairs directs the Inspector General of Police to undertake serious and honest investigations to identify the ringleaders of mob justice in Katabok and give feedback to this House for the people of Kotido District and the Jie in particular to find justice and nurse the wounds of hatred and despair created by the Ethur in their hearts.

    3. Finally, the leadership of Abim District must take full responsibility of treating, feeding and counselling the three innocent victims of segregation and tribal hatred. They must also try to reconcile with the parents of the victims after their full recovery from hospital. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the images of what happened there are very disturbing. Therefore, we need to do something about this.

2.23
THE MINISTER FOR KARAMOJA AFFAIRS (Mr John Byabagambi): Mr Speaker, I saw the images but at the same time, I had to inquire what happened and why that incident happened. First and foremost, I am getting the report from the commanders. However, the preliminary information I am getting - you know, this is a volatile area where the Jie and Abim do not want to see eye to eye; wrestling each other.

Therefore, I am of the view that I get the detailed report from the commanders because the Third Brigade Commander rings me almost on a daily basis to update me on the situation on the ground. Since I am the Minister for Karamoja Affairs, who is coordinating all these ministries, which are working in Karamoja, I will put it upon myself to give a statement on Tuesday –(Interruption)

MR MOSES ADOME: Mr Speaker, I am a little perturbed by what the minister is mentioning. The reality is that the Karimojong are Karimojong. They have their own ways and it is up to us; those who love peace, to try and unite them. We saw our people killing one another; Karimojong versus Karimojong. Abim people are not from without Karamoja; they are Karimojong.

It is not right for the minister to assume that Abim and Kotido have never lived with one another peacefully. It is a very wrong assumption because Abim has been part of Kotido.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order.

MR MOSES ADOME: The point of order I am raising is, is the minister in order to fuel and instigate conflict? By the time you are mentioning - Honourable minister, the reality is that you are trying to build a conflict out of things that you do not know. Therefore, we cannot allow that kind of information, no. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we might do ourselves a good service if we deal with issues in an objective way. However, if we try to cover them, they may eventually not work. It might be good for us to look at the whole picture and see what solutions we can derive from them. I do not see any violation of any rules of order of the House that the minister has committed. He is simply saying that there are some tensions and it is a fact. Even with the Acholi, there are some tensions but how do we deal with the tensions? 

The next matter that is going to be raised by the Member for Kitgum is about the same thing. Therefore, there are tensions, which we cannot ignore. However, the question is, how do we deal with such in a more positive way and solve the problem rather than making it bigger? That is the attitude we should take when we are dealing with these matters.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, as I said, I will come back to see how we can harmonise the two communities.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when you come back next week on Tuesday, add this to the other statement on Moroto so that we finish with you on that day.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Much obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

2.27
MS MARGARET LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. When all the districts neighbouring the Karimojong refused to host the Karimojong, especially during the dry spell, Karimojong from Kotido and the Jie specifically found their way and entered Kitgum District.

Kitgum District did not chase them because we have been living together. However, the unfortunate part is that they are in Kitgum and continuously raid animals from Kitgum. As I speak, 81 cows have been raided by the Karimojong. 

At the same time, what has hurt us so much is that they have even gone into raping women. Yesterday, 11 women were raped, eight are in the hospital; in Namukora Health Centre IV and three women were rejected by their husbands who claimed that they looked for the Karimojong to be raped.

As we have lived together with them, I first of all would like to ask the honourable minister, as he meets the neighbouring members of Parliament, that we should sit together and give the Karimojong the dos and don’ts. We were not invited in the meeting, which they held in Abim.

My prayer is that the Ministry of Water and Environment should dig dams for the Karimojong so that they remain in Karamoja without coming to other districts. This is because we are told that there are Turkana who are coming to graze in Karamoja, even during this dry spell. Why then are the Karimojong leaving their land, which can graze animals?

Secondly, the Minister for Karamoja Affairs should look into our 81 cows, which were raided by the Karimojong and pay 162 cows because we made an agreement that when they steal one cow, they must pay two cows.

Thirdly, I ask the Office of the Prime Minister, specifically the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, to support the homes of the affected people because as they set fires, 100 homesteads were left unsettled.

Lastly, the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs has been promising us soldiers. Recently, I went to the army detach at the border and found only five soldiers. I feel that the Ministry of Defence should add some soldiers and the police should also beef up some ASTUs because we only have 11 in the whole of Orom. I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the Minister for Karamoja Affairs and the Minister of Defence -

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, when one is a leader and they want to solve a problem, they have to first accept that there is a problem. The moment people accept that there is a problem, then it becomes easier to resolve that problem.

The problem is that some of the leaders from Karamoja do not want to accept the reality that they sometimes trespass and behave differently and cause havoc to the neighbours. These are the reasons every November, I hold meetings between the Karimojong and people from the neighbouring districts, local leaders; that is the meeting she is referring to. Usually it is about harmonising positions so that people get to know the Dos and Don’ts and we put them on paper.

However, unfortunately some resolutions are overlooked and sometimes at the instigations of their own leaders. That is where things go wrong. When we come to Kampala and start covering up, it becomes a problem. Therefore, Mr Speaker, may I, on Tuesday, also bring another statement on that matter? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, on Tuesday, please come. In the meantime, if these activities are going on, defence minister, what do you say?

2.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Col. (Rtd) Charles Engola): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am happy that hon. Lamwaka has mentioned that we have at least deployed some soldiers there but they are only five. 

However, I want to inform the House that the number of soldiers deployed is determined by the amount of threats present. If the threats are bigger than what the five soldiers can handle, then we deploy more. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. Is the Minister for Internal Affairs here? We should wait for a rather lengthy statement from the Minister for Karamoja Affairs on Tuesday. 

2.34
MS SARAH NAJJUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding a circular that was issued by Dr K. Mugasi, the Executive Director of National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS), to all chief administrative officers in the country saying that this season, it is members of Parliament that are going to distribute seeds to farmers.

Mr Speaker, all members of Parliament received 500 kilogrammes of beans and 1,000 kilogrammes of maize and the Women members of Parliament received 2,000 kilogrammes of maize seeds. I need clarification from the agriculture minister - because we are in the planting season - why this time the burden has been given to members of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the circular from Dr K. Mugasi, the Executive Director, NAADS.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, on the same matter that my sister has raised, I think it is not in order for the Executive Director of NAADS -

MS NAJJUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The circular is dated 28 February 2018, addressed to all chief administrative officers and it is signed by Dr Samuel K. Mugasi, the Executive Director, NAADS. It is about the allocation of maize and bean seeds. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Our committee responsible for the sector will look at this letter with the discussion going on.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, it is good the First Deputy Prime Minister is here. Otherwise, I think the decision by the NAADS Executive Director to turn members of Parliament into extension workers is wrong.

Mr Speaker, we are not paid for distributing seeds; that is not the work of members of Parliament. Therefore, for that Executive Director to make it a point that we, MPs, should be the ones to distribute seeds to farmers in our constituencies is wrong. This is the same trend the Ministry of Health or Government has decided about members of Parliament buying ambulances. Where do we get resources to provide ambulances to every constituency? We raised this matter here last time - I am even wondering how you are going to be a distributing agent of maize seeds in Omoro, Mr Speaker.

How can the Executive Director direct the Speaker of Parliament to go and distribute maize or bean seeds in his constituency? I think this is dishonourable and the Prime Minister must take it up and bring the Executive Director to order. We cannot be extension farmers. If you have failed on your part, say so, and another government takes over.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister has also been directed by NAADS to go and distribute seeds. (Laughter)

2.38
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd.) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I think the statement made by our brother is unfortunate because I do not think he represents our views here. If you are not able to distribute these seeds, then say that you cannot do it without being paid transport. Otherwise, the popular position is –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I have made a statement and before any Members either agree or disagree with me, the Prime Minister has jumped up and said it is my individual view - (Interjections) - I think you have heard.

Mr Speaker, is it in order, therefore, for the First Deputy Prime Minister to assume that it is my personal view and that I have failed even in the area where the Executive Director of NAADS has directed the Prime Minister to go and distribute seeds?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, sometimes, I do not know how to rule some points to order. However, I think the difference this time is - and I need this to be understood. Previously, it was our own chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries who would receive some sample seeds for the benefit of members of Parliament to go and distribute.

However, that did not take away the responsibility of NAADS to do what it is mandated, under the law, to do. Therefore, these two activities were going on concurrently - NAADS would give seeds to our committee on agriculture, Operation Wealth Creation and various entities that would now have their own mechanism of doing seed distribution.

The difference this time, if that letter is anything to go by, is that now they are saying that the responsibility of distributing all seeds for this season will be with members of Parliament; the amount is the issue. Is it now true that the entire seed distribution, for example, for Omoro County, of 1,000 tons of maize and 500 kilogrammes of beans, which is the total from NADDS or Operation Wealth Creation - because that is the discussion we are having - if this is coming from our own chair of the committee - the former chair of the committee used to handle it differently. I think the concern is now - let me first finish my ruling. 

Anyhow, the point of order that you are raising was just by way of a clarification to the Prime Minister that you are talking about separate sets of events. Can the Chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture help with this?

2.42
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Janet Okori-Moe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The letter that the NAADS director wrote is unfortunate. When I got that letter, I personally went to the Executive Director of NAADS with the vice chairperson of the committee, hon. Akugizibwe, to express our displeasure.

As you may recall, this programme started during the Ninth Parliament and it was on the request of members of Parliament to have food security arrangements with NAADS. It started when hon. Mathias Kasamba, who is now in EALA, was the chairperson of the agriculture committee. It was continued by my predecessor, hon. Lowila. 

When I took over office, that was one of the things that she told me - that whenever the season begins, it is up to the leadership of the committee to request NAADS to provide seeds to members of Parliament. We had the first season under my leadership towards the end of last year with no problem.

However, this particular one has brought a problem because NAADS went on air and announced something which had been an arrangement between Parliament and NAADS Secretariat. 

We requested the Executive Director to write another letter to counter what had already gone to the districts. Even then, the opponents of some Members of Parliament who intend to stand in future are already using it as ground for unseating the Members.

We are aware of the problem and normally, NAADS does not just provide; the committee leadership writes. This time we wrote requesting that they provide members of Parliament with seeds except that when it reaches allocation, they do not involve us. 

Let us wait for the next communication from the executive director and we see a way forward. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when the initiative started, it was with the Food Security Forum of Parliament. It was their initiative. Then it got embraced by the committee on agriculture. 

This time round, there could have been miscommunication. Let it simply be corrected. NAADS will do what it should do. Operation Wealth Creation will do what it should do. What has been given to members of Parliament - they will continue doing what they have been doing with the seeds they have been getting. Let us leave it at that. Let the communication be corrected to reflect what has been happening. Let us not put too much attention on this, please.

THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Mr Speaker, I am really constrained because you have guided. I, however, think the MPs, my colleagues, must face it. If you are not NAADS and you want to distribute seedlings, why should you complain if NAADS is giving you instructions? The whole idea of distributing seedlings – you have heard reports of the Auditor-General that members of Parliament take seedlings and do not distribute them. Therefore, this whole idea of MPs distributing – what should stop the finance committee from writing to Bank of Uganda that they want to distribute money? 

Members of Parliament should not be involved in business that is not their business. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: From what is going on, please never make hon. Ssemujju the chairman of Finance because he is going to write to Bank of Uganda for distribution of money. (Laughter) I think, let us pause this matter here, honourable members. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, I was saying, before I was cut short by points of order – which I have found to be the only way of stopping me from talking - my understanding is that when the Member of Parliament gets these seeds, that strengthens them. They can go to the constituency with something in their hand. They help those who have not got seeds from Operation Wealth Creation. That is to your advantage and to the advantage of your voters; somebody is providing you with means of going to meet your people with something. It shows that you are a capable MP who can get 1,000 kilogrammes of seeds to give to the people. It is to your advantage. What is the problem with that? 

It does not stop even wealth creation from giving seeds. It is okay for everybody to give seeds, including members of Parliament who are concerned about their constituencies and they take them seeds, not only of maize but many other things. I do not see anything wrong with that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO DELIVER QUALITY, AFFORDABLE AND SUSTAINABLE KIDNEY DISEASE CARE AND TREATMENT TO THE NATION

2.49
MS SPELLANZA BAGUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to commemorate the World Kidney Day and to urge Government to deliver quality, affordable and sustainable kidney disease care in Uganda. The motion is moved under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. 

“WHEREAS, every year, Uganda through the Uganda Kidney Foundation (UKF) joins the rest of the world in commemorating the World Kidney Day, which is a global awareness campaign aimed at raising awareness of the importance of our kidneys;

AND WHEREAS, the theme for this year is “Kidney Health for Everyone Everywhere”, emphasising Universal Health Coverage (UHC) for prevention and early treatment of kidney disease;

NOTING THAT, Objective 20 of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy enshrined in the 1995 Constitution directs that the state shall take all practical measures to ensure the provision of basic medical services to the population;

AND WHEREAS, the health sector received a total of Shs 1.95 trillion representing 6.7 per cent of the total National Budget for the financial year 2017/2018, and 66 per cent of the budget was released;

NOTING THAT, a recent study screening for Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs) in Wakiso District revealed an unusually high prevalence of chronic kidney disease at 21.4 per cent; the study further indicates that kidney disease is evenly spread out among the urban and rural populations and yet the burden of undiagnosed kidney disease is high as well;

CONCERNED THAT Uganda has only eight doctors specialised in kidney care, treatment and teaching, a few physicians and nurses are under training in kidney care and treatment, which gives a ratio of 1:5,000,000 Ugandans, which causes a challenge to the doctors and the patients;

AND CONCERNED THAT renal replacement therapy in the form of hemodialysis is the most easily feasible option for kidney care in Uganda, yet there are only two government health facilities that offer hemodialysis services namely, Kiruddu and Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital;

FURTHER CONCERNED THAT a patient needs three sessions of dialysis per week at a cost of Shs 600,000 shillings each session, which makes it impossible for an ordinary Ugandan to afford the cost of kidney disease treatment and care;

ACKNOWLEDGING THAT the Organ and Human Tissue Transplantation Bill once passed into law will regulate and streamline organ transplants in Uganda and eventually reduce the costs of attaining organ and tissue transplant services from abroad;

NOTING THAT the health sector is pivotal in ensuring a healthy population that guarantees increased production and productivity; 

AND FURTHER NOTING THAT the challenges highlighted in this motion can be resolved if the requisite budgetary allocation is made towards the kidney disease problem;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this august House that:

    1. This Parliament joins the rest of the world to commemorate the World Kidney Day.
    2. In financial year 2019/2020, Government increases the budget allocation to support the management and care of kidney disease by Shs 7.571 billion to cater for setting up of dialysis units in the 13 regional referral hospitals.
    3. Government should train more specialised doctors and nurses to ease management and care of kidney disease patients.
    4. Government should empower regional referral hospitals to offer treatment and care of kidney disease by providing well-trained human resource and necessary equipment.
    5. Government should expedite the enactment of the Organ and Human Tissue Transplantation Bill to streamline service delivery in the sector.
    6. Government should expedite the enactment of the National Health Insurance Bill as a way of ensuring universal health coverage in Uganda.”

I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Member for Moroto District, Ntungamo and PWD Eastern, MPs for Kanungu, Kibuku, Sheema and West Budama. Would you like to briefly speak to your motion?

(Motion seconded.)

MS BAGUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me give a very brief justification. Kidney disease affects people of all calibre and socio-economic status; new-born children as a complication of malaria and severe infections, which are both highly prevalent in our settings; teenage mothers as a complication of pregnancy and childbirth; the productive youth, middle-aged, and the seniors. 

The prevalence of conditions that predispose one to kidney disease is high in Uganda, standing at 26.4 percent for hypertension, 2.9 percent for diabetes, 18.6 percent for overweight and 3.9 percent for obesity while sickle cell anaemia in children affects up to three million people. There is a high burden of undiagnosed disease, with only 7.7 percent of hypertensive patients knowing about their condition, according to one study.

The distribution of these risk factors is evenly spread out among the urban and rural population and our budget must support screening and adequate management of the conditions before they lead to kidney disease.

Mr Speaker, there was a recent screening for non-communicable diseases in Wakiso District, which I already talked about. I also gave the figures.

Lastly, the lack of peritoneal dialysis service for children in Uganda is another problem I would like to raise in the justification of this motion. The peritoneal dialysis, which is more user-friendly and the preferred mode of vernal replacement in children, is non-existent in Uganda. The children are, therefore, not given the necessary care or are subjected to care using dialysis machines meant for adult patients. This makes the services unaffordable and more complex.

This is my justification, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the seconder of the motion going to speak? I will pick only one seconder and the other one will speak during the debate. It was moved by a lady. Therefore, let the male support the motion.

2.57
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am in support of the motion to urge Government to deliver quality, affordable and sustainable kidney disease care in Uganda.

Mr Speaker, today, I was lucky to attend the International Kidney Day function here and I have noted with concern that the kidney disease is on the rise and the disease is not selective of the poor, the urban or the rural population. I have also noted with concern that it is very expensive to access kidney disease care.

Mr Speaker, we are here to deliberate on behalf of Ugandans and we are the arm of Government that helps to plan for our people. I call upon Members that we urge Government to increase funding so that the care and establishment of the facilities that can manage kidney diseases is achieved in all regions of Uganda. I have heard of an example of a kidney patient from Kisoro who has to travel to Kampala twice a week for dialysis. 

We have been informed that the cheapest rate at which you can get such a treatment in a public facility is about Shs 700,000 and in a private hospital it is about Shs 3.5 million. Imagine that cost to a common Ugandan. Even at the level of a Member of Parliament, with the responsibilities that we shoulder, you cannot afford to meet such care. It is very worrying to suffer from a disease which you know you will not have care for.

This is an opportunity and the right time to urge Government and also to prioritise the care for kidney disease patients so that we help our communities. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the motion that I propose for your debate is that Parliament passes a resolution to commemorate the World Kidney Day and urge Government to deliver quality, affordable and sustainable kidney disease care in Uganda. That is the motion I propose for your debate and debate starts now. I will start with the Member for Moroto District.

3.00
MS STELLA ATYANG (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I stand to support the motion that urges Government to deliver quality, affordable and sustainable kidney disease care in the country.

Mr Speaker, we have all heard from the motion that there is a rise of kidney disease in the country and it is increasing annually. We have also known that this disease is not discriminative; it affects people from both the urban and rural areas. The services to control or manage the disease are expensive.

We have these services just within the urban areas of Kampala and Mbarara. This means that the rural population is left out without care yet they are important people to our country.

In the whole country, we only have eight doctors and all these doctors are based in Kawempe, Kampala and in Mbarara. This means that they only give services to those who are able to reach them. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to urge the Government to increase funding to dialysis centres in order to train doctors and buy more equipment for regional referral hospitals and national referral hospitals so that the rural people can access these services. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from Uganda Kidney Foundation. They include Dr Emmanuel Ssekasanvu, Senior Consultant Nephrologist; Dr Peace Bagasha, Physician, Mulago National Referral Hospital; Dr Grace Kansiime, Organising Secretary of the World Kidney Day; and Ms Sandra Mukasa, President, Uganda Kidney Psycho-social Support Organisation. They have come to observe the proceedings, please join me in welcoming them. Thank you very much.

3.03 
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga East County, Kagadi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support this motion looking at the issue of kidneys, which has caused death to many Ugandans. I think this is the time that we should urge Government to come and protect the lives of Ugandans.

Mr Speaker, it is very sad to hear that a friend or child has a kidney problem without hope that tomorrow, they will still be alive. It is sad to note that we have only eight specialists in the entire country. I was really ashamed to hear about the ratio of one doctor to five million people. This is really sad. How about the people from Bunyoro and Kagadi? What will happen to them?

We have only one referral hospital in Hoima. If all these services could be brought to the common person - look at the costs involved. Mr Speaker, kidney failure is rampant in many communities and this is the time for the Ministry of Health to say that money should be set aside to control this disease. Good enough we are in the Budget process. Who knows, we may also be prone to this particular disease –(Member timed out.)

3.06
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support this motion. 

Mr Speaker, if you have not witnessed someone suffering from kidney disease, you may not know how expensive it is to manage such a condition. I had a friend who suffered from kidney disease and eventually died and it was not an easy matter. His entire salary would go to sustaining his life in form of dialysis - the machine that tries to support the kidney to function well and it was very expensive.

Whereas the mover of the motion talked about Shs 60,000, this money is charged in the common facilities. When my friend tried to go to the common facility, there was a threat of other infections. Mr Speaker, many people go for this cheaper treatment but the rate of getting infected with other diseases is high and so, my friend had no option but to go for the most expensive treatment.

As Members have rightly said, one ends up spending about Shs 1 million weekly for dialysis, which is very expensive. This goes hand in hand with tablets, which are also very expensive.

Many times when we move motions here, we debate them but when it comes to the budgeting process, nothing is done. It is just a matter of debate and it ends here. I would like to request that when we come up with some of these motions and debate them, they should be matched with appropriation in the House.

Mr Speaker, my suggestion is that some of these critical machines like those for dialysis should be taken to regional referral –(Member timed out.)

3.08
MR HERBERT KINOBERE (Independent, Kibuku County, Kibuku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion.  

Mr Speaker, it is true that the quality of services is not the best. As my colleagues have said, the only way to address such issues is to decentralise these services to the rural facilities. 

However, members of Parliament and the public should appreciate that we can minimise and control some of these diseases. For example, if you are advised to stop smoking because it causes kidney problems, some people will ask how smoking is connected to the kidney. They forget that as they smoke, it lowers the flow of blood to the kidney and at the end of the day, they develop kidney problems.

Many people have been advised to drink a lot of water; about 1.5 litres per day but very few people do that. In addition, people have been advised not to buy drugs over the counter but seek advice from the doctor. Otherwise, you may end up buying anti-inflammatory drugs like Ibuprofen.

Mr Speaker, if you asked each one of us to check our bags and vehicles, you will find that members have Ibuprofen and other medicines, which are not prescribed by a doctor because when we feel headache, we go to the counter and ask for such medicines yet we do not know their effects.

I would like to appeal to the entire public that as we look for ways of improving the quality of services, we should be mindful of the –(Member timed out.)

3.10
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also support the motion to urge Government to make kidney health care services affordable.

Mr Speaker, a colleague has just mentioned smoking as one of the causes but I have witnessed children at lower elementary levels or infants who have had Reno Failure; a situation where the kidney can hardly filter waste from the blood. Therefore, it should not only be restricted to adults who smoke.

As the world commemorates World Kidney Day with celebrations and jubilation, Uganda should be doing the opposite; we should be mourning. This is because from reliable sources on the streets of Kampala and Mbale, we have mysterious disappearances of street children for their organs and one of the crucial organs targeted is the Kidney. 

Therefore, if the line ministry has failed to remove these children from the streets and save them from this menace, they should have some level of protection for our children so that those who are trading in human body parts are nipped in the bud. I beg to submit.

3.12
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County South, Bukomansimbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion, urging Government to commemorate the World Kidney Day and also to support efforts in the management and care of the disease.

I stand here to support the motion because I recently lost a friend of mine due to Kidney disease about two weeks ago. He travelled all over the world and had a kidney transplant. The first Kidney was donated by his wife. However, soon after his second Kidney also got issues. His brother had to donate to him a Kidney so he got another transplant to make him live. 

However, throughout these procedures, he spent a lot of money on dialysis because he had to travel to Mulago Hospital every three days for dialysis, which was very expensive. A part from the cost of doing the service, there was the cost of transporting himself to the only national referral hospital, which had the facilities and treatment.

Mr Speaker, we need to support this so that Government can provide the Shs 7.5 billion, which is being talked about to decentralise this service from the national referral hospital to all regional referral hospitals throughout the country because –(Member timed out.)

3.14
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Baguma for coming up with this motion. Kidney disease places a lot of burden on the patients and more so, it is worse for those in rural areas. First of all, our regional referral hospitals do not have these machines. Secondly, we lack specialists.

My friend suffered from this disease but unfortunately, she passed on. However, when I went to visit her in Mulago, I could not believe the queues there and as I recall, there was one good specialist that all the patients were running after. Therefore, I would like to urge Government to have a deliberate programme - first of all - to get enough specialists to treat Kidney patients.

Secondly, we also need to acquire machines and take them to the referral hospitals because kidney disease is real. We also need awareness because when some patients need donors, they do not know where to exactly begin from because some of the would-be donors – I think because of lack of information – are usually not willing to donate their kidneys. I think Government, specifically the Ministry of Health – (Member timed out.)

3.16
MS JACKLET ATUHAIRE (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also stand to support the motion; it is timely. Eight years ago, my sister, Esther, was diagnosed with this dreadful disease and by then in Mulago, there were only eight machines. We were paying $400 unlike now when people are paying only $40 and there are 33 machines; it was awful.

The biggest problem now is lack of awareness programmes. We need a lot of these programmes. I would like to say that you would rather be diagnosed with HIV than kidney disease because HIV has a lot of support systems. The problem is that the symptoms of kidney disease are tricky. By the time the patients go to the hospital, the disease is in acute stage and they are dying. Therefore, the doctors - who are not even there - are managing people who are about to die. We really need more funding. Hon. Baguma, thank you for this motion. I beg to submit.

3.17
MS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity to support the motion. I think we should reflect today on the budget for health in this country. It falls short of the Abuja Declaration of appropriating 10 per cent of the budget to the health sector. 

My vice chairperson has talked about 6.7 per cent. This is below standard. Therefore, I would like to call upon Parliament that in this budget, we all rise up to support increase of the health budget to 10 per cent because without health, we cannot do much. (Applause) Health is wealth. A healthy country is a wealthy nation. 

Mr Speaker, the kidney disease we are talking about claimed the life of my brother three years ago. This disease leaves families impoverished - it leaves them poorer than they were before. Therefore, we need to come together to support each other to ensure that the health ministry of this country gets the required resources, not only to treat kidney disease but to take care of the general health of our people.

Mr Speaker, my vice chairperson talked about seven specialists at Mulago but I would like to assure you that if we do not improve the remuneration of these specialists, they will keep running away. As a country, we are challenged with attracting and retaining specialised health workers. So – (Member timed out.)

3.20
MR FRANCIS MUKULA (Independent, Agule County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the motion. It is a good one. However, my concern is that majority of Ugandans, especially rural communities, die without knowing what has killed them. They fall sick but end up buying Panadol; they do not know what they are suffering from.

Therefore, I urge Government to embark on sensitisation of the masses. Up to now, the kidney disease is killing people but they do not know what is going on. Adverts are on television and radio stations but which are not accessed by people in the villages. It is only us and the urban people who understand that this disease exists. 

Therefore, there is need to increase the budget on mass sensitisation. People die of pressure; people die of Hepatitis B and others. In my village, somebody said there is a disease called appetite because he could not pronounce Hepatitis; so, this is very important. Just saying that we need money to treat diseases without the population knowing the causes is like having Malaria and you - (Member timed out.)

3.21
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join the rest of the Members of Parliament to support this motion. I would like to put much emphasis on the last point hon. Mukula has just ended with and that is sensitisation. It is very important because a lot of our people do not know the causes and you have just heard our colleagues here say that a number of our children – in the past, people thought kidney disease affected only the elderly but now, quite a number of children are affected. Some people now imagine it is hereditary.

Therefore, it is very important for Government to invest in information so that there are outreach programmes designed specifically for our health units and the people who access them so that they get to know how kidney disease is got and how to prevent it.

Lastly, I would like to thank hon. Baguma for coming up with this money, which I think is very little, that is required for our 13 referral hospitals. The Shs 7.5 billion meant to help manage kidney diseases in our referral hospitals is a good amount to start with. I do not think it is too much money. So, I would like to emphasise that if we really do –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have students and teachers of Hillstone Secondary School Matugga from Wakiso District, represented by hon. Robert Kasule and hon. Rosemary Sseninde. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. 

3.24
MS GRACE NAMUKHULA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namisindwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion and I would like to put emphasis on Government strategy on developing human resource. When hon. Baguma was presenting, she said we have eight doctors for every 40 million people. What plans do we have, as Government, to deliberately train and have skilled human resources for our people? I am aware that Government provides scholarships. Do we have deliberate action for specific areas so that where we do not have the skill sets, we train people, or do we just give those that are near us?

Secondly, we are talking about sensitisation but there are no health educators in the districts. Even where they are, they are not facilitated to move around to talk to the people. I would like to urge Government to look at our interests and put in place deliberate actions and provide and facilitate human resources where they are needed.

3.25
MR ANGEL MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Mr Speaker, I need protection. I am not Apaa. Thank you. I also join the rest of the Members to thank the Member who brought up this motion. It is very unfortunate that today we are talking about one of the diseases that are harmful to us. If somebody attends and listens to our debate, the person may be tempted to think that the kidneys are the most delicate organs in the human body, which is not correct. I think we should be talking about all the five organs that are very delicate. 

Look at heart disease; when you go to Mulago, you will get shocked. I am told you can have one kidney and live with it. How about the heart that is only one? Can you have your heart removed instead of the kidney and still live? 

Therefore, if we are talking about kidney disease, we should also talk about heart and liver disease as well as the other diseases so that when urging Government, they do not look at only one disease. It is true that a few days ago, we were talking about looking for money –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the focus on kidney is because today is World Kidney Day. If you had listened carefully to the motion, you would have not gone into talking about other organs which are also vital. (Laughter)

3.20
MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, as we celebrate World Kidney Day, I would like to appeal to the members of Parliament to celebrate it in style. We must be practical. 

Honourable members, we have the power of the purse. We are the ones who appropriate money for Government. I think today, Parliament must show its power while we are celebrating World Kidney Day.

We only require Shs 7 billion to provide dialysis machines to our referral hospitals. Our people are lining up for dialysis and they are dying in the queue as they try to access the machines. I think it is incumbent upon members of Parliament to provide resources today. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Prime Minister must assure the country that we are going to provide Shs 7 billion in this budget to purchase dialysis machines.

Honourable members, I appeal to you not to approve any budget if the money for dialysis is not allocated. That is our power. 

Secondly, we have very many private hospitals which cannot afford dialysis machines. Why can’t we provide a loan system in some –(Member timed out.)

3.30
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also join my colleagues in supporting the motion. Kidney diseases are actually spreading across the country. 

Mr Speaker, the cost of treating kidney disease that we were shown here is very expensive for most of our people especially those in the rural areas. I also have a friend who suffered a kidney problem recently and he was taken to India. His son donated him a kidney but it did not work. Another family member went and donated a kidney and it did not help him either. He was only saved by the third donor. What if kidney disease attacked those who donated their kidneys, what would happen? This should be taken seriously. If we can arrest this situation by getting Shs 7.5 billion, this should be very good for us to save many of our people who are suffering without any remedy.

How I wish that the guarantee we approved here last week for the hospital that is going to be built in Lubowa - how I wish we could get clarification and an offer from Government that when that hospital is finally running, that even our ordinary people should enjoy the services of that hospital other than tagging it in dollars, which is already threatening our people.

Mr Speaker, India is taking a lot of our money through this kidney treatment for our people. If Shs 7.5 billion is sourced and Government can assure us, it should be spread across the country because now - (Member timed out.)

3.32
MR MOSES ADOME (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): Thank you Mr Speaker. I also rise to join colleagues in commemorating this special day. To me, this debate should have come 10 years ago.

I thank our doctors - of course we only have eight doctors in the country who are kidney specialists. Honestly, from my knowledge, the eight doctors are very experienced, committed and friendly. I have had an opportunity to interact with almost all of them; I know all of them are committed. Unlike other doctors who you find absent from hospitals, these ones are present every night. 

I have had the experience with a person so dear to me, suffering from kidney disease. What all Members have mentioned; the idea of it being expensive - we want money by budget to fund kidney activities, I think –(Member timed out.)

3.35
MR GENESIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion and I thank my sister, hon. Baguma, for raising it. First of all, kidney disease is a very bad disease. It affects every person as she mentioned; it does not discriminate. What made me feel worse is the ratio - which is one doctor to five million Ugandans. That is too big a number to be sustained.

Mr Speaker, statistics show that 31 million people in the United States suffer from kidney disease per year. What about Uganda, a poor country, if I may say? That means we need to do a lot to support the sector and the ministry in terms of financing. The Budget mentioned here is such little money that we must look into so that we give the money to the sector. It is very important that this money should be put or machines should be bought in almost every medical or health centres across the country, particularly in regional hospitals.

Mr Speaker, it is known world over that this disease kills every other person. It is first of all expensive and secondly, it affects the social, economic and the livelihood of all the persons affected including the patients. Therefore, if we do not do a lot to support this sector, we are going to have more trouble for Ugandans.

Mr Speaker, people travel all the way from upcountry to come to Kampala to look for –(Member timed out.)

3.37
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the motion tabled by my sister, hon. Baguma. Kidney disease is terrible in this country and more or less like Hepatitis and other terrible diseases.

I would like to urge Government to source funds to make sure that we support the improvement of service delivery in our hospitals. There is also a very big challenge at the National Drug Authority. The National Drug Authority has gone ahead to allow fake drugs to enter our country through all borders. When you go to other countries, their national drug authorities do not allow fake drugs into their countries.

However, here in Uganda, our borders are open; drugs can enter anytime and of course when you investigate deeper, they are fake drugs. People use them and get affected and that is why diseases are rampant today. We have kidney and heart diseases emanating from those fake drugs. I would like to urge the National Drug Authority to strengthen its surveillance so that we do not have such drugs in our country.

Secondly, I would like to also urge Government to construct district hospitals which can detect infections at that level. Once people move from villages, they can be detected at district hospitals and at the end of the day, they are referred to where they are supposed to go. I would like to urge Government to construct district hospitals and also for Nakasongola to be considered for a district hospital.

As I conclude, I would like to urge Government that we have also to look at Uganda Cancer Institute in Mulago. When you go to Uganda Cancer Institute, you will shed tears, you find -(Member timed out.)

3.39
MR SAM BITANGARO (NRM, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion and I would like to thank the mover of the motion. 

First and foremost, I would like to urge Government to increase funding to the health sector but more particularly because of this day in this specialised area.

The reason is the cost of treating this disease is very prohibitive. In fact, one would say the suffering from kidney disease is akin to a death sentence because of all the stories we have heard, there is no success story. Everyone has still to say, “I had a friend or brother who suffered from this disease and they all died.” Therefore, because of the cost that is so prohibitive, we need to look at this treatment in a different way. 

Secondly and more important, we need to have a national insurance policy. We have been singing about this but nothing comes through. We are getting to the third year and we will leave Parliament in a few years down the road but this national health policy is not here. We are the people; Parliament, we have the power and authority to create it. What are we doing? 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I urge that we should prioritise in our Budget –(Member timed out.)

3.41
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The World Health Organisation has kidney disease ranked at No. 12 as a world killer and it is increasing by 8 per cent annually. That is threatening because in Uganda, we do not have specifics of the figures.

However, where we have a response approach, our sick people have to travel up to Mulago. In Mulago, they have to meet the cost of their stay and that is extremely expensive for them.

What is also disappointing is that for over 38 million Ugandans, we have only 33 dialysis machines for treating this disease. Honourable members, when you talk about kidney failure, it is actually the last stage. Sometimes, they call it the end stage of the renal disease; when you are dying. In other words, your kidney was suffering wear and tear without you knowing.

What are the causes? This is what we should concern ourselves with most. The most dangerous cause is actually diabetes. Mr Speaker, Diabetes 1 and Diabetes 2 are on the increase in this country. Even children who are 12 or 15 years are suffering from it. Therefore, they are potential candidates for renal disease.

Mr Speaker, when you look at other causes, for example, high blood pressure or any insufficient supply to the kidney, in most cases, it is the issue of diet. We have people in this country who have studied nutrition and diet vis-à-vis blood group. We would be interested in involving them in the sensitisation package - (Member timed out.)

3.43
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (FDC, Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion moved by my colleague to commemorate the World Kidney Day and to urge Government to improve the treatment of kidney related diseases.

The trouble I have is that we just passed a report of the committee on the National Budget Framework Paper. If you look at the section of health, you will be reluctant to stand here to urge Government to provide the Shs 7.5 billion because there are more than 20 items there that are either unfunded or underfunded.

For example, if you look at the Uganda Heart Institute, for them to begin operating like a fully-fledged institute, they need Shs 259 billion and Government provided has not provided it. They are now actually housed in the Cancer Institute waiting for Mulago. Maybe, that is where they will find accommodation.

We were supposed to have Shs 50 billion to start the Uganda Ambulance Services but there is no provision. Therefore, the list is long. You just have to go back to that report, which we passed here. That is why I said, you would be reluctant to urge this Government.

Unfortunately, we do not make the situation better. If we are the same people who have passed a resolution here to donate money to someone called an investor from Italy who is going to put up a first class facility and yet, we cannot deal with ours -

Finally, Mr Speaker –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think your time is really up now. Honourable members, can I close this debate and put the question to this motion? 

3.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Baguma for the motion. 

Kidneys are very important organs in the body. The major function of kidneys is that they act as a filter of waste products and the unwanted toxins and chemicals in the body and also balance the fluids.

Once something goes wrong with the kidneys, you are in deep trouble. Therefore, we would like to appreciate the comments made by the honourable members.

The non-communicable diseases, a number of which actually cause complications on the kidney, are on the rise. It is proper that we should examine the Budget and see how we can allocate additional resources to address this challenge.

The reason we passed the construction of the Lubowa Hospital is that some of the services it is going to offer include issues like dialysis but most importantly, organ transplants, including kidney transplants.

Mr Speaker, as the members said, we have eight nephrologists; kidney specialists who have been specially trained by Government so that we can address this challenge. They have the capacity to even do kidney transplants. What Government is left with is that Cabinet has already passed the Bill on organ transplant. It is being finalised by the First Parliamentary Counsel and soon, it should be tabled in Parliament for the first reading. Once it is processed, we should be able to establish a unit where we can even do kidney transplants, which is over and above dialysis.

Dialysis is basically supportive; the kidney has failed to filter and therefore, you put an artificial system to do the work of the kidney. However, the ultimate therapy is to do a transplant once the kidney has failed. Government is in that process of ensuring that we have transplant services within the county.

I just want to assure the House that Government acknowledges that this is a serious problem, which is on the rise and we are doing everything possible to address it. Therefore, as we conclude the budgeting process, let us look at areas where we can raise funds within our Budget to address this challenge. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that Parliament passes a motion for a resolution of Parliament to commemorate the World Kidney Day and to urge Government to deliver quality, affordable and sustainable kidney disease care and treatment to the nation. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member for your motion and we managed to do it on the day itself. Thank you and congratulations.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OF QUALICEL BUILDINGS, BUGANDA BUS PARK AND THE RETROSPECTIVE RENT CHARGES BY THE CURRENT OWNERS OF THE BUSINESS COMPLEX, MR DRAKE LUBEGA AND MR MANISUR MATOVU

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The learned Attorney-General is not here. Next item.

PRESENTATION OF THE PETITION ON THE CLOSURE OF BUSOGA UNIVERSITY BY THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR HIGHER EDUCATION

3.50
MR ANDREW KALUYA (Independent, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Under rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, allow me present this humble petition of stakeholders of Busoga University to conduct an investigation into the purported closure of Busoga University by the National Council for Higher Education. The petition reads:

“Busoga University started operating in 1999 after being granted a provisional licence by the Ministry of Education and Sports to operate and provide university education in Uganda. Since then the university has graduated over 13,000 students in different academic disciplines;

Busoga University was in the process of getting a charter accreditation status. Indeed the National Council for Higher Education inspected Busoga University in 2014 and following its inspection that year, the National Council for Higher Education communicated that Busoga University was ready to be granted the charter accreditation status on the whole but only needed to iron out two issues, which were to do with finances and staffing before such a grant was affected;

To the surprise of everyone, on 19 December 2016, the National Council for Higher Education published a notice of its intention to revoke Busoga University’s provisional licence. In its notice, the National Council for Higher Education labelled a number of accusations against Busoga University’s conduct of its affairs as the basis for their intention to close the university; 

The National Council of Higher Education proceeded to gazette its notice of intention to revoke the provisional licence of the university without giving Busoga University the opportunity to exercise its constitutional right to a fair hearing. Besides that, the National Council for Higher Education’s notice of intention to revoke the provisional license of the university also carried an order from the National Council of Education to Busoga University not to recruit new students; 

Busoga University, faced with such high handed action of the National Council for Higher Education decided to challenge the notice of intention to revoke the provisional license of the university before the Constitutional Court under Constitutional Court Petition No.6 of 2017; 

On 20 January 2017, Busoga University secured an interim court order from the Constitutional Court, which restrained the National Council for Higher Education from implementing its notice of intention to revoke its provisional licence including the order not to recruit new students pending the conclusion of hearing the main application and the main petition;

The court order, in effect, restored the university’s status quo, that is, that the university should continue operating until hearing of its main petition against the National Council for Higher Education, which was conducted under Constitutional Application No. 11 of 2017. The court has not, up to this day, concluded hearing of the university’s main petition against the National Council for Higher Education’s conduct;

On 4 December 2017, in a clear act of contempt of court, the National Council for Higher Education wrote and published a letter indicating that it revoked Busoga University’s provisional license;

The illegal and contemptuous conduct by the National Council for Higher Education has caused a lot of damage and stress not only to the university but also to its students, the alumni and other stakeholders; 

It has since appeared that the National Council for Higher Education and the Ministry of Education and Sports were motivated by a corrupt commercial interest to relocate Busoga University’s students to other private institutions of higher learning at a personal gratification fee; 

This has come to be reflected in the reasoning of the National Council for Higher Education that Busoga University’s students did not have the university entry requirements under the law and were thus not fit to be recruited to study at the university and be awarded university degrees by the university; 

Lastly, at the same time, the National Council for Higher Education, together with the Ministry of Education and Sports insisting that the same students without minimum entry requirements should be relocated to other institutions chosen by the National Council for Higher Education or the Ministry of Education and Sports.

Therefore, by this petition, your humble petitioners pray to this Parliament as follows:

    1. The Parliament of Uganda carries out an investigation into the purported closure of Busoga University by the National Council for Higher Education;

    2. The Parliament of Uganda directs the Minister of State for Higher Education to immediately halt its planned relocation of students from Busoga University to other private institutions; and 

    3. Parliament directs that the Ministry of Education and Sports should fast-track and expedite the government takeover of Busoga University in the manner that was directed by His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda and your petitioners are duty bound and will ever pray.” 

Hereto, your humble petitioners have appended their signatures. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to lay it on the Table?

MR KALUYA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table, a petition about Busoga University’s purported closure. I beg to lay. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, this petition stands referred to the Committee on Education and Sports to handle within the framework of our rules but also subject to my previous communication on handling budgetary matters as of now. That is subject to that ruling, which started at the beginning - the committee is expected to work on this within the framework of the rules subject to that.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE PROPOSED ANNUAL BUDGET FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

3.58
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): I wish to lay, in accordance with section 13 (7)(11) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, the budget estimates for Financial Year 2019/2010 and the liabilities for the Financial Year 2018/2019. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. What are those, honourable minister?

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, together with the budget I am laying the following papers -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you need to help us because we need to see you laying them. No, lay them one by one, honourable minister. Please put them on the other side then you lay one by one. Clerk, can you please help the minister to put the documents the other side so that he can lay them, one by one?

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, as I said, the budget is the accompanied by the following documents:

    1. Report on public debt guarantees, grants and other financial liabilities for Financial Year 2018/2019
    2. Government medium-term debt management strategy for Financial Years 2019/2020-2022/2023
    3. Report on grants received by Government in the current Financial Year 2018/2019
    4. Certificate of Compliance of the annual budget of the previous financial year, issued by the National Planning Authority
    5. Certificate of Financial Implications for the budget for Financial Year 2019/2020
    6. The Treasury Memorandum certifying the measures taken by the ministry on the Auditor-General’s report of the preceding financial year and on the management of the Treasury
    7. The Appropriation Bill, 2019
    8. A statement attesting to the completeness and reliability of the budget for Financial Year 2019/2020
    9. Certificate of Compliance on Gender and Equity
    10. Multi-year statements for the coming Financial Year 2019/2020
    11. The approved estimates of revenue and expenditure, both recurrent and development
    12. Vote 561 – Kaliro District: Summary vote estimates and items –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that an accompanying document for the budget?

MR KASAIJA: Yes, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Vote for Kaliro? (Laughter)

MR KASAIJA: Sorry, Mr Speaker. It is a continuation.

    13. Budget estimates for the statutory votes
    14. Tax expenditure report for the period July 2018 - March 2019
    15. The Income tax (Amendment) Bill, 2019
    16. The Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2019
    17. The Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2019
    18. The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2019
    19. The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2019

Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are we now using a different procedure? I thought Bills have a different procedure. Bills are supposed to be read for the first time and referred to committees.

Therefore, remove the Bills. They are going to be moved by motion properly. However, among the documents accompanying the budget, I have not heard the list of the accounting officers; was it laid? Is the minister requesting to withdraw the document?

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, it was among - I submit the list of accounting officers for Financial Year 2019/2020. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the list?

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, the list is right here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the proposed annual budget for Financial Year 2019/2020 has been laid today. The law says it should be laid by 1st April. Therefore, the Government has acted ahead of time. Congratulations. (Applause) 

The accompanying documents have been presented. It is supposed to be by 1st April and if you read the law, you would know that “by 1st April” means it is the last day. It stands referred to the Committee on Budget to handle within the framework of the budget law and to help us deal with this matter expeditiously.

Can I have the Bills read for the first time, please? They should have been substantially on the Order Paper for reading for the first time but I will allow you to read them for the first time today and we forward them to the committee.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I would like to move that the following Bills –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Move them one by one and I hope they have Certificates of Financial Implications.

MR KASAIJA: They do, Mr Speaker.  I would like to move that the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be read for the first time-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you should say, “I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read for the first time.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it accompanied by the necessary documents? Otherwise, state on record that it is accompanied by a Certificate of Financial Implications.

MR KASAIJA: It is accompanied by a Certificate of Financial Implications. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I have a number of Bills -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have one Certificate of Financial Implications for all of them or a Certificate of Financial Implications for each one of them?

MR KASAIJA: The Certificate of Financial Implications covers - this is what happens when you are not prepared by your technical staff. 

Mr Speaker, the Certificate of Financial Implication for the Bill entitled, “The Excise (Amendment) Bill, 2019” is herewith attached.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That Bill has been read for the first time and it stands referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to handle within the framework of the Budget Act and report to Parliament expeditiously.

4.12
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read for the first time. It is accompanied by the Certificate of Financial Implications.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to handle within the law.

4.13
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read for the first time. The Certificate of Financial Implications is hereby attached.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and it stands referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to handle within the framework.

4.13
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I would like to move that the Bill entitled, “The Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read for the first time. It is also accompanied by the Certificate of Financial Implications.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it looks like your Certificates of Financial Implications are not signed. Could you sign them as you lay them on the Table? I am giving you that latitude. The one you have just sent to me is not signed. 

MR KASAIJA: Thank you. I will sign.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sign them now because you do not have another chance to do this. Kindly sign them as you lay them on the Table. Let him start with the Certificate of Financial Implications he is laying on the Table and then sign others later.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, which Bill is that?

MR KASAIJA: I had already laid before Parliament the Bill entitled, “The Stamp Duty (Amendment), Bill 2019.” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

4.14
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read for the first time. The accompanying Certificate of Financial Implications is herewith attached.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

4.15
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that “The Appropriation Bill, 2019” be read for the first time. It is also accompanied by a Certificate of Financial Implications.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Budget to look at within the framework of the budget and advise the House.

MR KASAIJA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are welcome, honourable minister. It has always been very easy for you. What happened this time? You have been out of the game for a long time and I think you need to come back. Thank you.

Honourable members, the budget documents are here and that means we are set except that there are some documents we need to deal with right now before I make any statement. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE MINISTRY OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have to start with a sound apology.

4.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Mr Speaker, I would like to express our sincere apology for the delay in laying on the Table our ministerial policy statement for Financial Year 2019/2020.

This has been occasioned by some conditions beyond our control. Apparently, it took some time for our technical team to harmonise the figures with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This was the cause of the delay. We sincerely apologise.

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay, in conformity with the public -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is no longer in conformity. Just lay the document because the law has a date to it and there is no conformity anymore now. 

MR D’UJANGA: Thank you. I beg to lay on the Table the Ministerial Policy Statement covering - 
Vote 017 - Ministry of Energy and Development 
Vote 123 - Rural Electrification Agency 
Vote 311 - Uganda National Oil Company 
Vote 312 - Uganda Petroleum Authority for the financial year 2019/2020. 

I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Natural Resources to handle within the framework of the budget law and advise us on how to proceed.

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it separate from the –

4.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Ministerial Policy Statement for Vote 146 - Public Service Commission for financial year 2109/2020. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. You owe the House an apology. Please put your apology on record.

MR KARUBANGA: Mr Speaker, on behalf of the Public Service Commission, we tender our apologies. They actually wrote and said it was beyond their control.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

REPORT OF THE DELEGATION TO THE AFRICAN WOMEN’S CRANS MONTANA FORUM IN DAKHLA, MOROCCO, FROM 16 TO 21 MARCH 2017

MS VERONICA ERAGU: Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are supposed to lay. You cannot lay it from there. Why don’t you come here? (Laughter) 

MS ERAGU: Mr Speaker, can you give me a chance to say something?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you going to lay any document?

MS ERAGU: No, because it has been misplaced in the Office of the Clerk. I have been there –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then, we can leave it at that. We will deal with it next time.

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE NO.2 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are we ready with this?

4.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, please give us three minutes so that we crosscheck with the committee and come back.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we move to item 20?

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES BILL, 2018

4.22
Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Alex Ndeezi): Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I beg to amend clause 1 by way of deletion of the entire clause. 

The justification is that the commencement of an Act of Parliament is clearly provided for under section l4 (1) of the Parliament Act.

Mr Chairperson, what that section says is that commencement takes effect from the day of publication or of gazetting. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, the proposal from the committee is that clause 1 be deleted. Can I put the question to that deletion proposed by the committee? Honourable minister, if you have no objection, I put the question that clause 1 be deleted from the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, deleted.

Clause 2

MR NDEEZI: Clause 2 is on interpretation. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We can defer clause 2, which is interpretation and come back to it when we finish with the rest of the text. Let us stand over this clause.

Clause 2, stood over.

Clause 3

MR NDEEZI: We have an amendment on clause 3. Insert immediately after the word “expertise” the words “or an expert appointed by the council”. 

The justification is to provide for another qualified person, apart from the medical doctor, to determine and confirm disability.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, is that clear? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR NDEEZI: We propose to amend clause 4(2), immediately after the word “the Constitution”, by inserting the following:

“The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its optional protocols”. 

Secondly, in this provision, there is the word “people” appearing in the second last line of the provision. We amend by substituting the word “people” with the word “persons”.
The justification is that we are trying to encourage the Government to implement the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. 

Secondly, we would like the provision to be applicable to both legal and natural persons. The current provision says “people” but we want to use the word “persons”, meaning it is applicable to both legal and natural persons. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the amendments from the committee. I put the question to those amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR NDEEZI: Mr Chairperson, we beg to move an amendment to clause 5 by way of replacing the entire clause with the following:

“Clause 5: The right to enjoy family life
    1.  A person with disability has the right to a home –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, you have to read it the way it is drafted. If there are numbers, read them to help the people capturing the record.

MR NDEEZI: “Clause 5: The right to enjoy family life

    (1) A person with disability has the right to a home and to found a family and is entitled to:
(a) 	Have sexual and other intimate relationships;
(b) 	Enjoy equal rights at and in marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution;
(c) 	Guardianship, trusteeship and adoption of children under the relevant laws;
(d) 	Care for and bring up his or her children and shall not be separated from his or her children except in and in accordance with the best interest of the children.
2. 	A child with disability shall not be separated from his or her family or the person entitled to bring up that child except in accordance with the law and in the best interest of that child;
3. 	A child with disability shall enjoy all rights enshrined in the Children’s Act, on an equal basis with all other children and shall have the rights to know and be cared for by the parents or those entitled by law to bring them up;
4. 	A parent of a child with disability shall have the duty to take care of the child and ensure the child’s proper upbringing and development; and
5. 	A person who contravenes this section is liable to a fine not exceeding 24 currency points or a term of imprisonment not exceeding 12 months or both.”

The justification is for clarity and to make the provision more encompassing and applicable to all persons.

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal is to delete the existing clause 5 and in its place, put what the chairperson has just read in fair detail. So, I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR NDEEZI: In Clause 6, we beg to amend by inserting a new sub clause (1) to read as follows: “A person with disability shall not be subjected to any form of torture, cruel or degrading treatment”. In the same clause, at Page 5, we beg to delete the word “harmful” in the third line of paragraph (b) of the Bill.  

We also beg to insert a new sub clause (3) to read as follows: “A person who contravenes this section commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to imprisonment not exceeding one year or a fine not exceeding 20 currency points or both.”

The justifications are: 

    1. To align the provision with Article 44 of the Constitution of Uganda; 
    2. To provide for all traditional or cultural practices to which a person with disability may be subjected; and
    3. To provide for a penalty in case of a contradiction of the provision. 

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, chairperson. Those are the proposed amendments in Clause 6. You proposed a new sub clause (1) to be inserted. That means the existing sub clause will become sub clause (2). Correct?

MR NDEEZI: Let me repeat.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I need to understand you properly, honourable chairperson. In paragraph (b), why would you delete the word “harmful?” The text says, “A person with disability shall not, without his or her free and informed consent, be subjected to traditional…” What do you want to say?

MR NDEEZI: As a committee, we think our people should only be subjected to practices on the basis of their consent or will. If we retain the word “harmful” it means someone can still say the only way one can be subjected to torture is when the situation relates to harming him or her. 

Maybe, I should give more information on this section, Mr Chairperson. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you saying they should never be subjected to –

MR NDEEZI: The prohibition of inhuman and degrading treatment of person with disability –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are we restricting it to harmful practices, which the Bill suggests or you are saying they should not be subjected to any cultural or traditional practices without their consent even when they are harmful or not? 

MR NDEEZI: We only deleted the word “harmful.”  Other traditional or cultural practices can continue. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Does it make sense to you, Members?

MS NAKIWALA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. We would prefer that the word “harmful” is left within the Bill because the Constitution of 1995 already provided for the will and consent of all individuals in Uganda before anyone is subjected to any harmful practices. So, the word “harmful” is useful in this particular case to protect the statement. Otherwise, without it, it becomes null and void. I wanted to make that correction.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I support the proposal by the minister. As people with disabilities, we believe that not every practice is bad. We should only restrict and safeguard where we believe the practice is going to be harmful. We also know that the people with disabilities can make consent. Therefore, I agree with the minister’s proposal that we should only protect where the practice is going to be harmful. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that the position in the Bill? 

MS ABABIKU: Yes and let us maintain it. 

MR NINSIIMA: Mr Speaker, I want to also suggest that we remove the word “harmful” because if somebody has consented, there is no way he can still be subjected to harmful practices. In this sense, the word “harmful” does not apply. 

MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, there is a witness who appeared before the committee and said that she was forced to marry and according to culture, people thought it was okay. However, it was not done in accordance to her will. So, we are looking at situations of that nature and thinking that the word harmful can be abused.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Mr Chairman, mine is slightly different. I have difficulties in reconciling clause 3, which is medical examination by court and then, in clause 6, we are also saying the person should not be subjected to any forceful medical examination.

Supposing there is contention over the claim of disability as envisaged in clause 3, how does it relate to the protection under clause 6, where for the purpose of establishing whether the person is disabled or not, under the provision of clause 3, they may have to be subjected to further medical research? I just needed clarification.

MR NDEEZI: In clause 3, we are looking at a situation where someone claims to be blind but people around say the person is not a blind. Therefore, we will say we consult the doctor. Then in clause 6, it is for prohibition of inhuman and degrading treatment.

Clause 3 is about whether people agree that you are a blind person or not and then we refer to a doctor or a technical person and in clause 6, it is all about prohibition of inhuman and degrading treatment.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Mr Chairman, won’t somebody use the provision under clause 6 to their advantage? - Because if there is a contestation on whether you are disabled or not, we may want to subject you to the order of court. One can say that is degrading and inhuman to me, as provided for under clause 6, because one would be already claiming that they are disabled and you want to subject them to check-ups. Therefore, I would like to see how you resolve that so that it does not become a defence against what you have provided for under clause 3.

MR NDEEZI: When it comes to court, both clauses 3 and 6 can apply. It depends on the facts of the case. In clause 3, we are trying to establish or determine whether it is true that you are a person with disability in case of doubt. In clause 6, we are trying to prohibit inhuman and degrading treatment.

I agree with you, there is a relationship because while in court, the court may need to know whether you are a person with disability - and in that case, you can be called upon. They are related but there is no contradiction at all. 

Mr Speaker, I propose that we continue.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I still have an issue with paragraph (e). You were saying that a person with disability shall not without his or her free and informed consent be subjected to traditional and cultural practices; How will the people with disabilities fit within those communities, when for them, they must give their consent every time something happens that applies to everybody in the community?

MR NDEEZI: Mr Chairperson, I withdraw that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Won’t you be alienating them from the community?

MR NDEEZI: I have withdrawn the amendment in (b).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. The honourable chairman has withdrawn the amendment. You will make the people with disability to be subjected - because each time the whole community has agreed on something and you say for the people with disability, you need consent to be part of the community. That will alienate them instead. The harm is where the consent will be required.

That is withdrawn but can I put the question to the rest of the amendments? I put the question to the amendments as proposed by the chairman without this one in (b).

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, clause 7 is on page 6 of the Bill. It is on non-discrimination on the provision of education services. Our first amendment is on sub clause (1), by substituting for the words “a school or an institution of higher learning” with the words “an institution of learning” wherever it appears. The reason is to make the provision applicable to all institutions of learning.

We also have an amendment in sub clause 4(b) around the end on page 6 of the Bill. By inserting the following words immediately after the words “submit in a period not exceeding three months from the time of admission of the learner.” 

Mr Chairperson, this provision requires the institution to make modifications to accommodate a learner with disability. Therefore, we are providing for a period within which modifications must be made.

In sub clause 9, after sub clause 8 on page 7, we would like to insert three sub clauses. Sub clause 9: “Government shall provide braille, alternative scripts and sign language in all Government aided Institutions of Learning as may be appropriate,”

(10) “An Institution of learning that enrols a learner with a disability shall provide sports equipment specific to the needs of the learner with disability and put in place measures to facilitate the participation of the learner with disability in sports activities and other co-curricular activities.” 

(11) “A parent or guardian, who wilfully prevents a child with disability from attaining education commits an offence and shall on conviction be liable to a fine not exceeding 50 currency points or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or both.” 

The justification is;

    1. We use the term “an institution of learning” to make the provision applicable to all institutions and secondly, to provide for a timeline within which the institution must make adjustments.

    2. To encourage the Government to facilitate the learning process of persons with disabilities. 

    3. To provide for a penalty in case of non-adherence to the provision.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is the amendment as proposed by the chairperson.

MS ABABIKU: Mr Chairperson, I seek for clarification under proposal No.9 where Government shall provide Braille or alternative script and sign language in all Government-aided institutions of learning as appropriate. 

My area of clarification is that this phrase is targeting all Government-aided schools but we have learners who need specialised schools; for example, those with hearing impairments and sight impairment. We have this challenge in almost all the districts. For example in some of the regions, you may even hardly get these schools for the specialised learners.

My inquiry is; whether the committee has provided for an effort to be put by Government to ensure that these specialised schools are also put either at regional or district level – because not everybody can move to a centre in Kampala because they do not have these branches. Thank you.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I also wanted clarification for purposes of being consistent. In (6) we have provided for imprisonment for the offence being one year or 20 currency points and here we are providing for imprisonment of six months and option of a fine of 50 currency points. Doesn’t it then raise the issue of contradicting ourselves - that here you are giving a lighter option than what we provided for under (6). Why don’t we be consistent? Therefore, instead of 50 currency points if the intention is six months, then we can go for 10 currency points.

MR NDEEZI: Mr Chairperson, I appreciate his concern but remember once you put a question on a provision it means we should be moving forward; you already put a question on (6).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, his point is, that because in the other place, you have one year with the corresponding currency points of 20, now you have six months with currency points of 50.

MR NDEEZI: It depends on the gravity of the situation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, you have already determined the gravity that it is six months only. So he is saying that it should now correspond; it should be equal in weight. Therefore, if you want 50 currency points, that means you have to increase -

MR NDEEZI: It is okay if you have an amendment and the justification.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The justification, honourable chairperson, is that in the other clause, you said one year or 20 currency points. Now here you are saying six months or 50 currency points. It is not consistent. Ordinarily if this was 60, then the other one 20 currency points, six months should have been 10.

MR NDEEZI: Okay. Thank you, Mr Chairperson and my colleagues. I think what he is saying is that we can make an improvement on this provision by making it one year instead of six months.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: I was of the opinion that if the chair could accept, we are talking about a parent or a guardian to this very child that we want to help. Therefore, instead of making the sentence more punitive, we could allow because this parent has to come back. 

Therefore, the six months is okay. If you could reduce the fine to 10 which would be Shs 200,000 because what you are providing here is Shs 1 million. One currency point would be Shs 20,000. Therefore, if you are punishing this parent to look for a million shillings maybe it is going to be high. Remember this is the guardian or the parent to this child.

MR NDEEZI: No, the offence is very heavy. It is an act of negligence for a parent not to take care of the kids and parents who do so should receive heavy punishments. Mr Chairperson, I have a problem. One says he is a parent and yet they cannot take their child to school; if we get you what should we do with you? We should give you a heavy punishment. Therefore, I am of the view that we should retain this position.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Even if it is one year, it would still have to be 20 currency points not 50 to be consistent.

MR NDEEZI: I beg to stand over it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think it is a straightforward thing. The issue is, if you are saying one year or 20 currency points, then it is only proper that in the next clause, if you are saying one year, it should also be “or 20 currency points”.

MR NDEEZI: I agree with you. I think it is a consequential amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So which one are we going with? Are we taking one year or six months?

MR NDEEZI: I go by your ruling.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, I have just guided; I have not ruled.

MR NDEEZI: One year, not six months.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: One year or 20 currency points. Okay, that is the amendment.

MR ABALA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I am worried when we talk about one year for a parent who has been taking care of this child right from childhood and the child is now more than ten years. Due to some circumstances that he has had, and he has failed to sort out a few things, we are subjecting him to a situation that is going to have him in prison.

My view, Mr Chairperson - remember he has other dependants. Now because of this child, this man is subjected to pay so many currency points or spend months in jail. I suggest that we adjust this provision or the committee stands over it and looks into it because we are likely going to make a law that is going to be a bit of a challenge.

MR NDEEZI: Mr Chairperson, I appreciate the Member’s concerns. However, if you are a responsible parent, when you are available and with full liberty, right to work and earn a living, right to educate your children, you cannot tell us that you will be more useful when you go to prison. Therefore, we feel that a period of one year is good for you to go, learn, and be reformed by the time you come back. Six months is not enough.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, Mr Chairperson, that is the committee position of six months. You cannot change your mind from here now. All we are trying to do is that equate it in currency point terms so that instead of 50 it becomes 10 so that it is consistent. We are not introducing anything new. You have already proposed six months.

MR NDEEZI: I concede.

MR ANYWARACH: I agree with you in totality because the issue is actually harmonising 50 currency points with six months. Therefore, I think, as a committee, we also saw six months was okay.

Now when the question of harmonising the currency points became an issue here, I thought then that we cannot proceed to presume that we are amending to one year. I will take your guidance that we should accept what is equivalent, in terms of currency points, to six months.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which is 10 currency points. Do we agree on that, chairperson? Now, in 10, “An institution of learning that enrolled a learner with a disability shall provide sports equipment specific to the needs of the learner with disability.” Isn’t there going to be a backflip of this problem that they will not now accept to admit them, to avoid them altogether because there is no compulsory requirement for them to take them? Therefore, instead of going through the problem of having to acquire equipment; buy this and that, they would rather say, take your child with disability somewhere else. I am just posing a question.

MR SSEWUNGU: As we legislate on this law, we are putting an obligation on Government and we expect that Government is supposed to provide that equipment in schools. Therefore, it will be against the law if a head teacher refuses to admit a disabled child in the school because there is no equipment. As we are going to imprison the parents for not taking this child to school, Government also has an obligation to provide the necessities. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, this is a private school.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Chairperson, a private school should have minimum standards and among them are those required by the disabled. Those are the equipment. They actually have better equipment than Government. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Can I put the question to this amendment, as proposed by the Chair?

MR KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, I have an issue on (9). If we say, “Government shall provide braille, alternative script and sign language in all Government aided institutions of learning as appropriate”, I see this as a very tall order. I am looking at it from a budgetary point of view. 

Instead of saying “Government”, we should say “special institutions of learning for disability as appropriate”. In those institutions where children who are disabled go, all these should be provided. 

It will be very difficult to cause all schools to provide this equipment when there are schools, which are meant for disabled children.

MR NDEEZI: Mr Chairperson, we were very careful and mindful of the financial implications. That is why we used the words “as appropriate”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do the words “as appropriate” accommodate the minister's concern?

MS NALULE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. Actually, I feared when the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Planning said that persons with disabilities have to go to segregated schools. 

I never went to a school, which was specifically designed for persons with disabilities. What Article 4 of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities on state obligations asks governments to do is to provide services to persons with disabilities. The question of whether and when all these services can be provided can be of a progressive nature.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Chairperson, the law is trying to save Government. Schools provide monthly returns and in those monthly returns, they can provide you with the categories of children. If they say that schools A and B in Kalungu have students who are disabled, you have to pay attention to those schools.

If you think of creating special areas, that means you are going to shift people; children from Karamoja to Gulu to bring them to those areas, which is very expensive because you will have to put them in boarding schools –(Interruption)

MS NAKIWALA: Mr Chairperson, the information I am giving to hon. Ssewungu is that number 5 in the old provision in the Bill is exactly what he is talking about. Upon indication that these people are available in those schools, it is incumbent upon the Government to provide the necessary infrastructure as mentioned.

Therefore, the new law would be to highlight the categories; maybe the preferred gadgets. We would leave it as it was in number 5 in the old Bill. I beg to move.

MR SSEWUNGU: As I conclude, Mr Chairperson, most of the schools they are constructing are given those facilities in some areas; either in regard to classes or toilets. I think members can bear witness with me that that is what is happening.

Honourable minister, what is your fear if you have already provided some facilities? Maybe, you do not visit them -

MS ASAMO: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. As provided by the Chairperson of the committee, it is speaking of an institution of learning that enrols a learner. Therefore, the minister should not be worried. We are talking of people who are enrolled, whom you need to plan for. 

I will tell you that when you send Universal Secondary Education (USE) money to the schools, the headmaster will tell you, “I cannot buy a ball for only four blind children. I would rather buy for 400”. However, we are talking about a right to sports. 

The ministry should think of these children participating in sports. Sometimes, they have been left to keep uniforms and not to participate. This is just an obligation; it is already being done but we need to come in and say, as you enrol me, make sure that I also benefit from all the programmes in this school. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Can we proceed and take a vote on this? Can we take a vote on the amendment as proposed by the chairperson of the committee?

MS ABABIKU: Mr Chairperson, you raised a pertinent issue saying that – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That issue is already covered by 7(3)(a). Please, look at 7(3)(a); they cannot be segregated on the basis of disability. If the school or institution of higher learning refuses to accept an application for admission made by a learner with disability who is otherwise qualified for admission, that school has committed an act of discrimination. It is taken care of there. 

Can I now put the question?

CAPT. LAKOT: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. It seems, from the submission of members, that they are not in agreement with what the honourable member talked about; creating special needs schools. 

However, there could be disabilities that cannot be handled academically, where you cannot put them in an academic environment. There are some disabilities that need special handling like those who cannot clean themselves and the hyper ones who, in one way or another, cannot be put in the same school with normal children. If possible, they should be catered for.

MR ABALA: Mr Chairman, in Ngora we have a school for the deaf and there is another in Madera. However, after sitting Primary Leaving Examinations, the deaf children are admitted to Ngora High School, which is not a deaf-oriented school at all. Incidentally, Government has been recruiting teachers to go and translate for these children, just like there are translators in Parliament here.

I do not understand what my colleague is talking about. I would like to get clarification from her.

MS ASAMO: Mr Chairman, I think to allay the fears of the honourable member, we are already saying the Government shall provide braille, alternative scripts and sign language in all government-aided institutions. We have these special government-aided schools. For example, he cited Ngora School for the Deaf and the Madera School for the Blind in Soroti. 

However, we are promoting inclusive education because as you advance to university, we do not have any special university in Uganda. We are saying that where possible, we should promote inclusion. At the lower level one would be in the school for the blind but the moment they get to secondary, they will begin having challenges of inclusion. 

When we talk about braille, it is more specific to a blind child. When you talk about sign language, it is more specific to people having hearing challenges. Those are the specialties we are providing. The provision of these services does not mean they should remain in the quarters. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, what has been going on to date and what new thing is the law imposing on the Government?

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, I have been on the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for almost eight years now. Disability has been discriminating disability and that is why we have even moved away from “people with disabilities” (PWD) to the new phrase “persons with or without disability.” When you find “PWD” written, we do not want it to be discriminative and you think that this is for “persons with disabilities.” It can be persons with or without disability.

Secondly, we have looked at the situation where those who want to go to the main stream schools to study with the rest should not be discriminated against. Therefore, what we are imposing on Government is inclusion so that if such a child wants to study in the ordinary streams with persons without disability, they should be aided with the necessary tools to study. However, we are not taking away all these institutions which are specialised in nature. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it clearer now? Can I put the question – (Ms Nakiwala rose­_) - which number five? The one, which is in your Bill?

MS NAKIWALA: Mr Chairman, we would like to adopt the old sub clause (5) instead of generalising “all schools in the country” because implementation is going to be a problem. However, hon. Ssewungu put it rightly that there is always a declaration that we have these people who need these facilities and it is incumbent upon the Government to ensure that those facilities are put in place but not in all schools.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Committee chairperson, had you looked at clause 7(5)? What is the implication?

MR NDEEZI: Clause 7(5) talks about institutions of higher learning but in our amendment, we are talking about the Government. Therefore, instead of the obligation being on the institutions of higher learning, in our amendment we are talking about the Government.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: How do you harmonise the proposed sub clause (9) and sub clause (5) in the Bill? What is the difference between sub clause (9) that you are introducing and sub clause (5), which is already in the Bill?

Mr NDEEZI: Mr Chairman, I concede. Let us delete sub clause (9) appearing in our amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Actually, sub clause (5) is wider than the proposed sub clause (9). So, do we take out sub clause (9) because there is sub clause (5)? 

I now put the question on the remaining amendments –(Mr Nzoghu rose_)- I hope you are not going to talk about currency points because they have already been sorted. (Laughter)

MR NZOGHU: No, Mr Chairman. They propose that a parent or guardian who wilfully prevents a child with disability from attaining education commits an offence. I see that this is still not comprehensive because some other persons, who could be an authority or even distant friends, can also cause this. 

I think we need to add a third element to say, “a parent, guardian or person who wilfully prevents a child with disability from attaining education commits an offence” so that whether it is the parent, guardian or any other person outside that circle, they are liable in case it is proved by court that they prevented the child with disability from attaining education.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What would be the relationship of the person other than the parent and guardian? What would that person be doing with the child?

MR NDEEZI: It is very tricky to enforce that. In our case we are specific by saying either parent or guardian. “Guardian” may be an uncle, an aunt or some other person. If we make it open, it is very difficult to enforce.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Or some stranger. What would be the connection? Are you saying the one who gets the child on the way and stops the child from going to school?

MR NZOGHU: Not really, Mr Chairman. I have also noticed that there are children who have been unable to attain education because their friends or a certain teacher in their class had a contribution in stopping them from attaining education.

I would like to tell this Parliament that the parents or guardians are categories of people recognised in other laws like the Children’s (Amendment) Act. For example, imagine a teacher who deliberately or intentionally stops a child from attaining education when there is even proof that the person committed the offence. What do we do to such a person? That is what I am trying to challenge; let the chair explain that to this House.

MR NDEEZI: Mr Chairperson, I think this point is covered in clause 7, on non-discrimination, on the provision of education services.

Once the school – (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: I would like to request the chairperson to clarify further. In your opinion, as the chairperson, what disadvantage do you see in expanding this? Do you see that there is a deficit? Do you even acknowledge that there is a situation where a child’s education can be curtailed not necessarily by either the guardian or the parent?

MR NDEEZI: Mr Chairperson, I propose that after the word “Guardian” we add the words “any other person”. The Member is saying that there are situations when it is not the parent or guardian who may wilfully stop a child from going to school. If that is the case, maybe we can say a “parent or a guardian or any other person.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In that case, why don’t you just say “a person?”

MR NDEEZI: Hon. Nzoghu, I hope you have captured the concern. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In that case, you can say “a person” and then you define it to include the parent and a guardian and any other person. 

MR OSEKU: Mr Chairperson, I think the concern of hon. Nzoghu is right. You may have children in either care centres or remand homes and in those places, you may not have the parent or a guardian. I would like to propose that we should say “a parent, guardian or a person having responsibility over a child who wilfully… Otherwise, it is not just any other person but someone who has a responsibility over a child. 

We could, therefore, say “a parent, guardian or a person having responsibility over a child who wilfully – (Interruption) 

MR AOGON: Mr Chairperson, first, I would like to agree with you that by the time we apply the words “any person” it would have covered everyone. I think we do not need to introduce the words “guardian or parent”.

When you add the words “responsible person”, what happens to someone who just took a child and kept him or her at their house? I think the words “any person” caters for those categories. When you say “responsible”, you take out other people who are doing something wrong.

Mr Chairperson, I would like to agree with you that the words “any person” cover everyone. It is wide enough. I think we do not need to –

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairperson, if we amended the provision as you have advised, it will be perfect because the word “a person” would include all.
For example, if an administrator of a school - because of the fear of the responsibility imposed on them and decides not to admit these students – the penalty clause is not only for the three clauses he is amending but the entire clause 7 starting with - school, institutions of higher learning - shall not discriminate. You can see the term as it goes down. Therefore, we can say “a person who commits an offense shall be held responsible. I think this will sort out the problem. Thank you, Mr Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay? We shall say “a person who wilfully prevents a child with disability from attaining… The word “a person” covers everyone. Is that okay? Can I now put the question to all the amendments that have been proposed up to this point? I put the question to the amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR NDEEZI: The committee proposes to insert three new sub clauses, on page eight of the Bill; (7, (8) and (9) immediately after sub clause (6) to read as follows –

“(7) The Minister responsible for Health shall ensure that in the provision of sexual and reproductive health services, in public hospitals, a person with disability is not discriminated. 

(8) The Minister responsible for Health shall ensure that sign language interpreters are included in the public hospital organisational structures and that information, including drug labels, is provided in an accessible format for persons with disabilities.

(9) The Minister responsible for Health shall ensure that persons with albinism have access to free or subsidised -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Where are we honourable chair? You are running away from us.

MR NDEEZI: Mr Chairperson, I have mentioned that the person who was typing skipped (9).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are we doing the proposed new sub clauses (7) (8) and (9)? In clause 8, they are proposing - 

MR NDEEZI: We would like to add clause (9).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which is not in our text. 

MR NDEEZI: Yes, it is not captured.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, but we do not have that text. Where did it come from? 

MR NDEEZI: I have it.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, read the new sub clause (9) again because we thought you were making a mistake.

MR NDEEZI: “(9) The minister responsible for Health shall ensure that persons with albinism have access to free or subsidised –“ Sunscreen lotion is very important for persons living with albinism because they depend on this lotion in their daily lives. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERON: There was hon. Ababiku on clause (7). Can I start with the minister and then we open up for others? Honourable minister?

MS NAKIWALA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Hon. Nalule was granted leave of Parliament to go and draft the Persons with Albinism Bill, 2019 for the House to consider. So, let us leave that extra addendum that he is trying to insert for the honourable member who is coming up with the extensive Bill. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: 7, 8, 9, 10; where is this coming from? Is this a new one? This is from the committee still. Hon. Ndeezi, where did this come from because we do not have it? We agreed that no new proposal will come to the Committee Stage because we have not looked at it. 

MR NDEEZI: Mr Chairperson, it was agreed on in the committee but there was a typing error, which I am trying to correct. I am the chairperson of this committee; so, Members should trust me. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But the challenge that we have is it is not shared. We do not know it. (Laughter)

MR SSEWUNGU: Actually, the amendment is okay but he is being specific on individuals, which is dangerous for this Bill. That means you have to define others. If you go for that one because if you specify the name “albinos”, then I will also specify the individuals I know – (Interjections) – It is a disability but the honourable minister has stated that there is a Bill in the offing, specifically for that.

Therefore, within this very one, it is still catered for, as is stated under Schedule 2, Section 2 (7) and (8). However, the moment you go specific on a particular character of a disability, it will require you to name others within. Honourable members, since we are going to receive that Bill, why don’t we get it, more so that it is coming at Committee Stage?

MR NDEEZI: Mr Chairperson, please, turn to page 30 of the Bill, which clearly indicates that albinism is one of the categories of people with disabilities. The current law we are trying to repeal also includes albinism as a disability. I agree with you, Mr Chairperson and the minister. One Member intends to move a Bill to cater for persons living with albinism. This is what we call “anticipation” in our Rules of Procedure, meaning that the Bill has not yet come. She was granted leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill but it has not yet come. 

So, if we say all issues to do with albinism should be excluded from this Bill, it means that people living with albinism will have no protection between now and the time the Bill comes. So, Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Anywarach, is this the new set of amendments that you proposed as a committee? 

MR ANYWARACH: We agreed on the issue of albinism but the issue was that they are bringing a Bill specifically for persons living with albinism. However, we are looking at the peculiar nature of disabilities. Little persons are little persons. They do not have albinism. The blind are blind and the deaf are deaf. They are not little persons.

The peculiarity here is that if you know, the persons living with albinism never stand for long in the sun. We are saying since they have issues and their gel is only Shs 15,000 per person but they cannot afford, let us – under this special area of health – ask Government to make that provision. They are not even many.

It will not be offensive, especially under health. When we bring the other Bill, it will be comprehensive to look at all these other areas of concern. It is just our request as a committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, from a purely drafting point of view, the way it is drafted is very repetitive. That is why I keep on insisting that these kinds of amendments should be passed through the Department of Legal and Legislative Affairs. You see, you cannot say, “the Minister responsible for Health shall ensure that...” in all the clauses and yet you can say, “the Minister responsible for Health shall ensure that (a) (b) (c) (d)…”

From a purely drafting point, it gets very repetitive and yet, the issues that you are trying to separate could have been listed. This is now a completely drafting issue. I do not know whether we can have this looked at by the drafting team to harmonise it properly for us. This particular amendment might have to be looked at properly so that we are advised better. You have issues of principle with them.

MS NAKIWALA: Yes, Mr Speaker, because the Certificate of Financial Implications that we received at the beginning did not look into issues of provision of these particular items so we might have to revisit that idea as well. However, I request the House to accept that it is very critical for these people to get the oils and lotions, much as it is also critical for all other people with disabilities to get the wheelchairs and shoes that they require to use. So, let us, first of all, handle what we received at this stage so that any additions that require financial implications can be dealt with in the coming laws. I thank you.

MR AOGON: Mr Chairperson, I would like to concur with my chairperson. He noted it very well. We cannot dwell on anticipation. We do not know when the other Bill on albinism is coming to the Floor. (Applause) These people - like hon. Anywarach put it - are not very many. We can only ask the drafting team to help us. We can stand over this so that they re-organise the piece of work that we are handling; then we bring it back here and deal with it. I feel that would be good for those people. That will be something for them to celebrate Easter with. I kindly beg.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. In my view, this is the Bill handling issues of persons with disabilities in general. I support the committee, where necessary, in bringing the types of disability in this Bill because I look at this - as a person with disability - as our main Bill.

Secondly, under clause 8, restricting sexual and reproductive health services to only public hospitals, to me, is very limiting. The minister oversees even private hospitals. So, I propose that we leave it as “hospitals” so that when I get in a private hospital, I will be catered for and be able to get services. Thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Chairperson, I would like to seek for your indulgence that since you are an expert in the drafting of laws, can’t we do this here so that we do not waste time coming back for these two sessions?
Secondly, when you go to the main Bill, in clause 8 (b); “provide accessible labour beds for expectant women who are persons with disabilities, accessible examination tables, wheelchairs….” 

When you come to clause 7, the Minister of Health shall ensure that in the provision of sexual and reproductive health services in public hospitals, a person with disability is not discriminated against. 

I see a repetition here. We have to reorganise this. Mr Chairperson, with your expertise, which I am trying to emulate, you could help us improve this because –

MS NALULE: Mr Chairperson, the issue that the honourable member has raised in clause 3 (c) concerns the facilities that we have to find in antenatal wards, labour wards and so on. However, the other provision is talking about sexual and reproductive services. This caters for family planning products like condoms and the rest. I think this is different, unless you want a merger. 

MR ABALA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I would like to thank you for the guidance you have given. What you said is very critical. 

What my brother said earlier on is also very important. For a long time, the minister has always given us stories about albinism. The committee, in their wisdom and expertise, because they consulted widely, have come up with this provision to help us. 

The minister has talked about this issue frequently but we do not seeing the provision. Assuming she brings it in 2030, what will happen to that category of people? That is why, in my opinion, we should go ahead with the proposal from the committee and ignore the proposal from the minister. Thank you.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. On clause 8, the proposal that states, “The Minister of Health shall ensure that sign language interpreters are included in the public hospitals’ organisational structure”. This has been amended by the Member from Adjumani.

I see more than three ministries, which are very critical here including the Ministry of Education and Sports, the Ministry of Public Service and – I wish to seek clarification from the chairperson on the basis of their conclusion to specifically address themselves to the Minister of Health and leave out the others.

Secondly, Mr Chairperson, including the interpreters is not comprehensive enough because it is one thing to include but it is another thing to adopt. I thought that possibly, the chairperson of the committee should see whether it may make sense to, for example, paraphrase it and replace “included” with “adoption”. 

It would then read - I would like to be careful and say, “the Ministry of Health ..” because I have said there should be more than one ministry and we should see how to harmonise it. I propose that it reads, “The ministries responsible shall ensure that sign language interpreters are adopted in the hospital organisation structure.” 

“The Minister responsible for Health shall ensure that sign language interpreters are adopted”. I am not comfortable with the current proposal because it is not comprehensive enough to give a clear interpretation of what to include and what to adopt.

MR KARUBANGA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I would also like to come from the angle of affordability. I know this is important, especially where we have speech and hearing deficiencies. Let me broaden it by saying that wherever where we have service delivery, we would need these services. Therefore, when it comes to accommodating that in the structures of service delivery, it might be difficult to afford. 

What I would propose is, in those hospitals like the regional referral hospitals where the numbers are very big, we can have that provision. However, considering it at the health centres II, III, IV, district referral hospitals and regional referral hospitals may not be affordable. Thank you.

MR AOGON: If this House can support Shs 1.3 trillion for the specialised hospital in Lubowa, what about this small thing? Mr Chairperson, we can say that we have these facilities in every district. We would like to bring these people on board. Put yourself in a scenario where you are the disabled one. While people are watching and enjoying what is on the television, you are excluded. We are talking about inclusion. How I beg that this House can understand this and agree to include these people now. We spend a lot of money on very many projects.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Chairperson, what is happening now is, most of the television stations have specialists interpreting for people with hearing defects. 

Secondly, in most of the teacher training colleges, the teachers are trained for that. Most of the teachers coming out underwent that training. Therefore, we cannot fear this because of financial implications, yet, the Bill went through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and got a Certificate of Financial Implications. Thank you.

MR ABALA: Thank you, my friend, hon. Aogon. Look at UBC, which has a sign language interpreter and yet, it is not a private entity. Parliament, every financial year, allocates money to UBC. 

Even in this House, the chairperson of the committee has an interpreter right here in the House. Therefore, if we do not provide for such a service, it means that a category of people will always be discriminated against and excluded from the services they should also enjoy. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR AOGON: Thank you for that information. Mr Chairperson, just last week, somebody gave an example here that one of our members, hon. Baba Diri, uses a gadget that is worth over Shs 30 million. How many people out there with disabilities need such gadgets and we are not providing for them? What feeling do they have? Do they feel they are part of Uganda or they are outside our borders? And they are voters who support us every day.

Honourable colleagues, this is the time for us to stand with the people living with disability. These monies we are talking about - how many millions do they need anyway? Has anybody tried to cost -(Interjection)- if we can pass money for Lubowa, the other day we were here seeing passing money for aeroplanes and loans? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the people who need braille are the blind; the people who need sunscreens are albinos and all these other categories. All these are people with disabilities. Therefore, why are we elaborating it here again?

I would like to propose this; the minister responsible - because what we are doing here is under the non-discrimination principles; you want to give an obligation to the Minister of Health. Therefore, if you said something like this: “The Minister of Health shall ensure that services, equipment and provisions usually used by persons with disabilities are provided free or at subsidised rates.” (Applause) Something like that.

It would have taken care of the whole thing in - because the services are those kinds of services that they need and the equipment they need. If you want to define the provisions in another way - I am just suggesting – then you would also say, because this category of people will need these services and equipment; this category will need sunscreens - without elaborating all the details.

MS ASAMO: Mr Chairperson, I would like just to say, for sign language, it is a profession. Therefore, it cannot be called just a service. These people go to school to learn to do what -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You can use the phrase “professional service.”

MS ASAMO: Something like that because the professional service - that is why the minister is worried because at least, we need to have them and before I come to a regional hospital, I should be referred and somebody has to come on board. Therefore, for sign language, we have to look at the professionalism bit of it. Thank you.

MS NALULE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. I would like you to allow me to enrol you into using the language of persons with disability. Maybe, where you put the word “equipment”, we normally use the word “assistive devices.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Well, I am just using ordinary language. Assistive devices, yes; I mean you can use those words so that you get the peculiarity of this particular professional services, assistive devices and all those other provisions like sunscreens and what - you can redraft like that instead of having all these.

MR NDEEZI: Mr Chairperson, I thank you for the proposal. Very good in general but not so good in specific ways, why? We assume that you all know that most people who make this law do not know that sunscreen is important to people with albinism. Over there, most people do not know that the equipment that hon. Baba Diri uses in this Parliament is called braille.

Therefore, I would suggest that we make a general statement but when it comes to implementation, people will not help us at all. I thank you but I am very scared.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the way laws are arranged - the body of the law does not have to have details. Where you require details, you put them in the schedules or regulations. You would have laws or this would be one law if you have to draft the way you have drafted this one.

You are going to repeat every paragraph because you want to be clear, yet, by trying to be clear, you become unclear. Therefore, because you need to segregate these things - it is easy to read because you have made people here - if there is anything that needs explanation, you define it. If there is anything that requires listing exhaustively, you provide for it in the schedule and you will have covered it sufficiently well.

However, for now, let us look at these things again – no, we are not going to proceed with this discussion because we are not sufficiently guided on this. Therefore, what we are going to do is to pause this matter here in Clause 8. We will pause it here and resume these discussions next week.

What we are going to do is ask the legal people to look at this drafting again to see what can go in the section, definition and schedules. That is easy for everybody to read and understand what we are talking about. Okay, can we resume?

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Youth and Children Affairs) (Mr Florence Nakiwala): Mr Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House report thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the Whole House report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Youth and Children Affairs) (Mr Florence Nakiwala): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered parts of the Bill titled, “The Persons with Disabilities Bill, 2018” and has deleted clause (1)(c), stood over clause 2 (c), passed clauses 3 to 7 with amendments. I beg to submit.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Youth and Children Affairs) (Mr Florence Nakiwala): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report from the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clause 8 has been a bit problematic; we need to look at it again, redraft it and take out all the excesses and condense it and see how to make it a workable clause than what it looks like at the moment. 

Honourable minister, do you have something on the Bill? Please, look at this. We have sufficient time to look at it again and if there is anything similar to this, we will be able to look at them in the course of this time and when we come back, we will be able to deal with this Bill more easily than we have.

If there is any amendment that you have proposed like this one which has now come from the committee, please, circulate it so that we know what it is. These things that show up when we are at Committee Stage complicate a lot of things for us.

Please, chairperson, if you have some other things left in your armoury, bring them out in the course of the week so that by the time we come to sit, everybody knows what we are going to do for each clause. 

Any other matter? Honourable members, this House now is adjourned until Tuesday at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 5:59 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 2 April 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 
