

Thursday, 15 March 2018

Parliament met at 2.08 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Today is 15 March and every 15 March, we expect ministerial policy statements from the ministers of Government. I have been informed by the Clerk that so far, we have only two policy statements; one from the Ministry of Public Service and another from the Parliamentary Commission. 

I hope we will have received all the policy statements by close of business today. This is because if we delay with them, it impacts on the rest of the budget processes and that could cause us problems in future. We do not want a similar situation to occur like the one that we had last year, where we had to push Members so hard every time for us to have those things delivered in time. 

As you are aware, by 31 May 2018, we should pass the budget. If we start by delaying on 15 March, then the processes that will lead us to properly handle the budget by 31 May would be disrupted and that will cause us other challenges. I am urging the Government to make sure that we receive the policy statements today and also to facilitate the shadow ministers to present their alternative policy statements so that the committees can have comprehensive coverage of both statements.

Honourable members, 12 March every year is Commonwealth Day. On this day, the Head of the Commonwealth, Her Majesty the Queen of England, gives a statement. Today, we received that motion. We should have done this on 12 March but Parliament was on recess, so we could not. We have chosen today to be the day when we do that. 

Honourable members, I present to you the statement from the Head of the Commonwealth, Her Majesty the Queen:

“Commonwealth Day Message 2018 by Her Majesty the Queen, Head of the Commonwealth and Patron of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA) 

Theme: ‘Towards a Common Future’

We all have reason to give thanks for the numerous ways in which our lives are enriched when we learn from others. Through exchanging ideas, and seeing life from other perspectives, we grow in understanding and work more collaboratively towards a common future. There is a very special value in the insights we gain through the Commonwealth connection; shared inheritances help us overcome difference so that diversity is a cause for celebration rather than division.

We shall see this in action at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting which takes place in the United Kingdom next month, bringing together young people, business and civil society from across the Commonwealth.

These gatherings are themselves fine examples of how consensus and commitment can help to create a future that is fairer, more secure, more prosperous and sustainable. Having enjoyed the warm hospitality of so many Commonwealth countries over the years, I look forward to the pleasure of welcoming the leaders of our family of 53 nations to my homes in London and Windsor.

Sport also contributes to building peace and development. The excitement and positive potential of friendly rivalry will be on display next month as we enjoy the Commonwealth Games on the Gold Coast, Australia. Contributing to the success of the Games, alongside athletes and officials, will be thousands of volunteers.

Voluntary effort, by people working as individuals, in groups or through larger associations, is so often what shapes the Commonwealth and all our communities. By pledging to serve the common good in new ways, we can ensure that the Commonwealth continues to grow in scope and stature, to have an even greater impact on people’s lives, today and for future generations.”

Thank you. That concludes the message from the Queen.

2.14
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

As we talk, there is no co-trimoxazole, or what we call Septrin in layman’s language, for HIV patients or clients in the country. The importance of co-trimoxazole is prophylaxis; it is used to prevent opportunistic infections that would be attacking HIV patients. These might be skin rashes, diarrhoea, to mention but a few. 

For the last three months, we have not had co-trimoxazole in this country for HIV patients. Some patients have been buying it – for those who can afford - and some are not taking it, which is very detrimental to them and to this country. In most cases, HIV/AIDS patients die because of a combination of those opportunistic infections. 

My prayer is: Could this House direct the Ministry of Health to make sure that they immediately procure Septrin or co-trimoxazole for HIV patients in the country? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.16
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member for raising the issue. It is an issue of concern and I would like to undertake to bring it to the attention of the Minister of Health so that she can take appropriate action.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, according to our rules, we are supposed to have Prime Minister’s question time today. However, today there is Cabinet and the Prime Minister is chairing the Cabinet meeting, so there will be no Prime Minister’s question time. We will be handling other business on the Order Paper. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON FUNDING THE MANAGEMENT OF THE NODDING DISEASE SYNDROME

2.17
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had undertaken to come to this House with a statement this afternoon on the funding of the programme aimed at combating the nodding disease, as we agreed yesterday. 

However, I am afraid that as of now, he has not been able to get here. He is one of the main presenters in the special Cabinet meeting which is considering the budget. I crave your indulgence that we stand over that matter until he comes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, item stood over.

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

2.18
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi East County, Kibaale): Mr Speaker, I apologise to this House and the general public about what I said in the House yesterday and outside the House the other day. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How do we treat what you said in the House yesterday?

MR TWINAMASIKO: Mr Speaker, I would like to apologise to this House, once again, and I would like to withdraw the statement regarding all forms of beatings. (Laughter)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Twinamasiko very much for obliging to your guidance by coming back to the Floor. Yesterday, I raised a point of procedure fronting a request that you allow us to suspend rule 54 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to allow Members of Parliament to ask for clarification following the statement that was made by hon. Twinamasiko in which he said he only meant another beating. 

Some of us wanted to ask clarification as to which other beating he meant, other than the one we know in the dictionary. (Laughter) Can we ask the honourable member to simply explain the other beating? Mr Speaker, I still beg for your indulgence. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that statement is on our record and once a matter is withdrawn, we treat the space it occupies as if it was empty. Therefore, it is empty and there is nothing to seek clarification on. Thank you.

MR ABALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Over the past one week, we have read from the press, watched on television and heard on radio the various utterances concerning our colleague, hon. Persis Namuganza, and the Speaker of Parliament. 

This matter concerns this institution and it is very critical for us to understand the dynamics involved so that we see how this matter can be handled. Would it be procedurally right if we let the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline handle this matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member, for raising that matter. I think we have all seen and read what the honourable member is referring to, which relates to the leader of this institution, Parliament. 

There are discussions in the media attributed to a member of this House, which we do not know in details and we do not know where they are coming from. Usually, when such matters arise that require that the House be briefed on what is going on, we have a Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline that should examine these matters. 

The issues raised, before affecting the Speaker of this House, affect her as a Member of Parliament, whose privileges are also guaranteed by our own rules and laws of this country, including the Constitution. Where we have a matter of challenge of privilege, we usually refer this matter to our Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. 

Honourable members, the circumstances of this matter are such that it is difficult for us to comment one way or the other because the facts are not known. Therefore, I substantially refer this specific matter to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to look at the circumstances under which these statements are being made, the factors leading to them and the solutions, if that committee can recommend to the House what we should do as Parliament. Clerk, extract the minutes and transmit them to the committee so that their operations begin immediately to look into this matter and advise the House later on how we should handle it.

Honourable members, such things are not necessary. Like I commented yesterday in relation to the statement that has just been made, they impact on the integrity of this institution negatively. We owe it to the House and its Members that we avoid such things because the House is because of all of us. It is a unity that is disrupted; it is a purpose that is interfered with each time one Member is affected either by statements or acts that are adversary to the intentions and reasons for the existence of this institution. Therefore, let us try and avoid such things. 

When such things come up, of course we have institutions that can handle them. For this particular matter, as I have already said - The chairman is here; you will wait for the minutes which should be extracted today and please, proceed with this matter expeditiously and come and advise the House on the way forward.

Honourable members, in the distinguished strangers’ gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of legislators from Baringo County Assembly and Tharaka Nithi County Assembly in Kenya. They include:

1. 	Hon. Ameja Zelemoi, Deputy Speaker/leader of delegation; 
2. 	Hon. Lawi Kipchumba, Majority Leader
3. 	Hon. Reuben Chepsongo, Majority Whip
4. 	Hon. Sam Lourien, Minority Leader 
5. 	Hon. Tuwit Daniel, Minority Whip
6. 	Hon. James Warata
7. 	Hon. Anita K. Mbae 
8. 	Hon. Karen Karimi
9. 	Hon. Erastus Kinyua
10. 	Hon. Charles Nyaga
11. 	Hon. Erick Nthumbi 
12. 	Hon. Samuel Karangi 
13. 	Hon. Marcus Agenga 
14. 	Hon. Grace Omondi
 
They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

In the public gallery, we also have a group of Ugandan-Indian families returning to Kampala for the first time after their expulsion in 1972 by President Idi Amin Dada. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause) Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.28
MR WILLIAM NOKRACH (Independent, Persons with Disabilities): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table two reports. One is the report of the delegation to the 47th session of the ACP Parliamentary Assembly and intersessional meetings of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly held from 6 to 13 October 2017 in Brussels, Belgium. I beg to lay

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR WILLIAM NOKRACH: The second one is a report of a delegation of the Parliament of Uganda to the 48th session of the ACP Parliamentary Assembly and the 34th session of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly held from 13 to 20 December 2017 in Port-au-Prince, Haiti. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let the records capture that. Under the rules, we will find time and discuss what these meetings were about and what we can pick as Parliament and as a country to roll out to the citizens of this country.

LAYING OF PAPERS

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS, FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

2.30
THE MINISTER FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement of the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs for financial year 2018/2019.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for handling within the framework of the budget process.

2.30
THE MINISTER FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige):  Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Public Service for the financial year 2018/2019. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government to handle within the framework of the budget process and advise the House.

2.31
MS ROBINAH NABBANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kakumiro): Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for vote 104, Parliamentary Commission, for the financial year 2018/2019 by the Parliamentary Commission, March 2018. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to handle within the framework of the budget and we see what they recommend for the budget.

2.32
THE MINISTER FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to handle within the framework of the budget.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO INVESTIGATE THE ALLEGATIONS OF CORRUPTION, MISMANAGENT AND ABUSE OF REFUGEE PROGRAMMES AND FUNDS IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there have been consultations between hon. Musa Ecweru and hon. Hassan Kaps Fungaroo. I do not know how they are going to handle the order of business.

2.32
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There has been this short consultation but we agreed that the motion comes first. His statement will be made in response to the motion.

This a motion for a resolution of Parliament to investigate the allegations of corruption, mismanagement and abuse of refugee programmes and funds in the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM), moved under rule 55 and 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, 2017. 

“WHEREAS Uganda has been globally commended for its hospitality to refugees and has become the top third refugee hosting nation in the world;

AND WHEREAS the Government, through the Office of the Prime Minister and the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, has over the years been responsible for planning and implementation of the activities relating to the disaster and refugees programmes in Uganda;

AWARE of the many reports and investigations that have implicated the Office of the Prime Minister in the mismanagement and abuse of relief and refugee funds, which has brought disrepute to this country’s good image and has drawn the attention of the United Nations High Commission for Refugees, the global body responsible for refugees; 

CONSIDERING that several calls have been made by this august House for the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to make a statement on the systemic and recurring crisis and corruption allegations and mismanagement of disaster programmes and refugee funds in the Office of the Prime Minister;

SHOCKED that the minister has ignored the calls and directives by Parliament to address the concerns raised by Members of Parliament, mostly from areas hosting refugees on the crisis facing the host communities;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda as follows:

    1. The Parliament of the Republic of Uganda condemns any form of corruption, mismanagement and abuse of refugee care programmes and funds in Uganda.

    2. A select committee of the Parliament of Uganda be instituted in accordance with rule 186 of the Rules of Procedure to investigate the following:

    a) Allegations of corruption, mismanagement and abuse of refugee programmes and funds.
    b) Allegations of trafficking of young girls for sexual exploitation.
    c) Other forms of violations of human rights and dignity of the refugees in Uganda.

    3. Parliament urges the Executive, particularly the minister, to bring a motion to this House to address the gaps in the Refugee Act, 2006, especially to cater for the role of local governments, sub counties, town councils, etc. in management of refugee affairs…” -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, are you still proceeding by the motion? The copy I have talks of “table in Parliament the long awaited refugee policy”. Can we proceed with the text that Members have, please?

MR FUNGAROO: Yes. Thank you for that correction, Mr Speaker. 

“…3. Parliament urges the Government of Uganda to: 

a) 	table in Parliament the long awaited Uganda Refugees Policy for purposes of streamlining the framework and roles of the different stakeholders involved in the refugees and host community care and development programmes;

b)	 table in Parliament a motion for an amendment of the Uganda Refugee Act, 2006 so as to provide for the roles of local governments (subcounties, town councils, municipalities and districts, et cetera) in the refugee hosting areas in refugee and host community care and development programmes.

4. 	Parliament urges the Government of Uganda and all development partners to streamline the development programmes in districts and counties hosting refugees in Uganda to address the concerns of the host communities”. 

I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is the motion seconded? It is seconded. Honourable member, I would like you to consider paragraph 3 (b) in the amendment; instead of saying “table in Parliament a motion”, you could say “a Bill” because a motion does not amend an Act of Parliament.

The motion is properly seconded. Would you like to briefly justify your motion?

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you for the guidance, Mr Speaker. In the interest of time, I will leave part of this motion to be handled by my colleague, especially on the issues to do with finance. I am going to limit myself to the concerns of the host communities. 

1. 	Land
a) 	Terms and Conditions for Offering Land Used for Hosting Refugees
Unlike in other parts of Uganda, the land used for establishment of refugee settlements in northern Uganda, for example in West Nile, is owned by different clans and families under the customary land tenure system of Uganda. 

What are the terms and conditions for offering land for hosting refugees here? This needs a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) and the information contained in the MoU must be shared by all the concerned parties. The MoU should state the roles of the host communities and the roles of the other stakeholders like the Office of the Prime Minister, the United Nations High Commissioner for (UNHCR), et cetera.

b) 	Land Conflict Due to Wrong Settlement Boundary Demarcation and Nomenclature and Registration of Land 

Whereas the areas where the settlements are located had their own names before the refugees arrived and refugee settlements were established, and such names had their own meanings as given by the natives and owners of the land, sometimes the refugees or UNHCR gives different names in these areas. 

Actually, UNHCR uses a naming system based on zones and numbers instead of actual names of these places. This is likely to create confusion today and in the future in terms of identity, boundaries, history and ownership of the land.  Instead of using the original names, some of the refugees have also imported names of places from their countries of origin and given them to their new places of abode. They use institutions like markets, churches, et cetera. 

This is likely to result into land conflicts particularly for areas that are close to the border of Uganda. Moyo and Kajo Keji, for example, were involved in some kind of bloody and brutal conflict recently. This arose from the confusion surrounding the refugees who were settled along the borderline in the Anyanya war which started in 1955 and ended with the Addis Ababa Agreement in 1972. 

We do not want the same thing to happen this time. Therefore, all necessary steps should be taken to make sure that the naming of camps and the history of the land is documented properly by the Office of the Prime Minister and all the stakeholders to avoid the same from happening. 

There is a problem of environmental degradation. Trees and grass are seriously cut by the refugees and this is affecting the climate and environment. For purposes of wood, fuel and shelter, the refugees use the natural resources there. This needs to be taken care of.

The host communities also share the refugee burden, hence the demand for integration of programmes for social service delivery. Things like schools, health centres and water points were used by the refugees and citizens at the time the refugees arrived and yet these were meant for the citizens and budgeted for by the Government of Uganda.

Lack of a uniform programme or project framework: Mr Speaker, there is no document on development programmes for refugee hosting areas. There is a programme document for development assistance for refugee hosting areas in Uganda for 2004 and 2007. This was for the previous round of refugee hosting in Uganda. However, today, there is no document like that. 

There are also certain programmes which are said to be for the refugee hosting areas, for example the Refugee and Host Population Empowerment (ReHoPE) programme, but what is done in Adjumani is different from what is done in Moyo; what is done in Lamwo is different from what is done in Yumbe or Arua. Why?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you still speaking to this motion?

MR FUNGAROO: Yes. I am speaking to the motion; the concerns of the community-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please. The motion is for a resolution of Parliament to investigate allegations of corruption, mismanagement and abuse of refugee programmes and funds in the Office of the Prime Minister. 

MR FUNGAROO: If you look at the objectives down there, there are concerns of the host community in respect to corruption. This corruption that takes place in the Office of the Prime Minister is not only here at the centre. In Arua, for example, there was a case reported and the Refugee Desk Officer (RDO) for Arua was interdicted and the case is with the OPM. So, what we are drawing your attention to is that whereas we have the corruption at the top, there are also concerns in the field. 

The corruption in the Office of the Prime Minister, which I have just talked about, has got channels and networks from the centre up to the grassroots level. Some of the concerns brought out by the host community will help in the investigations we are calling for. 

There is lack of transparency and accountability in the refugee assistance programme; for example, there is too much secrecy by the Office of the Prime Minister and humanitarian relief agencies operating in the area. The programmes are carried out in secrecy. There is huge resistance always towards elected leaders’ requests for sharing of information that is necessary for purposes of oversight and fighting corruption.

There are no local public accountability systems for the staff of the humanitarian agencies that give aid and the recipients of the humanitarian aid and development assistance given out in the refugee areas. The people who receive the aid are expected to just receive the aid and question nothing. Therefore, corruption thrives in this area of darkness on the ground. 

The Office of the Prime Minister also interferes with the oversight work of the elected leaders and other civil servants. In my experience in Moyo District, I received complaints from the office of the district education office of Moyo, particularly from the District Inspector of Schools, at a conference which was organised to analyse the PLE results which were not good for both the refugees and the citizens in Obongi County, Moyo District. 

The Inspector of Schools reported that he attempted to go and inspect the schools in the settlement but the OPM staff blocked him from going to do his work. This has happened to councillors at the subcounty and district levels, and even I as a Member of Parliament, when I go to do oversight work I receive resistance from the Office of the Prime Minister. 

Projects, programmes and even statistics about refugees are not known to these people. Therefore, in the investigations to be carried out, it is very important for us to demand for this type of information: the number of refugees registered and hosted in an area; the names and locations of settlements, blocks and villages where the refugees operate; names, addresses, contact persons of humanitarian agencies operating in the area; programmes, projects and their locations; budgets for each programme and project; sources of funds for the specific programmes and projects taking place in a certain area; timeframe within which projects are implemented. There are cases where one project is claimed by more than one donor and one source of funding. 

I would like to draw your attention to the fact that corruption is not only at the centre. The worst form of corruption is down there where our oversight roles do not extend to, the places where the refugees are settled and programmes are implemented. We had a meeting with the CAO, the LCV chairperson, UNHCR and OPM where we had to reject certain proposals made by the OPM and a certain organisation called Medical Teams International. We rejected the proposals on the basis of unclear information of the sources of these funds. We had got information that three sources of funds are being used for the same project. 

There was also a concern about sharing of the fringe benefits associated with refugee hosting programmes. The host community, having given their land, expects also to share in fringe benefits like employment opportunities and business contracts. To our dismay, the Office of the Prime Minister ferries people from Kampala in buses to do jobs in West Nile without interviews. Local content in terms of employment opportunities and contracts creates problems. 

To get rid of this corruption and abuse of programmes in the Office of the Prime minister, there should be a field level memorandum of understanding to address the concerns of the host community-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought those would be the findings of the investigation and they would make those recommendations. 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let this Parliament investigate. I would like to call upon you and all the Members of Parliament present to assert ourselves as a government and as a people to support the services given to the refugees. There is a tendency of donors bulldozing even the local governments. I need your support for this motion. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can I have the seconder of the motion, before I propose the question for debate.

2.15
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues. I stand here to second the motion for a resolution of Parliament to investigate the allegations of corruption, mismanagement and abuse of refugee programmes and funds in the Office of the Prime Minister.

I would like to thank the Office of the Prime Minister for putting Uganda on the world map in as far as handling refugees is concerned. We give credit to them for that. It is that good gesture by the Ugandan Government that led to Uganda hosting the Uganda Solidarity Summit on Refugees in June last year.

Mr Speaker, that summit led to so many donors pledging and contributing a lot of money to help the refugees in Uganda. If you could allow me to take you through the contribution or pledges that were made towards the assistance of refugees, which is now the centre of the abuse and corruption that needs to be investigated: 

Equatorial Guinea donated $100,000; Gabon, $250,000; Kenya, $200,000; Somalia, $100,000; United Arab Emirates, $5 million; China, $500,000; Germany, $56 million; Denmark, $62 million; United Kingdom, $50 million; Japan, $10 million; Australia, $5 million; Canada, $11.5 million; Sweden, $27.1 million; Norway, $4 million; Australia, $2.2 million; MTN Uganda, $1 million; the Netherlands Government, $6.2 million; South Korea, $6.8 million; Ireland, $2.6 million; Finland, $2.4 million; European Union, $96.3 million; African Union, $100,000; and others, $350 million. All this added and converted into Uganda shillings is Ushs 127 billion. That is what that summit attracted to this country, and it was because of the gesture of the international community.

However, a few weeks ago, we read about a refugee scandal in the Daily Monitor of 10 February 2018. There was another article about the OPM being in a fresh Shs 8 billion scandal. These are the issues that have made us bring this matter to the House, because it is not the first time we are hearing about these problems in the Office of the Prime Minister. 

This problem started from where the money should be kept. There was a contestation between the Office of the Prime Minister and the donors. One commissioner, Kazungu, who was the leader of the delegation refused and said that the money should be kept in the Office of the Prime Minister. Donors were insisting on having a separate account. However, the donors were defeated and they allowed the Office of the Prime Minister to handle this money. It later came out that the money on whichever the account was, which the investigation should find out, is no more. We need to establish whether this money has been misused. 

In the newspapers, we read that the said commissioner has been dismissed or suspended for three months from the Office of the Prime Minister. Mr Speaker, we need to know where this money is and how it was used because we would like to maintain the image of Uganda at the top. We would not like to be dragged down because of the fraud that is suspected to be taking place. 

The mismanagement is not only limited to the use of funds, but also in the recruitment. We have got information that the commissioner was recruiting his clansmen in these projects. No wonder hon. Fungaroo said that people are taken from Kampala to be employed. Also within the ministry, it was said that only his clansmen were recruited. We need the investigation to establish that. 

Mr Speaker, there are also allegations that refugees have to bribe in order to be registered and they benefit. We would like to establish these facts. 

When it comes to scholarships, they are not awarded to the refugees who are entitled to them; they are given to the clansmen of those in those offices. We want this also to be established. 

We have also learnt that there are allegations of trafficking of young girls and women to marry men who are not of their choice. This happens after those men pay bribes to the officials at the border crossing points. This is abuse of young girls and women who are disadvantaged. We want these allegations established. We do not want the name of Uganda to be tainted.

Mr Speaker, when we raised this matter the first time, we had asked for a statement from the minister and we moved to have the motion but it did not come. It is good we have the honourable minister here; he has the statement and we will wait to see the response. 

I remember the Speaker, hon. Kadaga, told this House that she was confronted in Israel about refugees from Israel being dumped in Uganda, Eritrea, and Rwanda. We are mainly concerned about Uganda. The members who went with the Speaker to Israel can attest to what happened when the civil society confronted the Speaker saying that Uganda is allowing Israel to deport and dump these refugees here. Those are the issues that we would like to establish.

We appropriated money here to buy land for refugees and also for the landslide victims. A case in point is the land in Mbale, where the beneficiaries have not got anything yet. They went and bought wetlands to relocate the landslide victims but even then, there is contention on the said wetlands. 

The local communities have said that they have not received money for land compensation. However, this money was paid to a company owned by the wife of one of the Members of Parliament from that region. The investigations were carried out but along the way - This case is under reference No. CPS Kampala GEF77/2014 and this money was paid into account No. 3010311186 in Centenary Bank. It is under the names of a company owned by the spouse of an honourable member of this House. 

The Permanent Secretary in the Office of the Prime Minister, Madam Guwatudde Christine, appointed a team to investigate these matters and it included even interns in the Office of the Prime Minister. The investigations are under Mr Bata. 

Also, the Financial Intelligence Authority had directed that this money should not be transferred. However, a few days later, a letter came from Bank of Uganda’s Director of Supervision, whom we mentioned yesterday. The director wrote and said that this money must be released as the account is already blocked, and the money was released having been blocked earlier on by the authority. These are the matters that need to be investigated and established. 

There are also issues of procurement. When they were advertising to procure that land, the deadline was supposed to be 31 October 2013. However, on 28 October, they issued an advert cancelling the previous one but this one lasted for only two days. That is how this company got the award to provide that land to the Office of the Prime Minister and this is how that sum of money was established.

There are even contentions about that land and these are the issues that need to be established –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How much money was paid?

MR OKUPA: Eight billion Uganda shillings. These are the matters that this investigation team needs to establish. 

As I conclude, I would like to say that there are eight staff who were at the height of this matter: Mr Stanley Ahabwe, Assistant Commissioner for Procurement, Office of the Prime Minister; Mr Richard Masegere, the consultant transaction advisor; Ms Viola Namutebi, an intern; Mr Waboya, Principal Disaster Preparedness Officer; Mr Wilson Ouzu, Urban Officer, Ministry of Lands and Housing; Mr Wabamundu from the Ministry of Lands and Housing; Mr Henry Obbo, State Attorney, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; Ms Nakabugo, Assistant Commissioner for Disaster Preparedness -(Interruption)

MS AVUR: Thank you for giving way. Mr Speaker, the honourable member named the bank and the account but did not name the account title; it cannot be “the wife”. Could he please clarify to this House the account title?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, just a guide, when you want to rise on any matter of order, information or anything, please do not use the microphones until you are allowed to. This is because they are recording and when you do that, you disrupt the flow of the recording and transcription will be a problem. Please, avoid using the microphones before you are allowed to speak.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, you know it is a learning process. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I will not give up. (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: You will not give up, yes. I thank you for your work and for helping us all the time. I had heard echoing from the Members and they were asking what the name of the account is. I thought I would say it at the end. I only said it is a company owned by the spouse of one Member of Parliament and did not mention the spouse’s name, but I will say it. The name of the company is called Simu Oil Uganda limited and it belongs to that family. 

Mr Speaker, I was just giving a list of those suspected to have messed up this issue. There was Ms Nakabugo, Assistant Commissioner for Disaster Preparedness; Mr Gerald Manya, Assistant Commissioner; Mr Aggrey Kibenge, former Under Secretary, Office of the Prime Minister, but now Under Secretary in the Ministry of Education and Sports; Mr Kenneth Mugumya, the former OPM Principal Accountant and now the accountant in charge of accounts at the Ministry of Agriculture.

Mr Speaker, these are the concerns that we have as a country and as an accountability institution that need to be investigated. We do not want a bad name and reputation after having built a good name. This time we are happy that the names of the ministers have not come out in this. I would like to thank the ministers who are there because they came out and tried to do what they did. However, they need our help. Refugees are vulnerable people that need help. We cannot take advantage of their situation and swindle their money and resources. 

Therefore, I would like to call upon the House to support an investigation to be carried out by this House to deal with this matter, and preferably by a select committee. We want to clean our house so that we can be able to move together for the betterment of this country and the image of Uganda in the international community. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Okupa, for the speech you have made in secondment of this motion. Honourable members, the question that I now propose for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament to investigate the allegations of corruption, mismanagement and abuse of refugee programmes and funds in the Office of the Prime Minister. That is the motion and debate starts now with the statement from the minister.

3.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, I have a statement that I am presenting on behalf of my senior colleague, who was supposed to be here personally but because of other state assignments, he was unable to do so. I have had to run back from the field to come and stand in for him. 

I have also been reliably told by the office of the Clerk that this statement should be on your iPads now and if that is correct, then I beg to proceed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, proceed until otherwise advised.

MR ECWERU: The allegation of inflated refugee numbers, fraudulent distribution of food, bribery, interference in the elections of refugee leaders and trafficking of refugee girls, among others, are the issues this statement is going to particularly focus on. 

However, before I read this report, Mr Speaker, I would like to request this House to separate two things; matters to do with Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) should be separated from the issue of refugees. This is because these are two sectors although both are under the Department of Refugees and Disaster Management. 

After making this presentation, if it pleases this House, we could come and present another statement, specifically on IDPs and the management of procurement of land, which hon. Okupa has talked about. This is because it is specifically to do with IDPs and not the refugees. If this House agrees, then I can proceed with this report.

As you are aware, there have been reports in the media and from whistle blowers in the past few weeks regarding cases of fraudulent activities and corruption in the refugee response in the country. The allegations of inflated refugee numbers, fraudulent distribution of food, bribery, interference in the elections of refugee leaders and trafficking of refugee girls, among others, were brought to our attention through both our internal systems and by the United Nations (UN) Resident Coordinator, Madam Rosa Malango’s office. They even raised additional issues on the 26 January 2018 in a memo to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. The allegations, though not substantiated, required further investigation to establish the facts and to guide on further action. 

Again, acting on information received from the people on the ground and our implementing partners on 18 December 2017, my senior colleague, the minister, wrote to the inspector General of Police (IGP) bringing to his attention reports of misappropriation and theft of refugee relief items and fuel. He asked the office of the IGP to investigate the report. 

Mr Speaker, when the allegations on the same were further brought to our attention by the United Nations Resident Coordinator through the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Prime Minister convened a meeting on the 29 January 2018. The meeting was attended by my senior colleague, Engineer Onek, the Permanent Secretary in the Office of the Prime Minister, the Country Representative of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the Country Representative of the World Food Programme and myself. This was meant to get additional facts and to agree on a practical and prompt action to address the matter. 

On 30 January 2018, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister again met the ambassadors of the United Kingdom, United States and the European Union (EU) delegation. They expressed concern about the alleged fraud but appreciated the actions that Government was taking to address the concerns in order to restore the confidence that the development partners and the public have in the programme. 

On the same day, a meeting was held with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, His Excellency Filippo Grandi, who was visiting the country on other programmes but knew about this. Fraudulent allegations on the refugee response were also raised and discussed during this meeting. 

Mr Speaker, following the above meetings, on the 30 January 2018 the minister wrote to the Permanent Secretary in the Office of the Prime Minister, instructing her to immediately interdict or cause four officers who had been named in the various accusations to step aside while investigations into their conduct commences, to pave way for free and fair findings. 

The permanent secretary informed the minister that the accused officers had been given 14 working days to explain their roles regarding the various allegations, according to the Public Service Standing Orders, and that the 14 working days would elapse on Wednesday, 21 February 2018. Accordingly, the 14 working days elapsed and the mentioned officers have since been interdicted and are out of office as investigations are ongoing. 

The Refugee Response in the Country 

In the past three years, the refugee response in the country has drastically grown involving many players. This has certainly stretched the capacity of all the actors. The number of refugees has increased from just 433,593 since February 2015 to 1.4 million in February 2018, according to our records. 

I also beg to add that currently, given the explosion that has taken place in some parts of Democratic Republic Congo, we are receiving more refugees through Bunagana in Kisoro, Bundibugyo in the southwest, and the West Nile districts of Zombo and Vurra.

Mr Speaker, as I speak now, a large influx of refugees continues to flow into the country from the Democratic Republic of Congo. We are receiving approximately 3,450 refugees daily at our reception centre through Kisoro, Ntoroko, Hoima and Zombo districts. What this means is that the task of providing hope and support to refugees and communities remains quite huge.

During the solidarity summit on refugees held in June, pledges from different countries, organisations and even individuals were raised. These were followed up by a joint committee from OPM UNHCR, the UN Resident Coordinator’s office, Ministry Of Finance among others. I would like to categorically state that $523 million was pledged and about $350 million has so far been realised. Efforts are ongoing to realise more, particularly from the remaining pledges. 

What happened is that the OPM Government of Uganda account for receiving the solidarity summit funds has so far received $1.5 million. I would like to also make it clear that not even a shilling of this money has been touched, and I will be giving reasons. 

The money will be used to support the comprehensive refugee response strategy, that is, providing water, health, food, shelter, education and other essential needs for refugees and the host community. The rest of the money from the summit has gone directly to implementing partners and international Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs). I will give you an example. The Japanese may make a pledge to support Uganda but they may say that instead of giving the money to the Government of Uganda, they will route it through the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA). The Danish also claim that they will route it through their international development purse. United States also says that they will give relief but they will give their pledge through USAID et cetera. So, we have been able to capture that. 

The refugee response is a multi-stakeholder arrangement involving UNHCR, World Food Programme, UNICEF, UN Women, the International Organisation for Migration (IOM) and over 100 international and local NGOs. The Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees in the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) certainly captains the process. It plays the coordination role. 

Uganda has an international obligation to host refugees in accordance with the 1951 Geneva Convention and 1964 Organisation of African Unity (OAU) Convention, which were domesticated in the Refugee Act, 2006 and the Refugee Regulations, 2010.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, food is distributed monthly and distribution ratios depend on the food pipeline (food availability) of the World Food Programme (WFP), the UN food Agency; WFP contracts international and national NGOs to manage the food stores and distribution of food on its behalf. There is an international organisation called Samaritans Purse, for example, which has been implementing this in southwest Uganda while World Vision implements in West Nile. 

Before the distribution takes place, the refugee department in the Office of the Prime Minister generates a food log. Mr Speaker, I would like to confess here that this is where the gist of the investigation is going to zero down. This is because it is in the food logs that those of us who are supposed to be support supervisors seemed to see that there was some abuse though generating more food logs than what was necessary in order to benefit all.  

Again, I would like to say, Mr Speaker, that there are categories of refugees. It is not captured in this report but just for the benefit of the House, the refugees are categorised in two ways. There is that group that may have stayed here for over 10 years and because we have given them land to till, we wean them off from what we call “hot meal”. Then there are those who have just arrived and because they are in dare need, those are the ones that are supposed to benefit from all the food. That is where we have focussed and we are requesting the groups that are investigating to focus their investigation on that.

Mr Speaker, I told you that the Samaritans Purse has been doing this. The refugee department in the OPM particularly generates the food log, as per the registered refugees and asylum seekers in a given settlement from the database/server. The food log list is handed over to World Food Programme and UNHCR for verification and approved thereafter. World Food Programme hands over the same to its implementing partners that do their actual food distribution to refugees and asylum seekers. 

Steps being taken to address the issue
Mr Speaker and honourable members, working with our partners, we have decided, with immediate effect, to commence robust biometric re-enrolment and verification of all refugees in the country using a globally accepted biometric registration of UNHCR that has been tested. 

We hope this will plug any possible loopholes in the integrity of the register of the refugees and restore confidence in the refugee operations. The exercise will help to ascertain the actual number of refugees and also break them down according to categories so that we know, for example, the category that is supposed to benefit from food and which type of food; for example, those children that are malnourished will get enriched biscuits among other things. 

Investigations into the different elements of the whistle blower allegations on misuse of food and cash interventions meant for refugees, bribery and trafficking of girls have been initiated. The Police Criminal Investigations and Intelligence Directorate (CIID) and the Office of the Inspector General of Government (IGG) are handling those investigations. Our partners, UNHCR and World Food Programme, have also dispatched their investigators; they are already in the country doing their investigations.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we are taking all the necessary steps to ensure that the investigations are carried out independently and handled professionally. To this end, disciplinary proceedings have been initiated. First of all, they have been initiated against the officials who were mentioned; we have asked them to keep off the office premises so that they do not interfere with the investigations.   

Because of the multi-sectoral nature of implementing the refugee response, investigations are taking a multi-dimensional approach to track any possible collusion by officials from across the implementing agencies. I would like to assure colleagues that no stone will be left unturned. We have zero tolerance for corruption and abuse of public funds. Whoever will be found to have been involved will be firmly dealt with in accordance with our law. 

Mr Speaker and members, our ministry and the Office of the Prime Minister have nothing to hide in this matter. We operate openly and very transparently. When allegations or reports of fraud and corruption come up, we face them squarely and deal with them decisively. That is our way of cleaning our house and this is very clear. Even when Kazinda messed up our department, we were very free and we gave information that has led to his successful prosecution.

On 15 February 2018, supported by our colleague, hon. Frank Tumwebaze, we addressed a press conference and gave facts and guidance to the media regarding the response and actions being taken to deal with the matter and debunk falsehoods that could have been reported.

Mr Speaker and Members, a joint plan of action to address transparency and accountability has been drafted by the taskforce of the development partners and the technical staff. It will be finalised in the course of the week and will define the actions, milestones and timeframe to address the concern.

In conclusion, please note that Uganda's refugee policy continues to remain progressive. We will continue to keep an open door policy to refugees. I could probably add here that in the many platforms we attend, we are asked, “When are you reaching your breaking point? Is it time for Uganda to close its gate?” 

I would like to make it abundantly clear to Members here that we will never close our doors for as long as refugees are being persecuted in their countries. We will continue to keep our doors open. 

We know the challenges that confront us but our doors will continue to remain open. This has made us receive international recognition. Our resolve should not and must not wane. The allegations of corruption are very serious. I would like to beg that this should not divert us from the immense good work and support that the host communities, particularly the partners and some good staff in our office, continue to provide to the refugees.

Colleagues, we trust that we will emerge out of this exercise stronger and with greater determination to support refugees and host communities in our country. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for that statement. Honourable members, let me guide as follows so that we see how to structure this debate. This is one of those few cases where both the Executive and Parliament have agreed on an investigation. They have agreed that there is need to carry out an investigation. The question that we are now asking is: who should do the investigations? 

The mover of the motion proposed that it would be better if a select committee of this House is tasked to do the job. The Government has also presented a case that investigations are already ongoing – If you listened to this statement, you would not be asking where. 

They said investigations are being conducted by the police and the IGG. He also said that a team from the United Nations agencies, from UNHCR and WFP, have already arrived in the country to carry out their aspects of the investigations, where they believe their money could have been affected and they might not think that the investigators here will cover their interest sufficiently. They have sent in their own teams. So, there are investigations already going on. 

Honourable members, we now need to have a debate as to whether we want to take Members of Parliament to join those doing the investigations - They will still be in the same field asking for the same documents. That is what I am presenting to you, because the same document that UNHCR is going to ask for is the same document that the police, IGG and our select committee is going to ask for. 

Do we want as Parliament to join the fray? That is the question. We are an independent and an oversight institution that must be able to oversee whatever has gone right and gone wrong. Can we be part of that process? The process is not separate. It is the same facts, situations, and allegations of corruption. I am just setting it out for you so that when we take a decision, we know what we are doing. 

It is the same allegation of corruption, mismanagement and abuse of office and trafficking of women and children. That is the same investigation. Do we want to be there? How do we carry out the oversight later to see if these processes were done properly? That is what I am proposing to you that when you debate, bear this in mind.

3.29
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, the issue of refugees is an African principle; when your neighbour has a problem, you help. It was on this basis that many of the people in West Nile - the poor community who only had land as their resource - decided to give their land to these refugees to settle.

When the refugees started coming, Members of Parliament and politicians from the refugee hosting communities demanded transparency in these issues. We, politicians, should be involved in all this. 

Much as the minister has come clearly saying that they support these investigations, in the beginning your senior minister brushed us away. He said this is not an issue of politicians. He organized a meeting in Desert Breeze Hotel to discuss how development issues can be done. We went there as honourable members to attend this meeting because ideally, development must be participatory; people must be involved. However, we, the people’s representatives, were chased. He said he had no dealings with Members of Parliament. That time, all the local government chairpersons in the whole region were in China. He only called the Chief Administration Officers (CAOs) and the rest. We were bitter about this issue but we were not given any chance.

Uganda has been praised for its policy of allowing refugees into the country. The policy provides that refugees must be settled among the communities whereas in other countries, refugees are supposed to be isolated in camps and not settlements. So, whatever activities are for them are meant for them exclusively without any interference of the locals.

However, for us as Ugandans, much as we are basing on this policy, it is a disadvantage to hosting communities because they all rely on the same resources. We had agreed that we should be involved because since these refugees settle within the communities, these plans must be integrated. If implementing partners are seeking education, where should this institution be put? If they are thinking about health, where should the health facilities be put?

However, this was not considered, Mr Speaker. Even the local politicians at the district level were not involved. The implementation partners and Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) just go from Kampala or from Arua, which is the regional office, and carry out these activities without involving the politicians. 

The other day, I was in the council meeting and the LCV chairperson and councillors were bitter that the implementing partners give money to technocrats to go and do supervision but the politicians who are supposed to do the oversight role are not facilitated and not supposed to be part of it. Therefore, these problems are not surprising. 

Last year around November, four of us, Members of Parliament from West Nile - one from Adjumani, hon. Dulu Mark; hon. Angundru Moses from Arua; hon. Osoru was supposed to be there but she did not come; and I from Yumbe - had a closed door meeting with UNHCR and they were not happy. There were a number of things they told us. They were even asking whether Members of Parliament could spearhead a situation where OPM should not be involved. 

Therefore, it is high time we take our position. This is because every time when there is any issue regarding carrying out humanitarian support implemented by UNHCR, why should there always be problems? We have a number of programmes under Northern Uganda Reconstruction Programme, for example, but if you go on ground, you do not see any impact.

Therefore, honourable minister, it is good that as a ministry you have come up and even condemned your staff. However, it should not be just paperwork or mere presentation for the sake of presentation of a paper but a serious issue. When you go on ground-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, would you like to speak to the motion now after that long background? The motion is clear. Do you support the motion?

MR ONZIMA: Yes, I support it. I was laying a background, Mr Speaker. I support this motion 100 per cent.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who should do the investigations?

MR ONZIMA: The investigation must be done by a select committee. The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees as a body have come out on their part to do investigations but they are also equally investigating some of their staff. Therefore, for us as Government or Parliament that does the oversight role, we must have an independent body that also carries out our investigation. That should not be mixed with UNHCR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Today if your community is not yet hosting refugees, you must speak last. 

3.35
MR YORKE ALIONI (Independent, Aringa South County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion to have a select committee of Parliament to investigate the OPM and other implementing partners. 

Mr Speaker, in Yumbe, we are hosting 287,000 refugees in five camps, and in Zone 4 and 5 I am hosting over 60,000 refugees in my constituency.

Mr Speaker, we must investigate OPM on the matters of land. I want the minister to withdraw his statement on land procurement, which he just made here. In West Nile, Government does not own land; land belongs to the people and the community. When we got the refugees, we the leaders went to the ground to talk to the communities. We have leaders who are called landlords who gave us land for free - over two square miles. However, Mr Speaker, I am disappointed and I must tell this House. 

Last year in September, OPM sent their staff with some special forms and they were convincing locals to sign these forms. Legally, they would have offered their land to Government and they now come here to us and account that they bought land when they actually wanted to steal land from our people. I have a copy of those forms. The OPM must be investigated on matters of land.

Mr Speaker, we have the second challenge of water. From my constituency to River Nile is just a distance of seven kilometres but these people have refused to put piped water. People are fetching water using trucks. They have companies which fetch water from River Nile and bring it to the refugee camps. They are spending billions of shillings on water instead of tapping water from River Nile. The money spent so far on fetching water is more than what is needed to tap water from the Nile. Therefore, these people must be investigated. Who are the directors of these companies?

Mr Speaker, we have a challenge of employment. If you go to the camps, people are transported during the night on buses from Kampala and we do not know where they come from. You will find a gatekeeper, for example, who does not speak the local language. I would not like to mention the tribe because I may sound tribal. 

We have got cases of ghost employees and refugees. We need to investigate the issue of ghost employees and refugees and how the interviews were conducted to have the current workers. 

We also have an issue of kickbacks. We have information and evidence to prove kickbacks from the district to the Office of the Prime Minister’s officers. This would be proved if Parliament carries out its own investigations.

Another issue is about fake implementing partners, the NGOs. We have over 30 NGOs which were approved by the OPM. They have an understanding concerning sharing money and this must be investigated, because we have got information on that. 

I heard the minister talk about the money which was raised at the summit and he said that it is intact. I would like Parliament to investigate where that account is held and who the signatories are. We would also like to have the bank statement so that we prove him right or wrong.

Another concern is on temporary structures. If you go to those camps, you will see that these people have deliberately failed to build permanent structures. However, if you value their temporary structures, they are worth having a permanent structure constructed; for example, they built a school using eucalyptus but if you go into the value of the structure, it is not worth what is on ground. The value is instead worth constructing a permanent house. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to beg that the Executive should not be allowed to investigate itself, however much they said that about 13 people have been interdicted in the OPM. We need a special select team from Parliament to carry out the investigations. Some time back, when we had a meeting in Arua District, the minister, who is a colleague, said that the Members of Parliament were not necessary in the meeting because they are corrupt and they only run around so as to get allowances. 

It is time for us to prove who is corrupt. The UNHCR one time invited us together with Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) and officials from the refugee hosting districts. During that meeting, we raised that matter where the minister called us corrupt. Hon. Hilary Onek apologised before us in the meeting. I request that he still comes to the Floor of this House and apologises to the rest of the Members.

Mr Speaker, there are also other cases. Yumbe District had the best feeder roads in the whole country. However, if you go to Yumbe today, you would suffer from a back problem. The roads are in poor condition and the highest speed one can drive on these roads is 20 to 30 km per hour. We have got cases where they account for repairs of roads but that should also be investigated.

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for the time you have given me. My prayer is that Members who come from refugee hosting constituencies should be given priority to be part of the select committee because we are well informed. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you have information, it is better to be a witness than an investigator. (Laughter) Wouldn’t that be better?

3.44
MS SUSAN AMERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Amuria): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion that an investigation be carried out in the Office of the Prime Minister on the mismanagement of refugee funds. 

As a Committee on Presidential Affairs, we have been trying to follow up on how money is spent in the OPM. It is annoying that the whole Ministry for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees does not own a refugee policy. For the years I have been in Parliament, the refugee policy has been in draft form and we have always had the same ministers. 

I am aware that refugees come and leave at a certain time. Any of us here may have been refugees but the level of freedom that the refugees in Uganda have is questionable. I would not like to believe that the number of refugees recorded is correct. There are refugees living in Uganda by the will of the Government.

I do not know how the Government of Uganda benefits from hosting all the refugees we have in the country. I would not like to believe that it is only Uganda which is the safest place to host refugees in Africa. There are many other countries that are safe where other refugees could go. However, we have an open door policy where we bring in refugees who are treated like kings in our own country.

Mr Speaker, this House passed a loan request to support the refugee community. When we went to the field as a Committee on National Economy, what we saw was absurd. The refugees have penetrated into the surrounding communities and you cannot say this before officials of OPM. Look at the level of freedom of refugees owning assets in Uganda, as if when you are in another country you can do that.

We passed a loan request to support the people who are already supported by the international communities. We do not know how this loan has been utilised. It is very painful that Ugandan tax payers are not receiving the same services. If you go to Kiryandongo District, the refugee school there is privileged to have very good classrooms but our host community cannot access that although the refugees can access other schools where our children go with limited services. It is very painful and we would like to know why Government has chosen to take the direction it is taking. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to support the motion that this Office of the Prime Minister’s sector on the refugees be investigated because the way it is operating is very fluid –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Be investigated by who?

MS AMERO: It should be investigated by the Parliament of Uganda, which appropriates funds to some of these activities run by OPM. I support that you set up a select committee here so that they carry out the oversight role and dig into the nitty-gritties being hidden down there so that this House can be able to debate that report and make appropriate recommendations on the use of the resources that we appropriate. Mr Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity.

3.49
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. Before I came to this House I was the Emergency Response Manager for Plan International in Adjumani. In that regard, I would like to suggest the following: 

First, maybe I should say that I agree with the idea that a select committee of this House be set up to find out what has been happening and I base my reasoning on the following facts: My particular interest is in the 30 per cent that implementing agencies are supposed to deliver to the local communities. As one colleague mentioned, it is true that we approved a loan request and I remember one day I asked, “Where are these implementing agencies with the 30 per cent?”

The fact I would like to mention to this House is that if you are an implementing agency that is following the rules and making sure that you have programmes for the local communities, the Office of the Prime Minister will not like you. I repeat, if you are an implementing agency that is following the rules by making sure that the 30 per cent that is due to the local communities is implemented, the OPM will not like you. As Plan International, we were not liked for that. I must say it here that at one point I even told somebody that we will meet one day –(Laughter)– and we have met. 

I am happy that the minister’s statement talks about investigations across the departments and ministries because I also want to believe that there must be questions concerning the offices of RDCs. I remember that when I was in Adjumani, the RDC then would try to harass us - “You must give us this. You must give us this” - and one would clearly see the link between him and the OPM. 

On the basis of that, I would like to support the motion that we set up a select committee to go and investigate this matter. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I think the proper debate would be when the report is here. Let me just streamline our areas of agreement so that we see where we do not agree. 

Of course, we are aware from what the minister has said that investigations are being conducted by the police, the Inspectorate of Government and agencies of the UN – UNHCR and WFP. They are carrying out investigations on the same matter that we have stated here. Is it our agreement that Parliament should join the investigations? Is it really? You see, Parliament, essentially, would not investigate crime; the police and all the other departments of Government would do that. However, if they make a mistake or if we are unsatisfied, that is when we come in to find out what went wrong. 

The police are investigating. One of the other agencies that are tasked by an Act of this Parliament to do investigations is the Inspectorate of Government and it is involved in this investigation. Do we want to co-investigate with the Inspector General of Government? Do we want to co-investigate with the police? I am just framing the questions so that we take a decision on that line first.

If we want to do this investigation – police is investigating, IGG is investigating and Parliament is investigating - is that how we want to proceed? Can I put the question to that and we take a decision and move? I want to put the question on whether Parliament wants to be part of this investigation. 

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am not necessarily a very big fun of select committees and that is for a big reason; we have sectoral and standing committees, which are very well set up and can handle this. However, on this particular matter, I can see your guidance and based on that I suggest that Parliament requests or directs the Auditor-General to carry out a forensic audit and hands its report over to a relevant committee of Parliament to eventually report to this House for a thorough debate. 

We have done this before. The Committee on Public Accounts has done it and this other committee has done it several times and very good results have come out. Therefore, I do not see why we should not do the same.

Mr AMODING: Mr Speaker, on this particular matter, I want to appreciate the fact that there are going to be investigations from the IGG and all the other state agencies involved. However, there are some critical issues which relate to human rights abuses. Whereas there is misuse of monies and all that, there are also human rights abuses that have been reported by the refugees. I noted that there is human trafficking but we also had whistle-blowers telling us about sexual harassment and other issues. Therefore, would it not be proper that a relevant committee of Parliament is also involved in this investigation? This is because as Parliament we are interested in those issues. 

There are human rights abuses and the rights of women – there are quite many issues involved. So, I would like to get guidance from you, in terms of those other issues which are not directly criminal like fraud or misuse of money. Here we are talking about the rights of refugees, women and children. We have noted and we have been rightly guided and informed from the ground that there are those issues as well, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the challenge I have is the ambit of the motion. This is because we are not debating generally but we are debating a motion, and the motion is for a resolution of Parliament to investigate the allegations of corruption, mismanagement and abuse of refugee programmes and funds in the Office of the Prime Minister. The details are, specifically, one, to condemn this corruption; two, to create a select committee; three, Parliament to urge Government to draft the refugee policy; four, Parliament to urge Government to bring the amendment Bill to amend the refugee law; and five, Parliament to urge Government of Uganda and all development partners to streamline development programmes in districts.

That is the motion we are debating and that is where we are. That is why I am saying if we want to be part of these investigations, we need to take that decision and move on and we come and debate when the report is back. Would that be a good way? Okay, there is clarification from the Member for Busiro.

MR SEMATIMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I seek clarification from you on the following – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, they never seek clarification from the Speaker. It can be procedure or something else.

MR SEMATIMBA: Okay, procedure, Mr Speaker. The mover of the motion moved that among other things, Parliament sets up a select committee to investigate these corruption charges based on the fact– and in hearing what the honourable minister had to say – that some of the points of interest and the points that cause concern for investigation are different from those that the minister spoke about. 

Also, some of the purposes and conclusions that we seek to achieve as Parliament – based on that motion – are quite different from what the minister suggested. I am, therefore, confused as to whether the question that you are putting to the Floor is talking about the select committee of Parliament investigating it independent of others – which is what I believe was requested for – or as part of the investigators, which I believe is not what most Members here want to do?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Parliament will do it independently. However, my duty is to protect the integrity of this House and advise so that when we take decisions, we understand their full implications. What is going to happen? Let us say inside this Parliament is the scene of crime. We have the IGG here; we have the Police here; we have the UN agencies – WFP and UNHCR – here; and now we also have the Parliament present. There are same facts, same people, same documents and same everything. When will Parliament extricate itself from this situation and oversee it? That is all I am proposing to you that while we take this decision, we should bear that in mind. That is what I am proposing so that we understand and take the decision.

MR NGABIRANO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We have understood the motion. We have also got the information from the minister about the parties involved at this level, in terms of investigation. By protocol, Parliament is higher than all those institutions. Therefore, my view would be that we get a system into which all the investigations can feed so that we analyse whether our concerns have been catered for. Likewise, we can find a system of giving in what we want either to the minister – some of the concerns – so that all those investigations can take care of them. 

After that, Parliament should look at all those reports – we should find a mechanism and the reports must come to us. When we debate that report and we are not satisfied, we can continue and do further investigations, so that we are not soiled in having many investigations. 

Mr Speaker, I am saying this because I personally worked in refugee operations for many years. I know that Government – OPM – is rotten in this area. I know that even the United Nations and all these international partners have very dirty hands. For most of these implementing agencies – NGOs – you find their relatives just working around to commit all these crimes. Therefore, we must have an appeal process where Parliament comes in as a supreme and filters all these reports. I would like us to swing in that direction. Maybe we could stay back, get their reports and if they are not satisfactory, then we can come in and slaughter them properly. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This matter is very pertinent. In engineering, we believe in sampling and the bigger the sample, the more truth one gets. Personally, I would not be very comfortable with the Government agencies only such as the police, IGG and others. I would like to propose to this House that as the other agencies are doing their work – as the minister has said – let the select committee of Parliament also go and do investigations so that we can have the possibility to compare the findings. I do not want our Members also to go and mix up with UN. Maybe they will be driven in powerful cars and they may not even see the potholes they are talking about. Let us go with our simple buses that the Speaker will provide so that we see what is on the ground. 

Therefore, I would like to request Members that we go with the select committee. Let the others bring and we compare the data because some people will be covering others. When the police or IGG see some big shots somewhere, they will start covering but as Members of Parliament when the Speaker is not there we cannot cover anyone. Therefore, I suggest that we go and investigate independently. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us do it properly. Let us first agree whether we want Parliament to get involved. Once we sort that out, then we come to whether we want to give it to our committee or a select committee. I have just proposed - do you want procedure on that one?

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. From what you can see here, we all agree that Parliament should be involved. The question is: at what stage and how? Whereas some are saying now, some of us are saying Parliament will benefit from all these reports that would have been made by the different agencies that are going to investigate this matter. This is because for whatever you do, Parliament can come in at any time. It does not need to come in now. 

For the comfort of Members, we all believe there is a rot in the OPM in regard to this issue. So, let us agree that we allow these agencies to investigate. After, we get all their reports, benefit from them, see the areas which they have left grey, pick them out and we pick out clear action points and move on. Otherwise, I believe we are going to have a lot of uncoordinated troops’ movement and a lot of people will have fatigue of not giving us information. I beg to submit.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You correctly pointed out that the IGG is a Government institution that reports directly to Parliament. Honourable members, we need to have faith in our institutions. There is no reason for us to doubt the capability of the IGG. I know that we were debating a motion and it has specific prayers but it is our right to amend those prayers and include issues of human rights – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, can we finish this phase before we come to the actual conclusion of the motion?

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, I believe that we can have faith in the IGG’s office to investigate and report to us but I would like to add that maybe we need to advise the office of the IGG as to what issues should be included in the investigation so that when the report comes, it is thorough. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Inspectorate of Government is not subject to anybody’s control or direction, so we cannot do that. Yes, point of procedure.

MR AKAMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have guided that one of the prayers in the motion is to bring to book the corrupt officials at the OPM and that is well within the mandate of Police. The IGG is an independent body. There is a law that provides for the manner in which the IGG can investigate, the reports ultimately laid at the Table and then debated by Parliament.

Should Parliament find that there were some gaps and that we are not satisfied, then we shall have the powers to do further investigation. However, if we involve ourselves as Parliament at this level and then at the end of it all when we have three reports from the Auditor-General, IGG and Police, who will oversee all these reports? 

Let us maintain our integrity and powers as Parliament so that we are the ultimate body to handle this issue. In case there are some loose ends anywhere, it should be Parliament to tighten them and come up with the appropriate resolutions. Therefore, are we proceeding well to resolve that we constitute a committee of Parliament to join the investigation at this level?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, whatever this Parliament decides will be the right thing to do. (Applause) We will have proceeded correctly. Let me ask the movers of the motion to speak before we close this matter. The first line of defence for the independence of this institution is the Speaker. The first line of defence of the integrity of this institution is also the Speaker. 

There are times when there can easily be a conflict between independence over emphasized and downplaying integrity of an institution. So they may need to strike that good balance for us to stay above everything. If we go and play in the mud with everybody else, how do we jump out and oversee what they have done? (Applause) 

That is from the point of view of both independence and the integrity of this institution. However, this House has its own mind to decide whatever way it wants to decide. Otherwise, that would be my advice to it, based on the position I hold by your own confidence. Can I ask the movers of the motion to wind up before we take a decision, please? 

4.11
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the seconder of the motion, I gave some facts and reasons. However, allow me to again reiterate to colleagues that we need a select committee to handle this matter.

Mr Speaker, you have heard from hon. Monica Amoding that there are issues that border on human rights abuses. The Auditor-General will not cover those issues unless we get the Uganda Human Rights Commission to be on board. 

There are issues of ghost workers and refugees and other issues that Members have brought up here that are wide. We have never discussed a single report of the IGG in this House. Therefore, I would like the select committee to use these documents that are produced by the IGG and Auditor-General in their investigations. We have been told that the United Nations and its team are handling the investigations but we have had experience. 

Mr Speaker, you will recall that I served with you on the Parliamentary Commission and one time when we asked about the audited reports for the donor funds, we were told that they are handled separately by the donors. They come, audit and go away with their reports. By the time I left the Parliamentary Commission, I had never got an audit report on the donor funds. This is similar to this case. They will come, do their investigations, take it to the UN headquarters and sort it there. 

However, Mr Speaker, the country needs to know as investigations go on - when Parliament will get involved as these investigations start - recall the issue of PRDP funds when Parliament got involved, the public saw how Parliament was working yet the Auditor-General had previously done audits in the case but with nothing coming out.

It is Parliament that can handle it the best way because it is open and more information gets to us. When I was here, I received a chit. I did not even know that one of the people I named here is around. The person is ready to offer any information, but says they are not involved. I have a chit here. (Laughter) You can now see what this debate has brought. So, the more we continue with this debate, the more information comes and we shall be able to go into the depth of these issues. 

The issues have been raised about the election of the leaders where the vocal leaders among the refugees are sabotaged and not allowed to be elected because they know they will not work with them. So, the same team cannot investigate. We also have a case where money was banked in an account of one Jogoo in the Office of the Prime Minister. The IGG was asked to investigate but we are yet to get the report. Money was deposited onto his account and the matter was reported - (Interruption)

MS AMODING: Mr Speaker, I would like to give information to hon. Okupa that as the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, we have a backlog of about ten IGG reports, which we are yet to consolidate and present before this House.

Secondly, it was reported in the media recently that the IGG has about 4,600 cases to handle. In the event that we assign them this duty as well, I believe that given the backlog that the IGG is already battling with cannot allow them contain this assignment. If we are to amend the motion, we should include all the other issues because Parliament might take interests on the other human rights violations, which are associated to the matter. The information, which is helpful, is that to buttress the argument, Parliament should select or receive the reports from the other institutions as he is proposing. This is because of the bureaucracy and control - the IGG cannot be given a time frame to leave all the other backlog cases they have to handle this one. This one will be on the waiting list with the other cases, which they have. That is very helpful for this discussion.

MR AOGON: Thank you, hon. Okupa. The information that I would like to give is that it is also possible that if we set up a select committee, these agencies we are talking about like the police, IGG, UNHCR and others, can appear before this committee as witnesses. Let them bring whatever they have found out to the select committee. This is because there is no way we can trust those people to handle this matter; it is a country matter. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, we were told here by the minister that this team started working mid last month. I guess by the time we constitute a select committee, they would have finalised their final reports and those reports can be our working documents. They would be able to reach where all these allegations of human rights abuse have been made and interview the refugees themselves. Have we seen, in any of the investigations or even the media, whether they interviewed the refugees? That is why Parliament - of course when Parliament moves, there is that transparency and a lot of information gets to the people here.

Therefore, I would like to appeal to the House that let a select committee be picked to handle this matter. The others would be witnesses like honourable member from Aringa County South said and the IGG will give us the information. The Auditor-General will be part of the team of Parliament because the Auditor-General falls under Parliament. They will all give us this information. We did that with PRDP, and the Auditor-General was there with the first and second report. IGG gave us information, and the Director of CIID came to us to get all these things here.

So, Mr Speaker, let us move that way such that by the time we come back to this House, we shall have got all the information and we cleanse ourselves. This is not in bad faith; it is to help us regain our merit when we say we have uprooted the weevils in this matter. (Laughter) 

Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR FUNGAROO: Mr Speaker, thank you once again. Honourable members, I would like to appeal to your conscience. If you do not take part in these investigations by a way of select committee, you will have injured yourselves. If you do not, you will have knocked yourselves out completely. However, if you do and even if the report is for you alone, you would have prepared your minds to listen to the people who are going to talk to you. 

Please, know that there are a lot of investigations, which were supposed to be carried out and the reports brought here by the police on serious issues like school fires, market fires and murder cases, to mention but a few, but we have waited and no reports have been given to us here.

Secondly –(Interruption)

MR ACIDRI: Thank you, hon. Fungaroo. Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give is that globally, the United Nations, particularly UNHCR, does not have the exact figures of the refugees they manage. They always give estimates because of dynamics and so on. Of course, some refugees return to their homes and some keep going back. In some cases, they are inflated to justify the existence of a mission in a country. I am speaking from an informed position and experience because I have worked as a consultant for the UN.

Now, I would like to agree that we must have that select committee -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on a point of information. (Laughter)

MR ACIDRI: I am still giving information, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) I am giving information and I am not the one to whom you can give order; the order can be allowed by the person who holds the Floor. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, considering the gravity of the matter we are discussing and the assistance the UNHCR has given Uganda while we host refugees – we are just a refugee host country; we put ourselves out to help the refugees and it is UNHCR that assists us to host them adequately.

Mr Speaker, the UNHCR is a very serious body of the UN. Is the honourable member in order to stand on this Floor and allege that they normally give estimates of figures purposely to justify their presence in a country? Is the UNHCR giving in Uganda estimates of refugees in this country so that they can operate in Uganda? Can the honourable member substantiate? Is he in order, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member for raising the point of order. Honourable members, when I used to practise law, they used to say that the strength of the prosecution case rests on its own strength and not the weakness of the defence. Therefore, you do not need to spite other people’s weakness to build your case. Your case must be able to stand on its own. Do not degrade the IGG, the police or the UN agencies so that you sound better than them. Make your own case because you think there is a case this Parliament should handle not because the other institutions are weak. So, honourable members, you are completely out of order. 

MR ACIDRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I agree with your ruling. However, I would like to give further information because he holds the Floor. The further information I would give is: as earlier alluded, the Executive cannot necessarily investigate itself. As the minister has stated, we have clearly seen that, as a country, we will continue to have an open door policy to refugees as if we have the capacity to host every refugee in this region or in the world.

Therefore, it is important that a select committee does not only investigate what has happened in the OPM, but if it had the capacity, it should come up with a clear response on how many more refugees we can take and how many we cannot take because we are not going to continue accommodating refugees endlessly as if we have infinite resources in this country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that was information and it is well received. Honourable member, please wind up.

MR FUNGAROO: Mr Speaker, you remember here that even the Office of the Prime Minister has failed to give us the long awaited refugees’ policy. You know this! We are praised for a policy which does not exist. They say Uganda has a good policy; where is it? We work on trial and error. This is our opportune time to take charge of our country and especially the management of refugees. If we establish a select committee, we will learn a lot of things.

As Members of Parliament from the West Nile Region, we saw this kind of resistance with due respect, Mr Speaker. When Members of Parliament are determined to take any step towards issues of refugees, you find all sorts of excuses. We organised a workshop, and we wanted you to be the chief guest there. We had a meeting with the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, hon. Hillary Onek, including our sister, the Minister of State for Northern Uganda.

However, when we went to Arua with all arrangements made instead police deployed and the meeting was dispersed with all the made arrangement therein. You are falling into a trap. You Members of Parliament are falling in a trap. Therefore don’t accept this thing of going with people - (Interruption)

MR ALIONI: Thank you my brother, hon. Fungaroo Kaps for giving me the opportunity. Members this is a matter of life and death. Listen, right now in Kampala you can receive a drop of rain but when you go to my constituency and West Nile generally, we have not seen anything like rain.

These huge numbers of refuges feed every day and on daily basis they are cutting our trees down. Now we are going back to famine in that region and people are going to die. Money has been –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let us not abuse this -

MR ALIONI: The information I am giving is that money was given under environment but no single tree was planted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please resume your seat. Let us not do this to ourselves.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you. My appeal to you honourable members, is that given the experience given we had in Arua in West Nile, after a long consultative process, which even involved the office of the Speaker seated in front of us here and the resident country representative for UNHCR, the minister and all leaders from West Nile including my brother here all went - (Interruption)

MR OBIGA: I did not want to speak on this matter. However, Mr Speaker, I would like to give this information now that the issue of the deployment of police in that meeting, which was organised in West Nile, has come up and your name being brought up too.

Whether we organise meetings to talk about refugee issues or a large meeting for any issue, we all know we require the security by the police. When you do not engage the police even as a matter of civility to say we are coming to such and such a meeting, the police will kindly tell you that we can have this meeting another day. And they are doing that for it not to happen.

However, having said that, Mr Speaker, I would like to be very clear on record; I declare my interest that actually when you say refugees are in Arua District, they are only in two constituencies - my constituency Terego East and that of hon. Ismail Ogama. Yes, in Arua District, the other one is the municipality.

Therefore, yes, I support in general terms that there must be an investigation; from a personal position, I do support it.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much for the support first and for the record also. That meeting, which was organised and dispersed in Arua involved the police. There was actually a topic or presentation to be made by the Regional Police Commander (RPC) for West Nile and we communicated to the police.

They were equally disturbed when they were given orders that the meeting was not going to take place. The police are also suffering with these refugees. Therefore, my point is, this is a common point my brother honourable minister; this is the opportunity we must not lose.

Let us go down ourselves and do investigations in the framework of a select committee; no matter the cost or price, we must do it ourselves. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you know why we probe these issues is because eventually I have to draw the terms of reference. Now when the honourable member says there is absence for refugee policy, is the select committee now coming to design a refugee policy?

You have said that this is the opportunity to have a policy, are you going to draw a policy? Please let us look at what we have and can do, so that you guide the presiding officer in drafting the terms of reference.

What I have gathered is that the terms of reference should include issues relating to human rights; that is where we are. 
When you present these issues, do not think people do not support it; people just want to understand it properly so that they are together.

Therefore, when you start by making statements that delineate the support of other people, you lose support for nothing. This is an issue in this country and it affects all of us. There is no opposition to this matter, the minister has said he supports an investigation but the question is how you do it so that there is no stampede in the process.

Therefore, can I put the question on the issue of Parliament taking its own investigation in this matter? I will put the question on that aspect then we come to - because once that is decided then it is easier to process the motion. Do we want to get involved in the investigation of this matter contained in this motion? I put the motion to that question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, do we adopt the prayers as they are - no we don’t have to because it is captured that the terms of reference should draw and include issues of human rights because its captured in the text of the motion so that they can look at it again.

However, there are issues of condemning any form of corruption, mismanagement and abuse of refuge care programmes and funds that trace forward. The select committee be instituted in accordance with the rules and that Parliament urges Government to Table in Parliament the long awaited refuge policy - I guess this is not part of what will come in the terms of reference. It will now be that we take a decision that urges Government to bring the policy because I don’t think the select committee will come out with the policy. 

That we urge Government also to present a Bill because I don’t expect a select committee to present a Bill for amending the Refuge Act that is why we need concurrence on these matters and then there are other prayers. Can I now put the question for adoption of the motion please? 

Okay, I now put the question to the motion that a Resolution of Parliament to investigate the allegation of Corruption, Mismanagement and abuse of office programmes for funds in the Office of the Prime Minister be adopted in the terms expressed earlier. I put the question?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next item. There is no Prime Minister’s Question Time. Let us get to the next item.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER'S BILL ENTITLED, “THE TRUSTEES BILL, 2018”

4.36
MR EDWARD MAKMOT (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Mr Speaker, this is a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member's Bill entitled, "The Trustees Bill, 2018” moved under Articles 79 and 94 and Rule 120 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The motion reads:

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for peace, order, development and good governance;

AND WHEREAS Parliament enacted its Rules of Procedure pursuant to Article 94 (l) of the Constitution and clause 4 (b) of Article 94 and Rule 120 empower a Member of Parliament to move a Private Member's Bill;

AWARE that the laws governing trust management, administration of trust in Uganda are currently scattered in many statutes including the Trustee Act CAP. 164, Trustee Incorporation Act CAP 165 of 1939, the Trust Corporation (Probate and Administration) Act CAP. 163; 

FURTHER AWARE that the law governing trust in Uganda currently was enacted in the colonial era which is quite some time and cannot march with the current advancement and legal trends of trust operations such as -

    1. Capacity to create trust, validity of trust as well as providing for trust like constructive trust and resulting trustee; 

    2. The number of trustees that can be appointed trustee, not providing for other trustees like the managing trustees, custodian trustees, corporate trustees, protective trustees, hence the urgent need for amendment and review; 

CONCERNED THAT trustees in Uganda are increasingly becoming important because they help in management of one’s property and assets upon one’s demise and incorporating entities like societies, associations, schools, places of worship and non-governmental organisations;

FURTHER CONCERNED that the current legal framework is not only old, the mode of formulation of trust is not inadequate but also limits investment opportunities for trust hindering entering the trust development in Uganda.

CONVINCED that there is an urgent need to have a comprehensive review, amendment, consolidation of laws governing trustees in Uganda as to develop and streamline trustee operation activities.

NOW THEREFORE be resolved that;
1) 	The House grants me leave to introduce the Private member’s Bill or an Act entitled, “The Trustees Bill, 2018” a draft which is hereto attached.
2) 	That the House orders the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its reading.”

I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by the honourable member for Bufumbira South and Member for Busiki County in Namutumba District. Would you like to briefly speak to your motion?

MR OTTO MAKMOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is a draft Bill, which is attached to the motion. I will not go further into it and we also have a memorandum. 

I could briefly state that the laws of trustees in Uganda were enacted in 1954 and are majorly contained in common law and equitable principles.

The absence of a comprehensive law that has limited the formulation and creation of trustees to retirement benefits has been limited to the formalisation and creation of trustees to the Retirement Benefits Regulatory Act limited to retirement benefits in general.

And the Trustee Incorporation Act limited to land trustees, various other trustees especially under the succession regime have been created but not legalised because of the absence of a comprehensive legal regime.

Further, the law on trustees is scattered in different legislations including the Trustees Act, the Trustees Incorporation Act, Cap. 165; the Trust Corporation (Probate and Administration) Act, Cap.163; the Public Trust Act, Cap. 161; the Administration of Estates by Consular Offices Act, Cap. 154; the Administrations of Estates of Persons of Unsound Mind Act; the Church of Uganda Trust Act, Cap. 150; and the Local Government Act, Cap 243.

The trust legal regime today is a reflection of the colonial influence, which largely continued to uphold the principles of English law and as such, has failed to reflect the different customary and cultural practices of the people of Uganda, which are central to their existence. 

In addition, some of the provisions in our trust legislations are largely discriminatory on the basis of sex. A case in point is the Succession Act Cap. 162, which in a Supreme Court in law advocates of all the women in Uganda v. the  Attorney-General’s Constitution petition No.13, 2005 and No.05 of 2006 found some provisions to be unconstitutional. The Supreme Court of Canada in Saunders v. Vautier, 1841 his principles was enunciated in the case of Buschau v. Rogers Communication in 2006. 

The Supreme Court reviews of No.973 page 21 talks about when beneficiaries become of age and competent understanding that they can decide to terminate the trustee among other things. These are new developments.

The fact that our trust law was enacted in 1954 and given the different Acts that have been made, there is need to harmonise and the harmonisation or possible amendment is likely to have the effect repealing this Trust Act at the end of the day.

There is need and we have had some extensive work done with different stakeholders to try to make sure that we bring the Trust Bill, 2018 that is comprehensive enough.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it trust or trustee.

MR MAKMOT: Trustee Bill. With the proposed liberalisation of the retirement benefits sector comes other challenges such as the regulation of trust investment, making trustees accountable for their actions to protect savings of beneficiaries. 

I have been privy to court proceedings in Court of Appeal and I have seen how the court has struggled with the lacunas in the law in addressing accountability issues among others.

In many cases we are left to discretion, which is good but we need to empower the court system to avoid some of these trust abuses that are happening all the time. 

Several people have assumed duties of trustees in Uganda with no comprehensive law to streamline their activities and to hold them accountable; as well as provide the formalisation of other forms of trusts in Uganda. There have also been several advancements in the law of trust which require inclusion in the law. 

Mr Speaker, we have equitable principles - court has taken judicial recognition over the gains and yet, in many cases they are not coded. Common law and equitable principles require to be coded.

All these challenges present an urgent need to consolidate and qualify all the laws that will trust in one comprehensive law.

Lastly, the law is highly relevant and critical in accelerating the national development given that the operation of social security funds, which are major sources of investment, depends on having a comprehensive legal regulation of trust.

It is my humble believe that these irregularities can only be cured by a Trustees Bill hence my motion today. I beg to move. 

4.46
MR SAM BITANGARO (NRM, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, I rise to second this motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Trustees Bill, 2018” moved by my colleague hon. Otto Makmot.

Mr Speaker, this amendment is long overdue. The law relating to trust is scattered in many legislations. It is out-dated in most of them and needs to be put in a comprehensive law.

In most of the cases, we have here the Trustees Incorporation Act Cap 165, the Trust Corporations (Probate and Administration) Act 163 were adopted before independence and most of them have been referred to and judicial notes taken by our courts but they are not yet codified in one law. 

Therefore, I support and second the motion because we need these laws codified in one law. We need to consolidate and reform the law relating to trusts, codify the common law and equity relating to trusts and repeal the Trustees Acts Cap 154. 

We also need to repeal the Trustees Corporation Act Cap. 155 and to repeal the Trust Corporation and Administration Probation Act Cap. 153 so that the law relating to trusts is a comprehensive one is one Act. Therefore, on those grounds, I beg to second the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is a motion to grant leave of this House for the hon. Edward Makmot Otto to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Trustees Bill, 2018”. That is the motion and debate starts now.

4.49
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion and I stand to support it. 

We have three pieces of legislation over the same subject and all these Acts I can rightly say are archaic. They are legislations of 1954 and in their nature, they restrict the investment of Trusts Fund securities authorising the law of England, public debentures, immovable property in Uganda for a free hold or mile estate stock securities issued in respect of any loan raised by either the Government of Uganda or Kenya. 

We have a vacuum when it comes to the proposed liberalisation of retirement benefits funds. Until we get a comprehensive law dealing with the subject, the proposed liberalisation will be very impossible.

Mr Speaker, the Trustee Incorporation Act in itself does not give an elaborate procedure of how the trustee should be registered. It leaves legal practitioners in balance on how to proceed with the process of incorporating trusts. 

It is challenging that when you want to get a trustee corporation, you have to go to the Administrator-General.  When you want to get a trustee as an entity to deal with land, you have to go to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. The other Act refers us to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, which I find as confusing, not only to the legal practitioners but also to the public at large. 

I, therefore, support the motion that hon. Otto Makmot be granted leave to move the Private Member’s Bill. Thank you.

4.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Otto for ably bringing and presenting to us this motion. I think it meets the requirements in accordance with the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, that is, the motion being seconded and as well as attaching a draft copy of the Bill. 

It has been a tradition in the House that unless such a motion offends any provision of the Rules of Procedure, we have no reason to deny a member that right to proceed. Therefore, I would like to move a motion that since he was very clear as well as the seconders and there is a very strong justification that they are repealing old legislations and consolidating them into a new law, I would like to move that we grant leave and therefore, request that you put the question.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the question be put and that examining the situation – and I am supposed to have a dictation in taking that decision - I now find no contest and therefore, I will put the motion that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the motion that hon. Edward Makmot Otto be granted leave by this House to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Trustees Bill, 2018.” 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the preceding requirements are within the laws and the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. Therefore, the Parliament responsible Directorate and the department of the First Parliamentary Counsel should assist the member in preparing the final text of the Bill for its transmission to this House for first reading. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I would like to make an appeal to the Member that we have seen situations where we have supported Members who have sought leave to bring statements here; like the one I supported and seconded of the National Youth Statute. It has taken time without the Bill coming back to the House. Therefore, I would like to appeal to the colleague that he should not follow in the trap of those who come and put it here and then, everything disappears. Thank you.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF THE HOUSE TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED, “THE UGANDA DEVELOPMENT BANK (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018”

4.56
MR MWINE MPAKA (Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move a motion seeking leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill moved under Article 94 (4) (b) of the Constitution and Rules 120 and 121 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament Of Uganda. It reads:

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of the country;

AND WHEREAS Parliament enacted its Rules of Procedure pursuant to Article 94 (1) of the Constitution and specifically clause (4) (b) of Article 94 and Rule 120 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda empowers a Member of Parliament to move a Private Member’s Bill;

AWARE THAT as of 1 January 2018, the population of Uganda was estimated to be 42,288,962 people with a total dependency ratio of 108 per cent, which is very high and it is projected that Uganda’s population will be increased by 3,778 persons daily in 2018; 

DEEPLY CONCERNED that Uganda is the world’s second youngest country according to the World Economists Report and that Ugandan youth constitute approximately 22.9 per cent of the total of the country’s population according to the Uganda Bureau of Statistics and therefore, there is an urgent need to prioritise the youth in the country’s development agenda;

TAKING COGNISANCE of the fact that the Government has in the past undertaken a number of programmes intended to address the problem of unemployment and poverty among the youth including the Northern Uganda Social Action Plan (NUSAF), Skilling Uganda, Youth Enterprise Scheme, Youth Venture Capital Fund and various programmes under the different government ministries and development partners’ initiatives; 

CONCERNED THAT initiatives are micro and commercial financing in nature as opposed to development financing and to a large extent have not, therefore, achieved the intended objective of all alleviating poverty and empowering of the youth;

FURTHER CONCERNED that the different youth programmes and initiatives by Government are scattered across different ministries, departments and agencies and their objectives have neither been strictly adhered to nor not achieved; 

RECOGNISING THAT the importance of fast-tracking youth empowerment programmes and noting their contributions towards the national development and growth, it is imperative that such programmes be amalgamated under the stewardship of the Uganda Development Bank; 

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved that: 
This House grants me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill for an Act entitled, “The Uganda Development Bank (Amendment) Act”, a draft of which hereto attached and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.” 

I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by hon. Silas Aogan of Kumi Municipality, hon. Odur, honourable members for Agago, Youth Northern and Ngora County. Would you like to briefly speak to your motion? 

MR MWINE: Economic success and human security in the future for Uganda will largely depend on the young people towards 2030 Sustainable Development Goals. 

According to the 2014 National Population and Housing Census, Uganda is classified as averagely a young population with a medium age at 15 years. While the official statistics for the unemployed youths remain ambiguous, there is a growing mismatch between the labour supply and the labour demand. It is estimated that there are over 700,000 entrants competing unfavourably to the formal sector advertised jobs, which are about 1,000.
 
The new entrants in the job market are arguably and dependently the youth. With the current population growth, the unemployment youth will become more pronounced in the near future. The demand side is small and also constrained in creation of jobs. 

The Uganda Registration Service Bureau has a register of 500,000 businesses active, dying and dead. According to the last business census by Uganda Bureau of Statistics, more than 90 per cent of the businesses had less than four employees. The problem is that the bulk of the unemployed are the youth and practically the unemployed resources in a country discount growth and development objectives. 

These already add to the burden parking population of the age dependency ratio at 103. Certain employment opportunities lie in the inexhaustible potential of the youth as felt in this country in the present and future economic growth and development. Substantial existing evidence supports the youth led development and underscores the relevance of the youth development funds. 

The Government of Uganda has undertaken a number of employment oriented and entrepreneur interventions geared towards providing the youth with financial resources to encourage productivity. These are based on the pillars of enterprise development, job creation, business skills training and development. Some of these include the Youth Venture Capital Fund, the Youth Livelihood Fund, agricultural credit facilities and other broad initiatives like the Operation Wealth Creation. 

A recent evaluation of the Youth Livelihood Programme, however, revealed that the programme has received – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, how will this motion help you? That is what we need. 

MR MWINE: Yes, I am coming to that, Mr Speaker. The financial sector and the youth enterprises set off concurrently in this country. The financial sector in Uganda remains low, shallow, and illicit. It is dominated by the commercial banking industry, which accounts for over 80 per cent of the financial assets. 

The second largest sector in the country is the NSSF, which has over 70 per cent of its assets invested in fixed income and Government security. The available long term financing in form of equity is limited both from the NSSF and Uganda Securities Exchange. Collectively, the financial sector employs very few people and is not a hub for employment transformation. 

The provision for credit chip and long term remains the window to leverage youth entrepreneurship and employment. Without the well-functioning finance system, neither aids nor local entrepreneurship as such can create the right business climate conditions to do long term economic growth. 

The Youth Development Fund
The inability of the financial sector to address peculiar needs of the youth causes inadequacies in the current initiative such as YPL and the Youth Capital Venture Fund by Government which gives rise to an urgent need for a Youth Development Fund that consolidates the different youth related projects under the Uganda Development Bank legislation. 

This shall be a fund dedicated to addressing the financial and credit needs of the young people focusing on a whole range of economic activities, including a small and medium size enterprises and farmers. 

In addition, the Youth Development Fund, under the Uganda Development Bank, would uniquely cite holistic solutions to the youth and eventually seek a consolidation of the different existing initiatives. 

The rationale for amending the Uganda Development Bank Act to establish a Youth Development Fund 
The main objective of the Youth Development Fund is to find an economic environment, a conducive, legal and regulatory framework for the development of sustainable financial intervention in both urban and rural areas to address the growing need of the yawning gap in the financial market for the youth financing. 

It also strengthens as well as deepens and widens the existing initiatives by Government and the development partners to foster youth productivity, employment and job creation; channelling resources holistically through one repository and having one central entity to make it easy to implement and monitor programmes and projects other than having various scattered projects. 

Development financing as opposed to commercial financing for youth today can be monitored and given guidance and technical support by the development banks during start-ups till the projects are concluded as compared to commercial financing. 

The Youth Development Fund will be a conduit for financial literacy as well as invest in research and development opportunities for the youth. The outlook has a number of inward looking processes and laws in form of local content such as Buy Uganda Build Uganda. 

Financing youth ventures through Uganda Development Bank is easier to regulate, monitor and provides much clearer channels of accountability unlike the challenges that Government has faced in managing these different programmes. 

Promoting efficient and private sector led Youth Development Fund with a zero tolerance towards corruption as well as selecting youth led organisations with high levels of transparency, corporate social responsibility projects, promoting ethics and integrity will be embedded in the project. 

How the youth development bank fund will operate
The proposed youth development- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you do not need to go there. Which motion are you justifying? You have proposed a motion for proposing an amendment to the Uganda Development Bank Act.

MR MWINE: Yes, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You also remember that you had proposed another Bill- 

MR MWINE: Yes, Mr Speaker - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Wait. What you are justifying is the other Bill not this one - the creation of the fund was in another Bill, which we said we would deal with at a later stage. However, now the justification is not to the Bill you are proposing. If you are moving to create a fund, it is a different matter and you would not be allowed to do that because you have no authority to do it.

MR MWINE: Thank You, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. We are amending the Ugandan Development Bank Act to create a fund within the Uganda Development Bank.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then it has a problem.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If the intention of the Member is to amend the Ugandan Development Bank Act, with a view to creating a Youth Development Fund in the bank, I am afraid that that motion is unconstitutional based on Article 93 of the Constitution. 

What I would advise him to do would be to liaise with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development sell him the idea and if the minister of finance adopts it, he can formally introduce a fund to this House but certainly, the Member’s motion offends Article 93 of the Constitution.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I had hoped that the Member was going to do was to specifically introduce a component of catering for the youth in that bank. That is what I was hoping he was going to do. However, if he was going to create a fund then that is completely a different ball game. Therefore, my advice would be that let us pause this now, we go and redo what you are doing, we do not take it off the Order Paper then you come and continue with your justification when it is properly organised.

5.10
MR GASTER MUGOYA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also attentively listened to my young brother who is proposing to come up with an amendment. When he leaves this House, it is imperative that he understands the history of the Uganda Development Bank Act, which was enacted in 1972 at the time when this country started experiencing what I would call economic anarchy and when we had an emergency of terror in all spheres of human life.

I would like to also invite my brother to critically look at Sections 4, 11 and other attendant provisions of the Act to understand why it was hastily enacted. If you look at this parent Act, it has what I can call minor details instead of having major details that go to the root and essence of why the country came up with the Uganda Development Bank Act.

For instance, Section 4 only provides for a generality of the objective of this Act that is to provide and finance development in various sectors of the country’s economy. In addition, if you look at it, you will find that it lacks the economic essence and secondly, the law as it stands now, does not match the current situation, the tenets of liberalization and globalisation.

Lastly, I also wanted the propounder to go back and look at what we call the structure and management provisions of the Act. They are very narrow in sense and application. Lastly, I wanted the propounder to look at the banking sector or various laws and practices generally in the country and see whether the Finance Institutions Act is in consonance with this law and why we need an amendment. 

Needless to say, that where it is possible -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, please -

MR MUGOYA: Yes, I am summing up but because I am providing what seems to be a sweetener in my submission, I would also say that probably where it is possible, you can come up with an independent Bill minus what you are proposing. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the original intention of the mover is that we have a development bank set up in Uganda. We have the East African Development Bank but we also have the Uganda Development Bank. Now that bank in its operation is helping sectors like agriculture, etcetera but with no specific focus to the youth, that is where he is coming from.

Therefore, whether the law is general, sometimes, we draft laws in general terms to allow for discretion for the implementers of the law to be able to do it because we give them the latitude. We do not define every detail so that the latitude is left for the people implementing the law. Sometime, it is deliberate in drafting to do that. 

However, we will not go into that for now but what I ask of the honourable member, is to go back, you will come to justify this motion at the next sitting of Parliament along the lines and if the proposal you are making is to insert specifically that please, do not deal with the issue of setting up a fund, it is already there in the bank. What you want is a direct avenue to be able to enter this vehicle as young people. That is what you want to achieve.

MR MWINE: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Next item

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST BY THE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW JAPANESE YEN 13.659 BILLION ($125.1 MILLION) FROM THE JAPAN INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION AGENCY (JICA) TO FINANCE THE KAMPALA METROPOLITAN TRANSMISSION SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

6.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that a motion for adoption of the report of the Committee on National Economy to authorise Government-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Honourable minister, that item is not properly drafted. The motion you are moving is to request Parliament to authorise - that is the motion you are moving.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion to request Parliament to authorise Government to borrow Japanese Yen 13.659 billion ($125.1 million) from the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) to finance the Kampala Metropolitan Transmission System Improvement Project.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Seconded by hon. D’ujanga, Member for Bukoto -  but you people had the benefit to second this thing in Cabinet. (Laughter) hon. Aogon, hon. Kahonda, hon. Bafaki, hon. Tayebwa, Member for Nakapiripiriti. Do you want to speak to your motion?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the objective of this project for which we are requesting this amount of money is to improve the transmission system in the greater Kampala metropolitan area through construction and renovation of sub stations, improvement of transmission lines and introduction of a mobile substation. This will contribute to the improvement of power supply and economic development in the great area.

The components of the project include the following: Buloba substation, upgrading of Mutundwe substation, Bujagali, construction of new Mukono substation, upgrading of Kawaala substation, re-conducting of 132KV lines and a procurement of a mobile substation in case there is an emergency or breakdown in the system.

Mr Speaker, this matter was referred to the Committee on National Economy and they are ready to report to the House for consideration. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, that is not part of your motion. The report is for us –

Honourable members, I will propose the question and the chairman will report. The motion is to authorise Government to borrow ¥13.659 billion from the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) to finance the Kampala metropolitan transmission system improvement project. This matter was referred to the Committee on National Economy. Can the committee chairperson report and we debate?

5.19
MR LAWRENCE BATEGEKA (NRM, Hoima Municipality, Hoima): Mr Speaker, I am here to present a report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to ¥13.659 billion (equivalent $125.1million) from the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), to finance the Kampala metropolitan transmission system improvement project. The committee has considered this loan request and before I proceed, I would like to lay at the Table, the signed report, minutes, brief on the proposal, project implementation plan, loan agreement and the environmental impact assessment report. Refer to the survey on the project report. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR BATEGEKA: In the interest of time, Mr Speaker, the Minister of State for Finance has gone through the components of the project and I do not intend to go through them. The report is also uploaded on our iPads and I will move straight to the observations and recommendations made by the committee while considering this loan request. 

The following are the observations:

Development process of generation and transmission projects

The committee observed the slow realisation of electricity infrastructure projects particularly in the generation and transmission segments. While some progress has been registered on the mini hydros, large projects tend to take too long in the development phase.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited (UETCL), should accelerate the development process of projects in the generation and transmission segments in order to attract long-term financing in the electricity sector.

Low disbursement rates among UETCL debt financed projects. 
The committee noted the low average disbursements (about 2O.4 per cent) of direct UETCL loans against original project lifetime as at 3l March 2017. The low disbursement rates are attributed to poor project preparedness of UETCL, especially through lack of detailed project feasibility studies, lengthy procurement process for goods and services, lack of sites for contractors to start the works, delays in Government counterpart funds and in compensations of Project Affected Persons (PAPs).

The committee recommends that Government should ensure that all proposed electricity infrastructure projects presented before Cabinet should be scrutinised to ensure that preparatory phases such as feasibility studies, compensation of PAPs have been carried out before they are further submitted to Parliament for their approval.

Government counterpart funding 

The committee noted that Government enters into financing agreements with various development partners, in which it commits to provide counterpart funding through various implementing agencies. Among the lessons learnt, from the implementation of projects, especially those financed by externally borrowed funds, is the insufficient and untimely release of Government counterpart funding and the low absorption capacities of project implementing agencies. Government will contribute $13.6 million towards the implementation of this project.

The committee recommends that Government ensures that adequate counterpart funds for this project are timely integrated into the national budget during the project implementation period. 

The committee further recommends that the sectoral parliamentary committees should critically examine the budgets of Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) that are beneficiaries of externally borrowed funds to ensure that the budgets of the MDAs explicitly provide for all the required counterpart funds during that financial year for the projects that are under their implementation.

High dependency on consultancies 

The committee observed the high dependency on consultancy services in conducting feasibility studies and designing transmission lines projects by UETCL despite their successful implementation of several electricity transmission projects. There has been slow progress in translating this success into building sufficient capacities within UETCL in conducting feasibility studies and designing electricity transmission projects. For this project, 7.4 per cent of the total project costs ($10.3million) will finance the procurement of consultancy services for construction and RAP supervisions. The over dependency on consultancies possess an agency risk, especially where the consultant objectives end up not coinciding with UETCL objectives, which tends to cause delays in project implementation.

The committee recommends that UETCL scales up plans for building the capacity of UETCL staff, especially in conducting feasibility studies and designing electricity transmission projects in order to reduce on the exorbitant amounts of project funds, spent on consultancy services towards conducting feasibility studies and designing transmission projects.

Procurement 

The committee observed that the construction and consultancy by firms to be financed under the loan or the Government of Uganda, UETCL will be awarded contracts in accordance with the PPDA regulations or the financier’s regulations, whichever is applicable. However, debt financed infrastructure projects in Uganda are faced with procurement bottlenecks including lengthy bidding that have continued to negatively affect the timely implementation of electricity transmission projects. Administrative reviews also prolong the procurements when bidders are not satisfied or feel they have been treated unfairly.   

The committee recommends that Government should undertake the procurement process for debt financed projects ahead of time prior to parliamentary approval. In addition, the ongoing process of amending the PPDA Act, 2003 should be fast tracked by Government in order to further address the existing inefficiencies in the procurement cycle and promote value of debt financed projects.

Plan for Using Local Contractors, Equipment and Materials

Mr Speaker, the committee noted that skilled labour and regular workers for construction and work on sub-station facilities, civil works, buildings and transmission lines for the project can be ordered with local contractors. Local contractors will be hired for the project implementation plan.

The committee further notes that aggregate, cement and other materials to be used in the civil works and in the construction and upgrading of new and existing substations and foundation work for the transmission towers can be purchased locally. Equipment and materials will be purchased locally to the extent possible in this project. 

However, most of the substation facilities and transmission equipment and materials for the scale equivalent to the project to be procured are not manufactured in the country and thus, they will be procured from Japan or other countries in consideration of past introduction of the existing facilities and operation and maintenance capacity of Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited (UECTL).

The committee recommends that Government develops technical skills transfer programmes in all projects contracted to foreign companies to facilitate the development of a critical mass of local skilled labour to be used to maintain the established infrastructure. 

In this case, the consultant should provide on-site training and knowledge transfer to UETCL and Rural Electrification Agency (REA) counterpart project engineers on the various supervision activities of electricity transmission in line at no additional cost.

Where local capacity exists in the production of inputs to any public project, Government should support local producers in meeting quality and other specifications required for supply to the projects. 

Environmental and Social Issues 

The committee noted that a detailed Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) study for the project was conducted and approved by NEMA. The ESIA report outlined the ecological and social issues that have to be monitored during project implementation.

The committee recommends that UETCL should strictly ensure that the negative environmental impacts in the ESIA document are timely mitigated in accordance with NEMA requirements and other international requirements.

RAP Implementation and Supervision 

The committee noted that the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) study was prepared to establish the basis for compensation of Project Affected Persons (PAPs) for property that will be lost in the corridor for the proposed Overhead Transmission Line (OHTL). The implementation of the RAP will involve disclosure to groups and individuals. 

The Resettlement Action Plan valuation report shall be publicly disclosed in Kampala at UETCL offices and at each affected district headquarters for review. For PAPs who raise objections, the grievances will be referred to the grievance committee set up for the project to deal with complaints on compensation. 

Experience from similar projects have exhibited continued delays associated with payments to Project Affected Persons, especially to those land owners that have agreed to the valued compensation rates.

The committee recommends that in accordance with Uganda's compensation and resettlement requirements, the Project Affected Persons should be compensated in a timely and adequate manner in order to guard against the implementation delays for this project that might arise due to poor RAP implementation.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that the request by Government to borrow JPY 13.659 billion, equivalent to US$ l25.l million from the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) to finance the Kampala Metropolitan Transmission System Improvement project be approved subject to the recommendations herein. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson. Honourable members, that is the motion. The committee has reported, without variation to what their recommendations are; they recommend in the terms that we have proposed by request. Any short comments on this? Can we have two minutes each?

5.33
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to appreciate the committee for the work done. I have a few issues to raise but I should first of all declare my support for the loan. I know that when we go for a loan, we are essentially declaring a burden for the future government. 

The loan that we are processing is good but when you are doing a mathematical number in an examination, you are supposed to provide the working. When you get an answer and just plant it there without a breakdown, you lose out on many marks. In short, I need you to go back and provide the breakdown. Indicate how much money you need if you are working on the Namugongo sub-station or on the Kira sub-station. How much money will be spent on compensating Project Affected Persons? 

I know why I am saying this. We had issues with National Medical Stores where there was a lot of bickering here and there. There were claims that the money was meant for stabilising the economy, the dollar rate, this and that - because there were no details. Yes, I support the loan but I request that you go back and include those details.

Secondly, I would like you to talk about the energy fund, which was set up in 2008. That fund is the one that was supposed to help us when it comes to counterpart funding, payment of the people we are compensating and feasibility studies. What happened to the energy fund, which amounted to over Shs 1.4 trillion? Please tell us something –(Member timed out.)

5.35
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the Chairman of the Committee on National Economy for the report, which I support. 

I have two observations; one regarding the procurement cycle, which is delaying the Government in procuring a project. Government takes more than one year to procure one project because of the long cycle, which has more than 18 stages. That matter must be addressed regarding all donor funded projects. 

We have another delay when it comes to compensation. There are a lot of delays, especially in compensating the owners of land. You may recall how the Entebbe Express Highway dragged for over a year because someone wanted to be compensated at a very high price. 

Therefore, the National Planning Authority, in conjunction with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should compensate land owners early enough, before the project kicks off. That is my submission.

5.37
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the loan but the chairperson of the committee has raised critical issues to which the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should respond. These issues include the low disbursement rates. We are procuring loans but are failing to use the money within this sector. He talked of only 24 per cent. Honourable minister, where is the problem? Why do we continue to procure loans when we cannot use the money? 

Second is dependence on consultancies. Mr Speaker, our own technical staff cannot even prepare a feasibility study for a project. We do not have the capacity to supervise our own projects. Really, can we continue this way? Suppose this is cut out and we put the money in developing our local competence, how much shall we have saved? Really, honourable minister, you need to save us.

The third issue is procurement bottlenecks. The chairperson of the committee pointed out very clearly that there seems to have been some earlier recommendations that these bottlenecks be addressed before we give parliamentary approval. If there are going to be delays in terms of procurement yet these are not being delayed and we are talking about amending the law using the law of the funder, we need some answers from the ministry. Are we going to continue having loans and failing to use them within the right time and we pay interest on these loans when they are stuck in our ministries?

Finally is the issue of compensation and the resettlement policy. The chairperson of the committee is saying, this should be handled within the right time and adequately. What is “timely” and “adequate”? What is the Government policy on compensation and resettlement for those who are affected by these projects? If we talk of using local materials, which the chairperson pointed out, how much would we reduce in terms of the cost of the project? 

He recommended that some of these materials, which are locally available and the local - (Member timed out.)

5.40
MR RICHARD OKOTH OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the loan but I would like to raise a few questions for which I need clarification. 

This morning, the press was awash with an extract from one of the reports that the committee is yet to present and they talk about how the country is overburdened by external loans. I would like to find out from the minister about the repayment plans for these loans because we seem to be borrowing without focusing on how we shall be paying these loans. 

Mr Speaker, the 1997 Asian Crisis was caused by excessive external debt burdens of those countries. From the information available in the report, which the committee is yet to present – I do not want to debate it – it is very clear that we are already overburdened by external loans. I would like to know what mechanisms we have in place to cushion this country against the effects of the excessive borrowing that we are engaging in, more so on apparently self-liquidating engagements.

Secondly, whereas I appreciate that the ministry is concerned with the transmission lines in Kampala and so on, we have a transmission line, which was built some time back in Tororo. For many years, the people on whose land the transmission line was constructed have never been paid. I would like to know whether Government has any plans to pay the land owners along the transmission line from Tororo to Lira. Thank you.

5.42
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the committee report, specifically the proposal to borrow the loan because of growth in the metropolitan area, which needs to be supported with power supply. 

Mr Speaker, whenever we bring the issue of borrowing of loans, Ugandans wonder. Therefore, my prayer is that since we cannot do without borrowing, when it comes to the budget period, let us give a true reflection of our capacity. When we had the Budget Speech, our capacity to generate money locally to support Ugandan projects was rated highly. As a result, whenever we bring requests for loans here, it raises a lot of questions. 

I think in the next budget, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should give a true reflection of our capacity to support ourselves economically so that the country gets to understand that without borrowing these loans, we cannot operate well.

On the issue of procurement, what I have observed is that it is not about lengthy procedures but about poor planning. Normally, the spending agencies start to plan when the money is already on their accounts yet they could avert this by having proper prior planning. This has brought a lot of queries in the Committee on Public Accounts. If the spending agencies can improve on their planning processes, we can improve on this. 
On the hire of consultancies, the expenditure is very high. I wish to know from the minister – (Member timed out.)

5.44
MR SIMEO NSUBUGA (NRM, Kassanda County South, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank the chairperson for they have done what they normally do. Whenever loans are presented, they always end with the conclusion: “We therefore recommend the borrowing”. In my opinion, that was expected. 

However, I think that time has come for us to come up with better terms of reference for committees like the Committee on National Economy. We are borrowing money but in this report they have not shown to us a cost-benefit analysis of this loan from the assessment of the committee. What are the costs? What are the benefits? What are the alternatives? What else can we do as Parliament so that not every other loan that comes must pass and not every other loan that comes must be borrowed on the same terms as the lender wants? 

Members are decrying the high consultancy fees but those are determined by the lender. It is not our ministry here that determines that consultancy cost. Our committee should deliberate and give us more information. I have a feeling that the kind of information we receive from the Committee on National Economy is still wanting. We need to hear more. From your own thinking –(Member timed out.)

5.47
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and the minister. 

In the view of this House, I know that we borrow a lot of money but there are instances where you cannot stop borrowing. I would like to request the House that we allow and authorise Government to borrow this money.

However, honourable minister, I am told that there is a lot of money swindled in the procurement process. How are you going to handle that? We shall give you money here but you will take four years before you procure. When you procure, we do not want you to come back here and say the contractor has asked for more money than we passed. How are you going to handle that?

On the issue of compensation, I would like to request Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), National Water and Sewerage Corporation and the Ministry of Energy that when you compensate for where the power lines will pass, also compensate where water pipes will pass. We do not want to do triple compensation. Have you considered this or talked to National Water and UNRA so that instead of paying here, we pay the other side? 

We were here the other day and power went off when the House was in session. Honourable minister, do you want to assure us that when we give you this loan, we shall not have blackouts? If there is a blackout in Parliament, what will happen in Omoro and Butaleja? Can you confirm this to the House because we do not want a scenario like the other time when the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development came here saying that they are going to reduce the costs – (Member timed out.)

5.49
MR GUTOMOI ABACACON (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Uganda cannot live without borrowing, particularly loans of this capacity. I would like to thank the minister and the chairperson for coming up with this request. We have expressed our concerns and we are witnesses of the jury.

Mr Speaker, we should balance our thinking about the economy of this country. When you go to northern Uganda, particularly Lango sub-region, the economy has not been doing very well. We lost our property, particularly cows, and we expect those who suffered to be compensated. 

We should maybe think in the same line of borrowing to compensate these people because they went to court and won but they cannot be paid. If you cannot sit at Cabinet level and come up with another loan to compensate these people, we should move a motion here.  

I would also like to find out about the Rwekunye tarmacking road project to Apac, Lira up to Acholi Bur. When the idea was brought, I was informed that the road was going to leave out the home of the late President Obote and we complained about this borrowing. We advised that you add more money to ensure that, that road is considered. This is because leaving out Mzee’s home and taking the tarmac to future Presidents homes, even the current one – (Member timed out.) 

5.51
LT. COL. FLAVIA BYEKWASO (UDPF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and also comment on the $10 million for consultancies.

When you look at this, you may think that Uganda is dealing with issues of electricity for the first time. I am sure that for the time we have been dealing with this, we should have built capacity so that we reduce on this figure of $10 million. 

The other point I would like to make is on the plan for using local contractors. In the submission - I will not read the details - they are using the word “can”. I have heard that in some countries where huge amounts of money are invested in projects of this nature, they oblige a mandatory part of the contract to include local contractors to ensure local content. However, when you say “they can do this”, it is not binding enough. 

I would like to submit that we compel whoever is going to be the contractor to make sure that all these other materials that can be got from Uganda are bought from here. Instead of saying ‘can’, let us say, ‘they should’. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, can we draw this to a close? I think we have had sufficient debate. Let us hear from the ministers.

5.53
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will handle issues to do with finance, counterpart funding and securing releases while my colleague, hon. D’Ujanga, will handle issues to do with supplies and electricity efficiency. 

We are developing a policy that we should never bring a loan request here unless we are sure we have the money for counterpart funding. Counterpart funding is normally for two things: to compensate the people whose properties the project is passing through and also for land. 

It does not make any business sense that we should borrow money and then fail to implement a project simply because we cannot pay the people whose properties the project is passing through. I thought I should make that very clear.

On the question of procurement, we are returning to Parliament shortly to bring amendments to the PPDA law. We would like to change that law so that certain things are done very fast. It is not a bad law but there are certain things, which tie us and we have been wasting a lot of time.

In reference to compensation, if you will recall, we would like to make some amendments within the Constitution. I cannot remember the Article that states that land belongs to the people and if Government wants to pass a project through that land, the owners must be compensated fully and promptly. We shall come back on that and debate it –(Interjections)–It is already here. Please, let us not prolong it.

On the question of local content, you know very well that there is already an existing policy. Not only must these people be forced but any contractor here cannot bring in an item, which is locally available, unless the local price is uncompetitive or the quality does not match the service. That is already being implemented. 

Skills transfer is another policy, which we have deliberately taken; that when a project is being done here, as much as possible, we must get Ugandans to skill and copy them so that we do not continue importing this labour. 

As I have said, absorption issues relate to problems of compensation, procurement and approvals. Approvals have been done but I must really thank Parliament. These days you have become very exemplary in handling these requests very fast. I wish to express my thanks, on behalf of my ministry, for making sure that things are done very fast.

Do we have a repayment plan? Sure, we have what we call the investment strategic plan that shows you when and which product should come so that when it comes to repayment, we do not get stuck on the way. 

Somebody has talked about the Lira-Tororo transmission line compensation. I do not want to take a lot of time on it. However, the Tororo-Mbale-Soroti-Lira transmission line, which is supposed to pick power from Karuma when it comes on stream and bring it to particularly Tororo for industries - we have been stuck with the question of compensation but we are moving very well on that - (Interruption)

MR AOGON: Mr Speaker, we are talking about money for Uganda. I was voted for by the people of Kumi Municipality to raise my voice for the people of Uganda. I am trying to seek clarification but the minister is becoming adamant and yet I have a right, as a Member of Parliament, to defend the people’s views.

Is it in order for the minister to ignore a Member of Parliament as though I was not standing on the floor begging for clarification? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules of our engagement are very clear. When it is a point of order, the honourable member must yield the floor. However, points of information and clarification are up to the Member speaking to accept. We are not reinventing the rules; we are applying them squarely. Therefore, hon. Aogon, you are completely out of order. (Applause)

MR KASAIJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable member, did you want to assign me a responsibility that is not mine? 

Regarding consultancies, we should be more concerned about who does the consultancy. However, you cannot avoid consultancies as these are highly technical things. For example, these days I follow the quality of certain roads very closely. You people who take Tirinyi Road - we constructed that road barely 10 years ago, but now go and see it. When we put another contractor, I was there recently – go and see it and compare it with the road between Busia and Iganga – (Interruption) 

COL KULAYIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the honourable minister for giving way. I would like to put it to you, honourable minister, that the problems and sizes of some of these roads, for example Tirinyi Road, are not about consultancy. Shoddy work is about the performance of the contractor and the corruption within the implementers. Until we deal with the issue of attitude to work and the values in this country, we shall continue lamenting. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to request the minister and the implementing ministries to look at the question of quality of work. As you have rightly observed, honourable minister, the quality of this work leaves a lot to be desired and it is not about consultancies.

The issue we are raising is that the charge is very high. This is the concern and it is not a new matter. Is it not possible to negotiate the consultancy here - $10 million is another project altogether. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR OKUPA: Further information, Mr Speaker, to the minister. I would like to add on what Colonel -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let the honourable minister allow you, please.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, honourable minister. He is always a gentleman. Mr Speaker, it is true that the contractor may do shoddy work. However, the consultants also have a problem. For example, on the Tororo-Mbale-Soroti road, we engaged consultants but just as the road was about to be completed, they said, “No, we think there was a mistake. The traffic on this road is high because of the trailers going to Sudan so we must get another loan to redo the work.” Where was the consultant not to know the traffic flow on that road? 

MR FUNGAROO: Honourable minister, I am standing in for the Leader of the Opposition and I have serious concerns to raise. (Interjections) Yes, I am since three days ago.

Mr Speaker, before you conclude, if you are concluding -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that would not be the minister to allow you; it would be me, if that is your level. (Laughter)

MR KASAIJA: I would like to conclude - 

MR MAGYEZI: Honourable minister, this is important for your information - 

MR KASAIJA: No, please. Can I conclude? A Member has mentioned the Rwekunyu – (Interruption)

MR AOGON: Mr Speaker, it is very unfortunate that the minister, who is my great friend, can make me beg on the Floor like this. The procedural matter I am raising is, I asked a very pertinent question about the status of the energy fund and I have seen the minister dodge it technically. That is why he does not want a point of clarification from me. Honourable minister, can you specifically talk about the energy fund? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He said that would be for the Minister of Energy and Minerals. 

MR AOGON: Thank you, Mr Speaker. However, he said he is dealing with financial matters and when we talk about the energy fund, isn’t that about finances? Can you please talk about the energy fund? In 2008, over Shs 1.3 trillion was set up - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the procedural point?

MR AOGON: The procedural point is, why should the minister go off track and avoid my question? Is it procedurally okay for him to avoid my question?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, there are ways of smartly using the rules but there are also ways of completely misapplying the rules. You seem to be inclined to the second aspect, most of the time. I would like to strongly advise against it.

MR KASAIJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In winding up, the points that have been raised by the committee are very pertinent. For sure, we shall take them on and see how best to apply them. I would like to ask the Minister of Energy and Minerals to come and give -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that is for me, honourable minister.

MR KASAIJA: Oh sorry, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, I also like my job; so please, do not take it away from me. (Laughter)

6.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank my colleagues for the issues raised. The Member for Kumi Municipality wanted to know the breakdown and I would like to advise that the breakdowns are on page eight of the committee report.

Apart from that, my senior colleague, the finance minister, covered most of the areas except the wayleaves around Tororo. We are doing two jobs around Tororo: one, we are enforcing the transmission lines to Nairobi. That line was built in 1954 at 132KV is now being changed to frequency as part of the line interconnection. 

The other job we are doing in that area is changing the wooden pole lines from Tororo to Lira. It used to be wooden poles built in the 1950s and those who live up there know that during the dry season when grass is burning, there is always power failure in Soroti and Lira.

Therefore, we have a lot of difficulties with wayleaves in Tororo area, so much so that even those we have already compensated have come back to ask for more money. Well, the law says we should pay them adequately and we are negotiating with them.

My appeal to my colleagues is to try and moderate the discussions, mobilise our people and try to explain to them that these projects are for their own good. However, we are negotiating with them and I hope that soon, we shall conclude the negotiations.

The other issue is about using local materials. As much as possible, we have a policy of Buy Uganda Build Uganda (BUBU). Things that we can get locally, we buy. That includes aggregate, sand, cement and now I am glad to say that we have some capacity for high quality steel. There are some of our companies, which are able to manufacture high quality steel and we buy from them.

However, the issue and the problem we run into is the availability of large quantities of this steel. However, as much as possible, we try to buy what we can locally.
Finally, sometimes the consultancy is a condition. However, we are trying as much as possible to build capacity. We have interacted with the committee on this matter. Regarding transmission, we now have a bit of capacity to do certain work, although partially. As much as possible, we also try to save money.

I would like to thank you all very much for the interest you have shown in these projects that are going to improve our livelihood, especially around Kampala. We envisage that in the next 10 years, the capacity of consumption here will double. Right now, it is at 500 megawatts and we think that it will increase to 1,000 megawatts in the next 10 years and we are preparing in advance to meet the demand. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Opposition would like to move the question that the motion be put. Is that what you said? Briefly please.

6.11
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): By the grace of God, you cannot run away from me. If God wants me, I will be there. On behalf of the Leader of the Opposition and my own behalf, I acknowledge the need for electricity for our country. I also acknowledge the fact that we all live and work in the Kampala metropolitan area for the good of our country.

However, the concerns of Members of Parliament include the issue of wastage and the high consultancy fees, which need to be taken care of seriously. When shall we, as Ugandans, prove to ourselves and to the world that we have done something good with our own brains and our own scientists, some of whom have been internally displaced like Dr Baryomunsi?

Why do we accept conditions from outside? I came across donors who were complaining about donations, which were rejected by this Government. The money was given to us for free but the terms and conditions were not good. I saw some discussions going on in the Parliamentary commission during the Ninth Parliament when some money under the DGF funds to support Parliament was given to us and people said, “No, when it is like this, we cannot take it.” Meanwhile, these people were complaining about why we were not taking their money.

This means that money or laws given to us are not only for our interest but also for the interest of the people giving us the money. If we refuse, they will cry. Yes, they are giving us but we refuse and you will see them crying and kneeling.

When shall we improve our bargaining power and influence? How shall we show this to the people of the world? This is the point I would like to raise from the perspective of the alternative Government. If you are tired, get out and we will come up with a frame to prove that Uganda can save money and do things very well.

Secondly, as a person who comes from northern Uganda and a person who wants Ugandans to move together - yesterday we were here and we talked about a loan for extending a line from Masaka to Mbarara. Without stating much, there is also a line from Mbarara to Mirama hills to Rwanda to take power from Karuma. This is Karuma, which was stated by His Excellency the President in Obongi on Radio Pacis in several areas of northern Uganda - as the hydroelectric dam that will solve the problems of northern Uganda regarding electricity.

Since 1948, when the first hydro dam was built; the Owen Falls Dam, power has not reached Obongi and we were told that our opportunity is now Karuma. Why are you borrowing money to bring electricity to a place, which already has electricity instead of borrowing money to take electricity to Obongi first where there is no power?

Mr Speaker, if we want to move together, if we want the unity and harmony of Uganda to be enhanced, development must be balanced. For that reason, this particular case of the Kampala metropolitan area - (Interruption)

MR D’UJANGA: Thank you for giving way, hon. Fungaroo. Obongi is covered under the following programmes: one, a World Bank loan of $100 million, which was approved here is going to get power from Olwiyo up to Pakwach. Islamic Development Bank will pick power from Pakwach, along Wadelai, Rhino Camp then Obongi.

We are doing this because the current electricity in Moyo is coming from Lira through Atyak. If we extended that line to Obongi, they will have light as bright as candles. Therefore, what we have done is to now get a 132KV line from Olwiyo-Pakwach, put a substation and then supply Wadelai, Rhino Camp and then Obongi.

This 132KV line, as I reported yesterday, will continue to Nebbi, have a substation and continue to Arua. The money was approved in this House amounting to $100 million and surveys are on-going. It was overwhelmingly supported by my colleagues. 

We are pegging now – if you go to the area of my colleague, hon. Simon Oyet, he will tell you that we have reached there with wayleaves and he is helping us to pass through.
Next month there will be a contractor to extend the line from Olwiyo, Purongo, and Rwot Apwoyo up to Pakwach. Thank you.

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, honourable. As a member of the natural resources committee and the national economy committee, we took time to visit Kampala Cement because of Karuma. We found that Kampala Cement that consumes over 40 megawatts of power in a month has around 14 days of load-shedding because of the power distribution infrastructure in the area.

You now end up with a diesel generator. Remember that we signed a capacity agreement; whether we consume our power or not, we pay for it. It is like building a hotel like Serena but after you do not put in plates to serve the guests, the beds where the guests will sleep and end up not receiving people to come to your hotel.

As a government, we tied ourselves by borrowing billions of dollars to bring Karuma, Isimba, and Bujagali and yet you need just little money to ensure that all the power generated is consumed. An example is Obongi; if you read the report, the whole country is consuming around 520 megawatts. Karuma alone is going to produce 600 megawatts. If you said that all the power – (Interjections)- Karuma was to solve the problem of Obongi – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you should say where power is in the whole country. 

MR TAYEBWA: Mr Speaker, if you connected all sub-counties, we are going to consume an extra 320 megawatts. However, one factory alone here takes 40 megawatts. That means that you will need to get money and put in more transmission projects, more distribution projects, connect industrial parks and factories to reduce the tariffs which we are incurring as a country right now.

MR FUNGAROO: Mr Speaker, the issue of consuming electricity has been partly answered. You are talking about the consumption in areas where there is electricity.

You do not know that there are minerals in Moyo which have not been exploited because there is no electricity. The late Agadi Didi who was a member and a strong supporter of the NRM attempted to put up a cement factory at Metu and a marble factory in Moyo but it failed to take off.

The marble which Uganda would have produced would have been first class and this information is in the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. I got this information before the late Agadi died.

You have not fulfilled the needs of part of the country for industrialisation, and you want to concentrate on one side of the country. Moyo has iron ore as well, which needs to be exploited and we put up a steel industry there - from the hills of Obongi up to South Sudan. 

I agree that we should borrow money properly and that we should not waste it. But we should distribute development properly; Obongi should not be left out. I will never allow that to happen when I am here. 

I went to Karamoja in my Senior Six vacation and worked under a company called Saudi Marble Uganda Limited that works on limestone. Factories are established in the south but the raw material has to be transported all the way from Karamoja because there is no electricity and infrastructure - (Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Thank you, my colleague, for giving me the opportunity to give this information. Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, out of the 1,700 sub-counties we have in Uganda, we have made good progress. We have connected the rest and are left with only 287 sub-counties to access power. 

The Ministry of Energy has written a proposal and we have approved it at cabinet-level to borrow over $200 million; our team will be going over the weekend to EXIM Bank of China so that we can raise resources to connect the remaining 287 sub-counties. Before we close this financial year, this House is going to approve the facility to connect and light the whole of Uganda.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you for giving me the opportunity. I agree with the point you are raising, hon. Fungaroo, especially following the remark or information given by Minister D’Ujanga. 

There is extending electricity to villages and all sub-counties in Uganda but the quality of power you extend to us matters a lot. For instance, in my district, I am a potential investor; I can put up a good industry in Agago District but you have given us low voltage transformers of 25 megawatts – you cannot do anything with it. That reduces the usage of electricity.

MR FUNGAROO: Minister of State of Finance, hon. Bahati, you have given us information here that you are left with 287 sub-counties. Can you produce for us a list of these sub-counties and we see where they are by region?

A majority of them are likely to be from the north; let the minister produce the list and bring it here. As I sit down, we must also think about decongesting Kampala. We complain about traffic jam in the city; why don’t we encourage industries like Kampala Cement Factory, which hon. Tayebwa talked about? I think this is a new establishment of our time. Whereas they get raw materials from Tororo or Karamoja, instead of calling it Karamoja or Tororo Cement, they locate it in Kampala, where there is electricity, and call it “Kampala Cement” Factory, creating congestion here.

Why don’t you take this Kampala Cement Factory to Karuma and call it Karuma Cement? How do you plan the distribution of projects and development? You are the one responsible for the traffic jam in Kampala. (Laughter)

6.28
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Hon. Fungaroo, take heart. We are supposed to be setting up 22 industrial parks. Last Friday, we commissioned one in Mbale and soon we are coming to commission one in Soroti – (Interjections) - well, I was there about six months ago, I am not sure – we are planning one in Gulu and another in Arua. 

The only problem is that we do not have sufficient money to do them at once but I will ask my minister for investment to come and brief Parliament on our strategic plan in the distribution of industries, particularly through industrial parks around the whole country.

MR FUNGAROO: Okay. I will conclude by saying that a good action of getting money to help Uganda is being mismanaged and spoilt by you, the bad managers in the government; you who are now in charge. However, we shall tolerate this for the time that you are still around and since there seems to be less time left, we allow Ugandans to accept the pain of borrowing and living under mismanagement. 

We should make sure that we avoid corrupt tendencies of negotiating upwards instead of downwards when Uganda is borrowing and stop the wastage. In the interest of the country, I support the loan. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I put the question to this motion?

MR ODUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have observed that this House has about 40 Members and we are about to take a very important decision to commit this country to carrying a very big burden in debts of more than $121 million. 

Rule 24(1), (2) and (3) of Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda commands that we satisfy ourselves that we have the quorum to make a decision. I, therefore, accordingly invite you to confirm whether we have the quorum. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, the point has been raised. 

Honourable members, you will recall that yesterday, we requested the Minister of Finance to come and brief us about item three on the Order Paper regarding the management of the Nodding Syndrome. The time the matter came up, the minister was not here. Probably, this would be a good time for the minister to brief us about what is happening.

I am going to request the House that we return tomorrow at about ten O’clock for about two hours to be able to receive all the ministerial statements because next week we expect you to be doing exactly this during the proceedings. Therefore, when we resume tomorrow, we shall be in position to tackle some of these questions. I am hoping that the Party Whips will be able to mobilise members such that they come here for two hours from about 10 O’clock to mid-day. Therefore, honourable minister, can you proceed with item three? 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON FUNDING THE MANAGEMENT OF THE NODDING SYNDROME

6.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, yesterday, while debating this matter, we rightly observed that this is an emergency. We agreed with the Ministry of Health that we are going to provide the financial resources required to mitigate this emergency. We had a meeting in the evening and we have also consulted and discussed with the Ministry of Health that if they need any additional resources to the Shs 1.2 billion, they should write to us immediately. We are following up that request so that we can release the Shs 1.2 billion. However, from our discussion, the Ministry of Health should be able to process the Shs 1.2 billion and send it where it is supposed to be.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for acting very swiftly and following the promise he made yesterday. 

I am seeking clarification on what you said that you would be able to provide the Shs 1.2 billion. Remember, according to the doctor’s presentation yesterday, he said this amount would be able to cover rehabilitation costs of the two centres in Omoro and Kitgum. 

However, there is that big number of affected children in Pader District as it was raised yesterday. Will you be able to provide that additional funding that is required by another centre, just in case the Minister of Health does not include it in her write up? 

It does not mean that you will construct a new centre but you may have to put a rehabilitation centre in one of the health centres such that an equivalent amount of money that is required to run another centre is also provided to take care of an extra number of the affected children in Pader District. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the technical aspect of handling this situation lies with the Ministry of Health. What we are committed to, as Government, is that the Ministry of Health should look at all the emergency areas which require immediate funding, request and we meet them. However, the Ministry of Finance does not know which centre needs to be rehabilitated now. I can ask that particular one from the Ministry of Health so that it is included. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we commit ourselves here, we should live up to it. By the time you left here yesterday, we had been comforted by your words. Remember the professor told us that they need to run those facilities on a budget of Shs 1.2 billion per year. To me, you divide that by the three months left, if you have had challenges with finances – if you say that we are remaining with three months to complete and you had had problems with the finances, we only need it for three months. Thereafter, you can budget for the other parts in the next financial year because we would only need Shs 300 billion. 

Are you telling us that despite you holding the meeting yesterday and today, the Ministry of Health could not write to you to either tell you how much money they have or ask you to release money? This is because they have taken 24 or 30 hours without getting back to you. 

We are talking about life and death. You have known this problem to be an emergency. I do not think you realised it yesterday; though you said that since you realised that this is an emergency, you are going to look for money. However, this has been an emergency all along. This is an issue that concerns the lives of the young people.  

We would have been happy to hear from you today that the Shs 400 million is available and it is being wired because wiring the money takes about 48 hours to where it is required. It does not matter whether you are going to wire it to the Ministry of Health, then to those facilities or directly to those facilitates. Then for you to come here now and say that you have had meetings and these people have not communicated to you is quite disturbing to us. You make us lose faith when you commit yourself to a very serious matter like that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I think the biggest problem that we have in this institution is that when we agree to stuff and it goes to where the issues are supposed to be processed, these same Members here go there to criticise us. They go there to attack the presiding officers that they are mismanaging business in the House, instead of dealing with the problem. 

They go to the President and take liberty in the absence of all of us, instead of addressing the issue. Instead of advising the President on the issues and informing him that we have a problem here, they attack Oulanyah. This is sad. 

In those places, there are people who are sympathetic. There are ministers who do not understand what some ministers go there to do. If you agree here that there is a problem, forget about Oulanyah because he is not the problem. The presiding officer is not the problem. 

However, for you to go there and then make Oulanyah the subject of your eloquent submission in Cabinet, it does not make sense. This money is not coming from your parents. Forgive my language. It is not fair, honourable members. (Applause) 

I can even mention names. Those who are attacking me in Cabinet are looking at me, and yet here they come and sit like dignified persons. People are dying. Let us stop pretending about these things, please. That is why they never got time to discuss these things because in Cabinet they downplayed it. Here we take it as serious but somewhere else they downplay it. 
Concerning the recommendations we make here and the undertaking we take from the ministry - even if the minister tries to justify the case, some ministers downplay it so you have a conflicting message.  

I have really restrained myself from mentioning names for now but privately I am going to talk to the Members concerned that we did not take this properly. This is about human life; so let us deal with that. This money is going to people affected by this problem - families - and they are all citizens of this country. 

Therefore, please do not make us get emotive on this thing because we are restrained by the Chair that we occupy not to go that far. Nevertheless, please respect us also. If you do not respect yourself, at least respect other people. (Applause)

Honourable Members, I think the House now is not in a very good state to proceed. This House is going to be adjourned to tomorrow at 10 O’clock and when we come tomorrow – (Interjections)- I have not adjourned it yet. I said it is going to be adjourned but we still have policy statements that we should receive. Tomorrow when we come, there are decisions that we have to take. 

However, there are simple aspects that are still remaining on the Order Paper, which we could receive because they are not for decision right now. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO IMPLEMENT THE BILATERAL AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH SUDAN AND THE GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA CONCERNING PAYMENT OF MONEY OWED TO UGANDA - SOUTH SUDAN TRADERS BY THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH SUDAN

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this motion is for presentation and transmission to the committee but we want to receive the motion properly. Thereafter, I will refer it to the committee. It is not for decision now. 

6.44
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Dear colleagues, I would like to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to approve the bilateral agreement signed between the Government of the Republic of Uganda and the Government of South Sudan concerning payment of monies owed to Uganda - South Sudan traders by the Government of the Republic of South Sudan. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Bukoto, Kumi, Ruhinda North and Kassanda North. Please, just read the motion and we will refer it. 

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I move this motion under Rule 58 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

“WHEREAS Article 159(5) of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda graced the Parliament of Uganda with the authority to approve all agreements entered into by Government for giving out of a loan or a grant out of any public fund or any public account;

WHEREAS Article 159 (6) enjoins Government to lay such agreements before the Parliament for approval;

COGNISANT THAT the Government of the Republic of South Sudan owes to verify Ugandan traders USD $41,623,513,093 while other liabilities are still under verification by the two Governments;

HAVING REGARD to the bilateral agreement signed by the respective ministries of finance in the presence of the Heads of State of Government of Uganda and the Government of the Republic of South Sudan on 22 December 2016 regarding payment of monies owed to Uganda - South Sudan traders by Government of the Republic of South Sudan;  

NOTING THAT, pursuant to clause 2.1 of the agreement, Government of Uganda committed to pay the monies owed to Uganda traders on behalf of the Government of the Republic of South Sudan;

FURTHER NOTING that the Government of the Republic of South Sudan acknowledges the debt and has made commitment pursuant to clause 3.1 of the agreement to repay within the period of 60 weeks any and all monies paid by the Government of Uganda to the Ugandan traders;

ACKNOWLEDGING that the commitment by the Government of Uganda shall be treated as a loan to the Government of the Republic of South Sudan;
CONVINCED that this agreement is in the best interest of the Ugandan traders;

CONSIDERING that the traders have not been paid by the Government of the Republic of Southern Sudan for over six years;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved as follows:

    i. That Parliament approves the bilateral agreement signed between the Government of Uganda and the Government of the Republic of South Sudan on the 22 day of December 2016 concerning payment of monies owed to Uganda South Sudan traders by the Government of the Republic of Sudan”. 
Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this motion at this stage will not require justification but will be referred to the Committee on National Economy to handle expeditiously and then report to Parliament, bearing in mind that there have been petitions in this House relating to the same subject. There have been previous resolutions from this House concerning this same subject. We ask that the minister interfaces with the Committee on National Economy so that they deal with this urgently.

Honourable members, why I am seeing this urgently? It is because from next week when we give the committee time to deal with this, when we resume the other week, it will be two days before we receive the budget and that is why I was hoping that we receive all the policy statements today. When we receive the budget, everything will change because the Budget Committee will have to work round the clock to make sure we beat the deadline of 31st of May. 

In addition, it may not be easy to have plenary and the committee going on at the same time. Therefore, there must be need to suspend plenary for the committee to be able to process business quickly. That is why I was saying that the Committee on National Economy should be able to finish all this plus this particular motion that is going to it and the Supplementary Schedules that have just gone before the committee. 

Chair, you should be able to finish this within this period and next week so that by the time we start business again, we have two days within which to complete these things and then go into the actual budget issues. In addition, there is a matter before the Committee on National Economy on domestic borrowing. I also urge the committee members who are here to work round the clock to finish this because we have a very tight timeline on these. 
I ask the Clerk to extract minutes of this communication so that they know that they have this week and next week to finish these businesses so that when we resume the other week, we are ready to receive these reports and deal with them. Honourable minister, do you want to lay a copy?

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I forgot to lay a copy of the agreement at the Table; I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on National Economy to handle expeditiously in the timeframe I have provided. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS

6.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the financial year 2018/2019, Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Presidential Affairs to handle expeditiously.

6.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for Lands, Housing and Urban Development; Vote 012 for the ministry and vote 156 for Uganda Land Commission.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is that really in the form we normally receive them? It looks like a dissertation from -

DR BARYOMUNSI: It is a properly bound original copy. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now we are beginning to question the authenticity of some of those documents - but any way we receive it. However, honourable ministers, we also urge you to supply electronic copies for upload on the iPads. Let the records receive that and it stands referred to the appropriate committee.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I apologise for the quality but I had to go out and call the ministry to make sure that we meet the requirement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is referred to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to handle expeditiously within the framework of the budget.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Health for the financial year 2018/2019, covering vote 014 - Ministry of Health; Vote 114 - Uganda Cancer Institute; Vote 115 - Uganda Heart Institute; Vote 116 - National Medical Stores; Vote 134 - Health Service Commission; Vote 151 - Uganda Blood Transfusion Services; Vote 151 - Mulago Hospital Complex; Vote 162 - Butabika Hospital; Votes 153 to 176 - Regional Referral Hospitals; Vote 304 - Uganda Virus Research Institute and Votes 501 to 580 covering Local Governments. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Health to handle and report. 

6.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Internal Affairs for the financial year 2018/2019 covering the following: Vote 009 - Ministry Of Internal Affairs Headquarters; Vote 120 - National Citizenship and Immigration Control; Vote 14 - Uganda Police Force; Vote 145 - Uganda Prisons Services; Vote 305 - Government Analytical Laboratory and Vote 309 - National Identification and Registration Authority. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to handle expeditiously. The committee has received both reports. It has already received Defence and now Internal Affairs.

6.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Water and Environment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the Ministry of Water and Environment that big? 

MR BAHATI: Vote 019 - Ministry of Water and Environment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Natural Resources to handle expeditiously.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Local Government, Vote 011, Vote 147, Votes 501-797 of all Local Governments.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Local Government and Public Service to handle expeditiously.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation - Vote 023 and Uganda Industrial Research Institute - Vote 110. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the appropriate Committee on Science and Technology.  

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (Votes 010,121,125,142,152,155,160,501-850).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Agriculture to handle expeditiously. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry for the Presidency; Vote 001 - Office of the President; Vote 002 - State House; Vote 107 - Uganda Aids Commission; Vote 112 - Ethics and Integrity and Vote 159 - External Security Organisation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is referred to the Committee on Presidential Affairs to handle.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Vote 006 and Vote 201-237).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Foreign Affairs to handle expeditiously.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - Vote 008. 
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to handle expeditiously.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance - Vote 020.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance to handle.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives - Votes 015,154 and 303.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the committee in charge of trade to handle within the framework of the rules.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of East African Community Affairs - Vote 021.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on East African Affairs to handle quickly and report. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the ministerial policy statement for Vote 129 - Financial Intelligence Authority.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Finance to handle within the budget framework and advise us on how to proceed. Does that conclude all the policy statements?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities - Vote 022.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Tourism to handle within the budget. Have I received the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Education and Sports?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, we shall lay it tomorrow morning. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Tomorrow, we shall receive the ministerial policy statements for the ministries of works and transport and education. Honourable Members, this is good effort, though we should have received all of them. However, receiving more than 90 per cent is a good start for this financial year –(Applause)– even if, the state of some of them is still wanting.

Honourable members, as I said, let the ministry supply soft copies of these statements so that they can be uploaded on the Members’ iPads. It eases the work because you are aware that we no longer make a big number of copies. We always request that a certain number of copies be made to support the institution that might not be able to proceed with this. The department of the Clerks does not have the facilities of the iPads. 

We, therefore, need some of them in hard copies to be brought to our attention. Thank you.

Honourable members, this House is now adjourned to tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. Please, let us start at 10.00 a.m. so that we can rise at midday.

(The House rose at 7.04 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 16 March 2018 at 10.00 a.m.) 
