Tuesday, 25 March 2014

Parliament met at 3.22 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome His Excellency the Vice-President and all the Members to this sitting. I will begin by amending the Order Paper and I will permit our delegation of the ACP/EU to present a report. In the meantime, I am hoping that the break of plenary we have had has enabled our committees to work and generate sufficient work for us to sit continuously until we close the session.

Secondly, hon. Members, I would like to inform you that our colleague, hon. Andrew Baryayanga, was involved in an accident. He is now at Nakasero Hospital, out of intensive care and in a ward. I would like to invite you to go and visit him but I am concerned about what he informed me that the accident occurred due to a trailer that had broken down across the road. It had been lying in that position for more than 15 hours and no one had taken the trouble to notify the travelling public that there was a danger. I would like the government to investigate whether that is what transpired but this is what he informed me; that it had been there for some hours.

I also want to inform the House that our colleagues from Bundibugyo have been having serious challenges arising from the boat accident. We have been in discussions with the Minister of Internal Affairs to try and assist them because the district of Ntoroko is not only small but has no capacity to handle over 100 dead bodies from the accident in Lake Albert. So I do call upon the government to assist Ntoroko in dealing with that situation.

I am also delighted to inform the hon. Members that we dispatched two of our colleagues to attend the Commonwealth Africa Regional Summit in Seychelles and during that summit, one of our Members, hon. Kiwanda Suubi, was elected the Chair of the newly formed Commonwealth Africa Parliamentary Human Rights Group. We congratulate him and wish him well.

Hon. Members, I also want to inform you that I led the Ugandan delegation to the 130th Inter Parliamentary Union in Geneva from the 16th to 20th March together with hon. Dombo, hon. Amongi, hon. Okumu and hon. Kiyingi Bbosa. One of the assignments that we had as Africans was to support the election of an African Secretary General for the first time in 125 years. So, I am delighted to inform you that our networking worked very well and that Mr Martin Chungong from Cameroon will take office on 1 July 2014 as the first African Secretary General of the Inter Parliamentary Union. Throughout the history of the IPU, there have only been Europeans so this is a big achievement for Africa and we want to wish him a successful tenure.

I also want to inform the House that on 30th June, the IPU will be 125 years old. We have been requested to organise some activities within our local parliaments to commemorate the occasion and we shall inform you about what arrangements we are making in that regard.

Also, I want to report that hon. Betty Amongi was elected Teetotaller Representative of the African Group on the Coordinating Committee of Women Parliamentarians. Please join me in congratulating her on this achievement and to wish Africa good luck in that regard. Thank you.

Now hon. Members, owing to the time we spent when the plenary was not sitting, a number of emergencies have arisen. So, let me give one minute to hon. Kasibante, hon. Aol, hon. Kabajo, hon. Hatwib Katoto and hon. Otada. Each one minute. 

3.26
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (DP, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance about something that happened in Mulago Hospital over the weekend. Six patients who needed a life support system were subjected to oxygen tubes in ward 3B of Mulago National Referral Hospital on Saturday. The gist of the matter is that eventually the oxygen cylinders run out of oxygen, and it was announced by the hospital administrators that they did not have any more oxygen. The six ended up dying one by one.

I have since tried to get some of their names and I have established three. One is Nicholas Kiiza, another is Zaitun Nakawuki and the third one is Mariam Aol. I got to know about this because I had visited a patient but also some press reports have indicated this incident today.

Madam Speaker, not only is Mulago a national referral hospital but oxygen is a basic necessity for life and any hospital must have it as its basic requirement. I wish the minister to be responsible and explain why a national referral hospital can go without this basic necessity of life. Thank you very much.

3.28
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance that is about Gulu Main Market. Last Friday 21st, part of Gulu Main Market was burnt down and the main vendors are women and youth. They lost their entire livelihood; actually they lost over Shs 200 million in that fire. They also sometimes watch when other markets burn down and the response is very fast – they are rescued. And these are people who are just trying to stagger out of war. So, I am here appealing on their behalf so that we respond very quickly because they have loans and the finance institutions do not understand this fire. So it is now upon us to rescue these market vendors in Gulu Main Market. And I also want to ask the Minister of Local Government; is Gulu Main Market the original one which is being built?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I thought you wanted to help the people who suffered; what else are you submitting about?

MS AOL: Madam Speaker, you know that where the market is currently situated is very difficult to control in terms of security. These people who burnt this market seem to be either thugs or opium smokers. But if people went back to the original market – you know, the structure is enclosed and it is not going to be easy for thugs to just burn it; that is why I am appealing that the work should be done hurriedly so that our market vendors, who are mainly women, go back to the original market. Thank you very much.

3.31
MR JAMES KYEWALABYE (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising to present a matter of national importance. On the afternoon of 11th March, Rwamata Sub County in Kiboga District, specifically the parishes of Nsalalwa, Kitagazi and Sinde were hit by a severe rainstorm which resulted in more than 100 houses being destroyed; two churches were completely destroyed and several schools de-roofed. The gardens of the people in the affected area were completely destroyed and the number of homesteads, which were affected, is more than 300. As a result of this destruction, the people in the affected area are facing hunger. In the three months before the next harvest, if these do not get help, they face starvation. So, my appeal today is to the government, through the Minister of Disaster Preparedness, to come to the rescue of these people by getting them some basic housing –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, wind up.

MR KYEWALABYE: And the second appeal is for Government to provide these people with food during this period, and before the next harvest. Madam Speaker, I am aware that this problem of sever rainstorm affected not only Kiboga District but also Mityana, Mubende, Luweero and other districts. And, therefore, I request Government to come up with a clear response to this problem. Thank you.

3.33
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance. This is about trade in Uganda. As we speak now, we all agree with the inspection of goods before they arrive here in the country because it has been bringing us a lot of problems. However, the way it is done is not yet organised. First of all, in different countries there are no established offices where these people can go. And more specifically, the people of Uganda who cannot afford to buy in bulk cannot access those offices. So recently, these people started urging traders to find them before releasing their goods. Madam Speaker –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Please, come to the point, quickly. What is it that you want Government to do?

MR KATOTO: Madam Speaker, it is because my time was taken by the islanders. The first thing we beg Government to do is to set standards and we empower the Uganda National Bureau of Standards to do the work rather than these people suffering abroad and when they arrive here they are tortured. The government has also lost money; we are aware that since this practice started, Uganda Revenue Authority, which was collecting Shs 800 million from vehicles is currently collecting only Shs 300 million. This is a loss. So we should find a way of harmonising through the Ministry of Trade to make sure that Ugandans do not suffer to this extent. Thank you very much. 

3.36
MR SAM AMOOTI-OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryadongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Over the last four months, there has been systematic killing of people, especially my supporters in the constituency. And Mzee Rwamudoora, Fred Kamuhabwa – this one survived by the skin of his teeth; Monica Kulabako – this lady’s neck was actually cut off after being raped. And on the 13th of this month, just last week, my political assistant, Mr Lawrence Kidaga, was murdered in cold blood. And this is something I had picked before and I had alerted the Police; I had even alerted the deceased because there were meetings that were always held in some quarters and I had given all this information to the Police. But unfortunately, the Police did not act until all these people were systematically murdered by hacking. So my political assistant was killed – I even had to rush back from my Pan African Parliament duty because he was gruesomely murdered. 

Now, some suspects made extra-judicial statements before a magistrate, confessing the names of the people who hired them to kill my supporters. But I am disappointed that the Police have not handled this issue well; some of these people have now turned around to say that they were forced to make those confessions. So basically –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude in half a minute.

MR AMOOTI-OTADA: There is absolute impunity; people are being killed – and there are even some cases where people suspected to be witches are lynched in the presence of the Police. So there is a total breakdown of law and order in Kibanda County. Some people have taken the law into their hands. There is threat of revenge and people are angry; there is polarisation and there is absolute loss of public trust in Police with some people feeling that probably there is nobody in charge of the situation.

So, Madam Speaker, this is what I wish to bring to the attention of this House. There is a hit list to which I also belong and the Police have that information. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I would like to ask whether the Government Chief Whip is making an undertaking to get responses on this matter – or is it the Leader of Government Business.

3.38
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Some of the issues that have been raised have the sector ministers here who are ready to respond. Like this issue raised by hon. Kasibante, Dr Rugunda, the health minister is here. I request that you allow him to come and give us a response.

3.39
THE MINISTER FOR HEALTH (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The reported death of country men and women at Mulago Hospital is very deeply regretted. We have set up a team headed by the Director General of Health Services, Dr Jane Acheng, to investigate circumstances under which this tragic loss may have taken place and we do expect that by the end of today, we will have at least a preliminary report. So, I request that tomorrow I give a more substantive response on this matter to this august House. 

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you so much, Dr Rugunda. Madam Speaker, on the rest of the issues that have been raised about Gulu Market, the disaster in Rwamata Sub County, the quality of goods imported here and the killings in Kibanda County, I am going to inform the ministers and the responses, if you allow, will be made tomorrow because these are urgent issues which should be attended to urgently. 

But allow me, Madam Speaker, to congratulate hon. Godfrey Kiwanda Suubi, whom you sent to work in Seychelles on behalf of Parliament, and he scooped a big achievement for us as a country. We congratulate him and also promise to offer him all the necessary support to make sure he works because at that level, he will be marketing Uganda. I thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INVESTMENT (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the National Budget Framework Paper for the financial year 2014/15. I beg to lay. I also beg to lay on Table tax expenditures for the second quota for the financial year 2013/14 as required by the Constitution. I beg to lay. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you forgot to congratulate me, I am now the chairman of Bugisu Co-operative Union – (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations, hon. Nandala –(Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want the Minister of Finance to explain to me what he means by tax expenditures because when you talk about the budget, it consists of the income and expenditure and the income of Uganda is mostly from taxes. So, I want him to assist me understand what he means by tax expenditures. 

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, Article 152(2) of the Constitution requires the Minister of Finance to periodically report to Parliament on the exercise of powers conferred upon the minister to waive or to vary tax imposed by the law. Government has paid to date Shs 4,182,186,436 as strategic interventions to support:
    1. Hotels
    2. Hospitals,
    3. Tertiary Institutions, 
    4. Government and Non-Government Organisations as per the schedule that is attached. 

So, what I am laying on Table is actually the tax expenditure and the beneficiaries of that requirement in terms of the law. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think we need to correct the presentation because it is actually “tax waivers”. I think it is better to call them so. You know in the letter you wrote to me, you called them “tax expenditures” but they are actually “waivers”. I think we should be clear so that people can understand. 

MR AJEDRA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. 

MR NANDLA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, in fact, that is why I rose; it should read; “Tax exemptions” not “waivers”. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the next time the minister writes, he should write the correct thing. Now the National Budget Framework Paper for the financial year 2014/15 is sent to the Committee on Budget for scrutiny and perusal and report back. The document on tax exemptions or waivers for the second quarter of the financial year 2013/14 is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Thank you. 

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE ON GENDER ON ELIMINATION OF VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN

THE SPEAKER: Minister for Gender; is there no one to lay the report? Okay, next item. 

CONSTITUTION OF THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMISSION IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 11 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as you may recollect, the term of office of the commissioners has expired. Let me now invite the Opposition Chief Whip to make nominations. 

3.47
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryadongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I remember when we were making the rules here, I put the House on notice that if independent Members of Parliament do not receive equal treatment like the rest of the Members of Parliament, then we shall seek to find justice somewhere else. Indeed the rules were passed and we, the independent Members of Parliament, went to the Constitutional Court to challenge certain sections of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament; to challenge the administration of Parliament Act where the Parliamentary Commissioners derive their mandate and another piece of legislation which we have challenged. Madam Speaker, you may be aware or not aware of this undertaking. 

In the recent past, we pleaded with the Constitutional Court that this Parliament is about to replenish the membership of the Parliamentary Commission and that among other things for which we are challenging the Administration of Parliament Act, we are challenging the composition of Members who go to the Parliament Commission and we were seeking to get an interim order to stop this activity. 

Now, the Acting Chief Justice, who heads the Constitutional Court, in his own wisdom refused to listen to our interim order because we told him that we will be disenfranchised if this Parliament goes ahead and constitutes the Parliamentary Commission and then later on you dispose of the case. We will be disenfranchised at that particular point in time. So, he declined to give us interim orders and obviously, I understand the difficulty of the chairperson that you cannot do anything about it right now save for if I had presented an interim order to you. But I just want to register our disappointment really that what is going to happen right now is  a matter that is sub judice; it is something which is in the courts of law. And it is – (Interjections) – I wish only we could listen to each other because it is better. 

Madam Speaker, what is going to happen now is going to be unfortunate. I know your hands are also tied. I also know that the hands of the honourable members are also tied; we are together in this. I don’t know why you are murmuring; we are together. What I am saying is that, the courts of law have not helped us to settle this matter. We were asking for a postponement until this matter is disposed of.

Anyway, the long and short of it is that the Constitutional Court refused and in fact what they have done is to call us to do the scheduling, which we have done and the Chief Justice wants to hear the merits of the case and determine it while right now here, we are going to do something that we are complaining of. I just wanted this to go on record, Madam Speaker. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, first of all, we are not supposed to legislate in anticipation. Secondly, I have not been served, either with your petition or with an order restraining me from conducting the elections here. You know, if we continue like that it means that someone will just go to court and say “this year, don’t pass the budget” and we shall not pass it. If the courts make a direction asking us to amend the rules, we shall do that. But for now, we must proceed with the rules as they are.

3.52
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukingiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Madam Speaker, the Member of Parliament for Aswa County, hon. Reagan Okumu, is the new Parliamentary Commissioner representing the Opposition in the Parliamentary Commission.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that hon. Reagan Okumu be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, the ruling party, the NRM, offers hon. Rosemary Sseninde Nansubuga, the Woman MP for Wakiso District; hon. William Nokrach, the PWD Representative for Northern Region; and hon. Rose Akol, the Woman MP for Bukedea District to serve as Parliamentary Commissioners. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that hon. Rosemary Sseninde, hon. William Nokrach and hon. Rose Akol be approved by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Please stand up, hon. Members. This is Commissioner Rose Akol, the other one is Commissioner Rosemary Sseninde and there is Commissioner William Nokrach at the back there. Congratulations! (Applause)

Hon. Members, as you may recall, the term of office of the leaders of the standing committees has nearly expired. Let me now invite the Government Chief Whip and the Opposition Whip to present their proposals. The Clerk to Parliament will read out the committees.

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO STANDING COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 148 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS

3.55
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Madam Speaker, the NRM Party is offering the following Members to serve on the Public Accounts Committee:
    1. Hon. Margert Kibwhoijana, Woman Mp, Ibanda;
    2. Hon. Alex Bakunda Byarugaba, MP for Isingiro South;
    3. Hon. Henry Musasizi, MP for Rugabda East;
    4. Hon. Kyabangi Nakato, Woman MP for Gomba;
    5. Hon. Asupasa Wilson Isiko, MP for Busiki County;
    6. Hon. Emmanuel Dombo, MP for Bunyole West County;
    7. Hon. Eddie Kwizera, MP for Bufumbira East;
    8. Hon. Saleh Kamba, MP for Kibuuku;
    9. Hon. Nantume Jennifer Egunyu, Woman MP for Buvuma;
    10. Hon. Naome Kabasharira, Woman MP Ntungamo;
    11. Hon. Emma Boona, Woman MP Mbarara;
    12. Hon. Ogwang Peter, Youth Rep. Eastern;
    13. Hon. Jacob Richard Opolot, MP for Pallisa County;
    14. Hon. Felix Okot-Ogong, the MP for Dokolo County;
    15. Hon. Yprokam Katwiremu, MP for Sheema South;
    16. Hon. Matsiko Kabakumba, MP for Bujenje County;
    17. Hon. Yona Musinguzi, MP Ntungamo Municipality;
    18. Hon. Ignatius Besisira, MP for Buyaga East;
    19. Hon. Martin Mugabi Muzaale, MP for Buzaya County;
    20. Hon. Tim Lwanga, MP for Kyamuswa County; and 
    21. Hon. Oleru Huda, the Woman MP for Yumbe District.

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite the Opposition whip to make their presentation.

3.58
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukingiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On that committee, we have the following Members:
    1. Hon. Alice E Alaso, Woman MP for Serere, Chairperson;
    2. Hon. Paul Mwiru, MP for Jinja Municipality, Vice Chairperson;
    3. Hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi, MP for Bundariri West, Member;
    4. Hon. Lucy Ajok, the woman MP Apac District (UPC), Member; and
    5. Hon. Joseph Ssewungu, MP for Kalungu West (DP).

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask hon. Owor Otada to read out the names of the independents?

3.59
MR OWOR OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. 
    1. Hon. Gilbert Olanya, MP for Kilak County; 
    2. Hon. Jessica Ababiku, MP for Adjuman; and 
    3. Hon. Gerald Karuhanga, the Youth MP for Western Uganda 

Those are the three independent Members we are offering to this committee. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I also wish to present hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, the MP for Lwemiyaga, as a Member of that committee. (Applause) 

Hon. Members, I put the question that the membership and leadership of the Public Accounts Committee be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, for the Local Government Accounts Committee, the NRM Party is offering the following as Members to that committee:
    1. Hon. Stanley Omwonyo, MP for Okoro County;
    2. Hon. Yahaya Gudoi, MP for Bungokho North;
    3. Hon. Veronica Babirye, the Woman MP for Buyende;
    4. Hon. Stephen Kangwagye, MP for Bukanga County;
    5. Hon. Peter Eriaku, MP Kepebyong County;
    6. Hon. Milton Muwuma, MP Kigulu South;
    7. Hon. Tonny Ayo, MP for Kwania County;
    8. Hon. Dr Kenneth Omona, MP for Kaberamaido County;
    9. Hon. Boaz Kafuda, MP for Busongora South;
    10. Hon. Margaret Makhoha, the Woman MP Namayingo;
    11. Hon. George Ekuma, the MP for Bukedea;
    12. Hon. Kyamadidi Vincent, Rwampara Country;
    13. Hon. Ssemugaba Samuel, Kiboga East;
    14. Hon. Grace Freedom, Zombo District;
    15. Hon. Awong Ahmed, Koboko County;
    16. Hon. Nshaija Dorothy, Kamwenge District;
    17. Hon. Lokii  Abrahams, Jie county;
    18. Hon. Namoe Stella, Nepak District. We are offering 18 Members.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Government Chief Whip. Can I invite the chief whip of the opposition to present their nominees.

MR ROLAND MUGUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the Local Governments Accounts Committee we have: 
    1. Hon. Kiiza Winifred as Chairperson, Woman MP Kasese District from FDC party;
    2. Hon. Akora Maxwell, as a Deputy Chairperson, representing the people of Maruzi County UPC party;
    3. Hon. Osegge Angelina, Soroti District FDC;
    4. Hon. Ochola Stephen, Serere County FDC;
    5. Hon. Nambooze Betty Bakireke, Mukono Municipality from DP; and
    6. Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi Muhammad from Butambala County, DP. Thank you Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can I invite hon. Otada to make his presentation.

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, independent Members of Parliament are as follows: 
    1. Hon. Akello Rose Lilly, 
    2. Hon. Allen Andrew, 
    3. Hon. Ninsiima Rona, and 
    4. Hon. Grace Namara. 
Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I present Lt. Gen Owoyesigire Jim, UPDF, as a Member on this committee. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the leadership and the membership of the Local Government’s Accounts Committee be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES COMMITTEE

MS JUSTINE LUMUMBA: The NRM party is offering the following to serve on the Government Assurances Committee: 
    1. Hon. Proscovia Oromait Alengoti, from Usuk County;
    2. Hon. Badda Fred, from Bujumba Country;
    3. Hon. Sabila Nelson from Kongasis County;
    4. Hon. Mpaire Beatrice from Buliisa District;
    5. Hon. Sinabulya Namabidde Sylvia from Mityana District;
    6. Hon. Kiiza Rwebembera James from Bugahya County;
    7. Hon. Kabale Kwagala Olivia, Iganga District;
    8. Hon. Ntabaazi Harriet, Bundibugyo District;
    9. Hon. Nakawunde Sarah, Mpigi District;
    10. Hon. Achia Terence, Bokora County;
    11. Hon. Mayende Stephen Dede from Bukooli South;
    12. Hon. Katoto Hatwib, Katerera County;
    13. Hon. Mukula George Mike, Soroti Municipality;
    14. Hon. Nabbanja Robinah, from Kibaale District.

MR ROLAND MUGUME: Madam Speaker, Government Assurances Committee we have: 
    1. Hon. Wadri Kassiano Ezaati, MP Terego and Chairperson from FDC party;
    2. Hon. Sassaga Isiah, Deputy Chairperson, MP Budadiri East FDC;
    3. Hon. Omoro Peter, MP Soroti County FDC;
    4. Hon. Nabukenya Brenda, Woman MP Luweero DP; and
    5. Hon. Jacinta Ogwal, Otuke county UPC. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite hon. Otada to present the independents.

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, the independent members of Parliament are as follows: Hon. Mbogo Kezekia, MP Budaka County; Hon. Nsanja Patrick, Ntenjeru County South; Hon. Bahinduka Mugarra Martin, Ntoroko County MP.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I present General Katumba Wamala, UPDF, as a Member of that committee. I put the question that the leadership and Members be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AND STATE ENTERPRISES COMMITTEE

MS JUSTINE LUMUMBA: NRM party is offering the following Members to serve on Commissions, Statutory and State Enterprises Committee commonly called COSASE: 
    1. Hon. Biraro Ephraim, MP Buhweju County;
    2. Hon. Mbahimba James, MP Kasese Municipality;
    3. Hon. James Kiwalabye Kabajo, MP Kiboga East;
    4. Hon. Nakabira Lubega Gertrude, MP Lwengo District; 
    5. Hon. Kakooza James, MP Kabula County;
    6. Hon. Adong Lilly, Nwoya District;
    7. Hon. Mugema Peter, Iganga Municipality;
    8. Hon. Bagire Vincent Waiswa, MP Bunya West;
    9. Hon. Rwakajara Arinaitwe, Workers MP;
    10. Hon. Baba Diri Margaret, MP Koboko District;
    11. Hon. Mawanda Michael, MP Igara East;
    12. Hon. Margaret Achila, MP Kotido District;
    13. Hon. Mulimba John, MP Samia Bugwe North Count;
    14. Hon. Simbwa John, MP Makindye East;
    15. Hon. Balyejusa Suleiman, Budiope East;
    16. Hon. Kasule Robert, MP Kyadondo;
    17. Hon. Tashobya Stephen, MP Kajara;
    18. Hon. Tete Everline Chelangat, MP Bukwo District;
    19. Hon. Mubito John Bosco, MP Budiope West. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Government Chief Whip. Can I invite the opposition whip.

MR ROLAND MUGUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In COSASE, we have: 
    1. Hon. Ssemujju Ibrahim Nganda, Kyadondo East as a Chairperson from FDC party;
    2. Hon. Namayanja Florence, Deputy Chairperson representing the people of Bukoto East from DP;
    3. Hon. Okupa Elijah, Kasiro County FDC;
    4. Hon. Okumu Reagan, Aswa County FDC;
    5. Hon. Mathias Nsubuga, Bukoto South, DP; and 
    6. Hon. Ayena Krispus, Oyam North, UPC. Thank you.

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, for COSASE we have the following independent MPs: Hon. Baryayanga Andrew, Kabale Municipality; hon. Kyeyune Haruna Kasoro, Kyotera County; and hon. Kasibante Moses, Rubaga North.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I present hon. Dr Julius Oketa, UPDF, as a Member of the committee. I put the question that the leadership and Members of that committee be approved 

(Question put and agreed to).

EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES COMMITTEE

MS JUSTINE LUMUMBA: The MRM party offers the following to serve on the Equal Opportunities Committee: 
    1. Hon. Yaguma Wilberforce, MP of Kashari County as the Chairperson of the committee;
    2. Hon. Helen Grace Asemo, representing People with Disabilities, as the Vice Chairperson;
    3. Hon. Okeyoh Peter from Bukooli Island;
    4. Hon. Kawooya Anifa from Ssembabule District;
    5. Hon. Twatwa Mutwalante from Ik Ik County;
    6. Hon. Ndenzi Alex representing PWDs;
    7. Hon. Kabahenda Flavia Kyegegwa District;
    8. Hon. Kitatta Aboud from Bukoto County West;
    9. Hon. Nabirye Agnes from Jinja District;
    10. Hon. Kusasira Peace from Mukono District;
    11. Hon. Amoit Judith Mary from Pallisa District;
    12. Hon. Kaahwa Tophace, Hoima District;
    13. Hon. Baka Mugabi Stephen, Bukooli County North;
    14. Hon. Anite Evelyn representing the Youth of Northern Uganda; and
    15. Hon. Timbigamba Lyndah, Kyenjojo District.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can I invite the Opposition? Equal Opportunities.

MR ROLAND MUGUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On our side we have:
    1. Hon. Atim Anywar Beatrice, Woman MP Kitgum District, FDC; 
    2. Hon. Wadada Femiar, Sironko District, FDC;
    3. Hon. Ekwau Ibi Florence, Woman MP Kaberamaido District, FDC;
    4. Hon. Kikungwe Issa, Kyadondo South DP;
    5. Hon. Santa Alum Oyam District, UPC. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Otada.

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, I present to you two names of independent Members of Parliament: 
    1. Hon. Nalubega Mariam from Butambala District, and 
    2. Hon. Kaddumukasa Ssozi from Mityana South. 

I also move an amendment to delete my name from this committee because after some consultations, I opted to remain in the Appointments Committee where I have been all this time. So, I move that my name be deleted from this list, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I present hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire of Buyaga West as a Member of this committee.

Hon. Members, I put the question that the name of hon. Otada be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that the leadership and the membership of the Committee on Equal Opportunities be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: The NRM party offers the following Members to serve on the Human Rights Committee:
    1. Hon. Jovah Kamateeka, Woman MP Mitooma District as Chairperson of this committee;
    2. Hon. Safia Nalule Juuko representing people with disabilities as the vice chairperson;
    3. Hon. Katwesigye Oliver, Woman MP Buhweju;
    4. Hon. Amoding Monicah Youth MP National;
    5. Hon. Iriama Margaret, MP Moroto District;
    6. Hon. Muhumuza David, MP Mwenge North;
    7. Hon. Mutyabule Florence, MP Namutumba District;
    8. Hon. Ongalo Obote, MP Kalaki County;
    9. Hon. Onyango Kakoba, MP Buikwe County North;
    10. Hon. Kiwanda Godfrey;
    11. Hon. Jalia Bintu;
    12. Hon. Nanyondo Birungi Caroline; and 
    13. Hon. Nokrach William.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Government Chief Whip. Can I invite the Whip of the Opposition?

MR ROLAND MUGUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the Human Rights Committee, we have:
    1. Hon. Nabilah Naggayi Sempala, Woman MP Kampala District, FDC; 
    2. Hon. Tayebwa Odo, Ishaka Municipality, FDC;
    3. Hon. Bihande Bwambale, Bukonjo East, FDC;
    4. Hon. Kyanjo Hussein, Makindye West, Jeema;
    5. Hon. Jack Wamanga-Wamai, Mbale Municipality, FDC; and 
    6. Hon. Deogratius Kiyingi, Bukomansimbi, DP.

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, for the Human Rights Committee the independents have the following Members of Parliament: 
    1. Hon. Lubogo Kenneth from Bulamoji County;
    2. Hon. Atim Joy Ongom from Lira District; and
    3. Hon. Amodoi Cyrus Imalingat from Toroma Constituency.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members, I present hon. Muhammed Nsereko, Kampala Central and hon. Oula Innocent, UPDF, as Members of this committee.

Hon. Members, I put the question that the leadership and the Members of this committee be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: The NRM party offers the following Members to serve on the Committee of National Economy: 
    1. Hon. Xavier Kyooma Akampurira, the MP Ibanda North, as Chairperson; 
    2. Hon. Evelyn Kaabule Mpagi, Woman MP, Luuka District as Vice-Chairperson;
    3. Hon. Ann Auru, Moyo District;
    4. Hon. Kamara John Nizeyimana, MP Bufumbira North; 
    5. Hon. Jacob Wangolo, MP Bunyole West; 
    6. Hon. Syda Bbumba Namirembe, MP Nakaseke County; 
    7. Hon. David Bahati, MP Ndorwa West; 
    8. Hon. Okello Anthony, Kyoga County; 
    9. Hon. Biraahwa Mukitale, MP Buliisa County;
    10. Hon. Chemaswet Abdi, Kween County; 
    11. Hon. Kafabusa Werikhe Michael, MP Bungokho South; 
    12. Hon. Lolem Micah Akasile, MP Upe County;
    13. Hon. Mbagadhi Frederick Nkaye, MP Kagoma County; 
    14. Hon. Migadde Robert Ndugwa, MP Buvuma Islands; 
    15. Hon. Mbabazi Betty Ahimbisibwe, Woman MP, Rubirizi District; 
    16. Hon. Isabirye Iddi, MP Bunya South; 
    17. Hon. Bakaluba Mukasa, MP Mukono County;
    18. Hon. Mandela Amos, Kooki County; 
    19. Hon. Mulindwa Patrick, MP Kasambya County; 
    20. Hon. Byarugaba Grace, MP Isingiro District; 
    21. Hon. Lokeris Samson, MP Dodoth East; 
    22. Hon. Sempala Mbuga Edward, MP Nakaseke South. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite the Opposition Whip?

MR ROLAND MUGUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the National Economy Committee, I present: 
    1. Hon. William Nzoghu, MP Busongora County FDC; 
    2. Hon. Odonga Otto, Aruu County, FDC;
    3. Hon. Atiku Bernard, Ayivu County, FDC; 
    4. Hon. Dr Bayiga Lulume Micheal, Buikwe South, DP; 
    5. Hon. Akena Jimmy, Lira Municipality, UPC; and 
    6. Hon. Ssebagala Abdu Latif, Kawempe North, DP. I beg to present, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I invite hon. Otada.

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, on the Committee on National Economy, I present to you hon. Nalubega Mary Tuunde, Workers, Independent.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members, I present hon. Captain Susan Lakot, UPDF. Hon. Members, I put the question that the leadership and the membership of that committee be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE BUDGET COMMITTEE

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, the NRM party offers the following Members to serve on this committee: 
    1. Hon. Amos Lugoloobi, Ntenjeru North as Chairperson and 
    2. Hon. Wamakuyu Mudimi, MP Bulambuli County as Vice-Chairperson of the committee. 
    3. Hon. Acayo Christine, Woman MP, Nebbi District; 
    4. Hon. Amongin Jacquiline, MP, Ngora District;
    5. Hon. Nyirabashitsi Sarah Mateke, Woman MP, Kisoro District; 
    6. Hon. Nebanda Andiru Florence, Woman MP, Butaleja District; 
    7. Hon. Col. Mwesigye Fred, MP Nyabushozi County; 
    8. Hon. Nankabirwa Anna Maria, Woman MP, Kyankwanzi District; 
    9. Hon. Bigirwa Julius Junjura, MP, Buhanguzi County;
    10. Hon. Amos Okot, MP Agago County; 
    11. Hon. Margaret Komuhangi, Woman MP, Nakasongola; 
    12. Hon. Alex Ruhunda, MP, Fort Portal Municipality; 
    13. Hon. Achia Remigio, MP for Pian County;
    14. Hon. Nulu Byamukama, Kitagwenda County; 
    15. Hon. Martin Drito, MP for Madi-Okolo County; 
    16. Hon. Baker Ssali, MP Buikwe West; 
    17. Hon. Michael Ayepa, MP for Lamwo County; 
    18. Hon. Rose Akol, Woman MP for Bukedea District.

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I now invite the Opposition Chief Whip. 

MR ROLAND MUGUME: Madam Speaker, allow me to present the following:
    1. Hon. Franca, Woman MP for Agago District;
    2. Hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, MP for Tororo County;
    3. Hon. Jack Sabiiti, MP for Rukiga County; 
    4. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, Woman MP for Dokolo District;
    5. Hon. Patrick Oboi Amuriat, MP for Kumi County;
    6. Hon. Fred Ebil, MP for Kole County.

I beg to present, Madam Speaker.

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, on the Budget Committee, I present the following members:
    1. Hon. Joseph Matte, MP for Bughendera County;
    2. Hon. Jennifer Mujungu, Woman MP for Ntoroko District;
    3. Hon. Fox Odoi, MP for West Budama North County; and
    4. Hon. John Bagoole, MP for Luuka County.

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members, I present hon. Phinehas Katirima, UPDF. Hon. Members, I put the question that the leadership and members of that committee be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES, AND DISCIPLINE COMMITTEE

MS JUSTINE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, the NRM party offers the following Members to serve on the Committee of Rules, Privileges and Discipline:
    1. Hon. Rosemary Nauwat, Woman MP for Amudat as the vice chairperson;
    2. Hon. Sarah Lanyero, Woman MP for Lamwo District;
    3. Hon. John Baptist Lokii, MP for Matheniko County;
    4. Hon. Simon Mulongo, MP for Bubulo County East;
    5. Hon. Jim Muhwezi, MP for Rujumbura County;
    6. Hon. Sam Lyomoki, representing workers;
    7. Hon. Elizabeth Karungi, Woman MP for Kanungu;
    8. Hon. Isaac Sejjoba, MP for Bukoto County Mid-West;
    9. Hon. Khiddu Makubuya, MP for Katikamu South;
    10. Hon. Rosemary Seninde, Woman MP for Wakiso; and
    11. Hon. Mabel Bageine, representing Bugangaizi District.

I beg to move. (Interjection) The chair is supposed to be provided by the Independents.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I invite the Opposition side.

MR ROLAND MUGUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the Rules, Privileges and Discipline committee, allow me to present:
    1. Hon. Abdu Katuntu, Bugweri County;
    2. Hon. Christopher Acire, Gulu Municipality;
    3. Hon. Medard Sseggona, Busiro East;
    4. Hon. Joseph Balikuddembe, Busiro South; and
    5. Hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi, Rubaga South.

Madam Speaker, I beg to present.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let us hear from hon. Otada.

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, on a bi-partisan approach, we agreed with the NRM and I thank them for allowing us to chair this committee. And I present hon. Jacob Oboth as chairperson of the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges. (Applause)

Thank you. I also want to present to you the following:
    1. Hon. Manoah Achile, MP for Aringa County; 
    2. Hon. Rose Iriama from Nakapiripirit;
    3. Hon. Julius Maganda, from Samia-Bugwe South; and
    4. Hon. Mathias Mpuuga, Masaka Municipality. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, I present hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, Ndorwa East and Lt Gen. Charles Angina, UPDF to be on that committee.

I now put the question that the leadership and Members of that committee be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HIV/AIDS AND RELATED MATTERS COMMITTEE

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, the NRM party offers the following members to serve on the Committee of HIV/AIDS and Related Matters:
    1. Hon. Sarah Kayagi Netalisire, Woman MP for Manafwa District as chairperson;
    2. Hon. Medard Bitekyerezo, MP Mbarara Municipality as vice chairperson. (Applause)
    3. Hon. CD Oketayot, MP Pader District;
    4. Hon. Justine Khainza, Woman MP for Bududa;
    5. Hon. Sarah Mwebaza, MP Kibuuku District;
    6. Hon. Gilbert Bukenya, MP Busiiro South; 
    7. Hon. Tom Aza, MP for West Moyo;
    8. Hon. Ruth Lematia, MP for Maracha District;
    9. Hon. Chris Baryomunsi, MP for Kinkizi East;
    10. Hon. Connie Nakayenze, MP for Mbale District;
    11. Hon Lydia Chekwel, MP for Kween District;
    12. Hon. Freda Kase-Mubanda, MP for Masaka District; 
    13. Hon. Juliana Modest Auma, MP for Abim District; and
    14. Hon. Patrick Mutono, MP for Butebo County.

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Government Chief Whip. Let me invite the Opposition Chief Whip.

MR MUGUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On HIV/AIDS and Related Matters Committee, allow me to present the following:
    1. Hon. Roland Mugume, MP for Rukungiri Municipality;
    2. Hon. Kevinah Taaka, MP for Busia Municipality;
    3. Hon. Hassan Kaps Fungaroo, Obongi County; and
    4. Hon. Joy Ruth Achieng, Kole County.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Otada, please take to the Floor.

MR AMOOTI: Madam Speaker, I have the following MPs for the HIV/AIDS and Related Matters Committee:
    1. Hon. Kenneth Kiyingi, Mawokota South;
    2. Hon. Benjamin Cadet, Bunyaruguru County; and
    3. Hon. Godfrey Lubega, Kassanda North.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I present hon. Sarah Mpabwa, UPDF as Member of that committee.
I now put the question that the leadership and Members of that committee be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE APPOINTMENTS COMMITTEE

MS JUSTINE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, the NRM offers the following Members to serve on the Appointments Committee as Members:
    1. Hon. Paula Turyahikayo, MP Rubaabo County;
    2. Hon. David Ochwa, MP for Agule County;
    3. Hon. Susan Amero, Woman MP for Amuria;
    4. Hon. Mathias Kasamba, MP for Kakuuto County;
    5. Hon. Victoria Busingye-Rusoke, MP for Kabarole District;
    6. Hon. Theopista Sentongo, MP representing workers;
    7. Hon. Stephen Kagwera, MP for Burahya County; 
    8. Hon. Patrick Nakabaale, MP representing the youth in central region;
    9. Hon. Simon Peter Aleper, MP for Moroto Municipality;
    10. Hon. Moses Balyeku, MP for Jinja East;
    11. Hon. Hood Katuramu, representing people with disabilities;
    12. Hon. Kasirivu-Atwooki, MP for Bugangaizi East County;
    13. Hon. Dorothy Mpima, MP for Buikwe District; and
    14. Hon. Mpima Dorothy, MP for Buikwe District. I beg to move. 

MR ROLAND MUGUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the Appointments Committee, allow me present: 
    1. Hon. Bako Christine Abia, Woman MP Arua District, FDC;
    2. Hon. Aol Betty Ocan, Woman MP Gulu District, FDC; 
    3. Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba, MP KawemPe South, DP; 
    4. Hon. Amongi Betty Ongom, MP Oyam South, UPC. 

I beg to move. 

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, for the Appointments Committee, I beg to present: Hon. Nyakikongoro Rosemary, Sheema District; and Dr Okuonzi Sam Agatre, MP Vurra County. I would like to move that Sam Amooti Otada, MP for Kibanda County, form part of this committee. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I present the Gen. Elly Tumwine, UPDF to be on that committee. But before we take the vote, the membership of the committee of Appointments is 20. So if we are to include three independents, it means we have gone beyond the Rules of Procedure. So, hon. Otada, we may have to discuss because the Appointments Committee requires only 20 Members. The other committees have 30 but for the Appointments Committee, it is 20. So, maybe we can defer and consult over it and conclude on Appointments tomorrow. Okay, let us go to the Committee on Science and Technology. 

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

MS JUSTINE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, the NRM offers the following Members to serve on the Committee on Science and Technology: 
    1. Hon. Semuli Anthony, MP Buwekula County as Chairperson; 
    2. Hon. Nyakecho Annet Okwenyi, MP Otuke District as vice Chairperson. 
    3. Hon. Kahunde Helen, MP for Kiryandongo District;
    4. Hon. Kintu Florence, MP Kalungu;
    5. Hon. Baker Ssali, MP Buikwe West; 
    6. Hon. Obua Hamson Denis, MP for Ajuri County; 
    7. Hon. Waira Kyewalabye Majegere, MP for Bunya East County; 
    8. Hon. Baliddawa Edward, MP for Kigulu North; Hon. Omara Geoffrey, MP Erute North; 
    9. Hon. Kwemara Ngabo William, MP Kyaka County; 
    10. Hon. Namugwanya Bennie, MP Mubende District;
    11. Hon. Balumba Rusania MP, Kiruhura; and
    12. Hon. Raphael Magyezi, MP for Igara West. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you Government Chief Whip. 

MR ROLAND MUGUME: Madam Speaker, on the Science and Technology Committee, I beg to present: 
    1. Hon. Epetait Francis, MP, Ngora County, FDC; 
    2. Hon. Obua Ogwal Benson, MP, Moroto County, UPC; 
    3. Hon. Kawuma Mohammed, Entebbe Municipality, DP; and
    4. Hon. Namaganda Suzan, Bukomansimbi District, DP. 

I beg to move. 

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that hon. Kafeero Sekitoleko, MP Nakifuma County; hon. Chemutai Phyllis Kapchorwa District and hon. Anywarach Joshua, Pader County form part of this committee. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the leadership and the Members of that committee be approved by this House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE BUSINESS COMMITTEE

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Business Committee comprise the following: 
    1. Rt Hon. Kadaga, Chairperson; 
    2. Rt Hon. Oulanyah; 
    3. Hon. Kasule Justine Lumumba; 
    4. Hon. Oguttu Wafula;
    5. Hon. Atim Ogwal Cecilia;
    6. Hon. Vincent Ssempijja; and
    7. Hon. Sanjay Tanna. 

The rest are all the committee chairpersons as ex-officio Members. They are there by virtue of their office. 

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, it has been the practice for some time that as the representative of the independents, I sit on this committee. So, I want to find out from you, Madam Speaker, whether this has since changed. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Otada, how can you be on two standing committees; that would mean you are on three committees? You would be in a sessional committee, on the Appointments Committee and the Business Committee. I think you will have to make a choice whether to be here or on the Appointments Committee. Do you want us to defer this?

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, we have already found ourselves in a very difficult situation. This business of “independents must be here and there” - in my simple mind, I know they are independent of one another –(Interruption) 

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, with due respect to my brother, hon. Kassiano Wadri, I would like to raise a point of order. The issue he is trying to deliberate upon is an issue that is before the Constitutional Court and therefore it is sub judice. Therefore, is the honourable member in order to pronounce himself on a matter which is before a competent court of law?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the rules require that some independents sit on this committee. That is what we have complied with. I do not want to go into the issues of what is in the court. 

MR WADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling; I had not finished. The point I am raising is that, if I heard you rightly reading the names composing the Business Committee, I heard the name of Hon. Sanjay Tanna. He is an independent and hon. Ssempijja. Those are three people. Aren’t those Members representative enough? Must they be everywhere? 

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, it was just a point of clarification; it is not that I want to force myself on this committee. It was just a polite reminder and I have absolutely no problem not being on this committee. I am sure that, Madam Speaker, if you find it appropriate like you have always done, you will invite me for consultation on some of these things. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members, I put the question that the Business Committee be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, although we are still dealing with standing committees, there have also been some changes to one of the sessional committees. Let me invite the Government Chief Whip. 

MS JUSTINE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, under Rule 176(6) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the party whip has powers to designate the chairpersons and the deputy chairpersons of sectoral committees. Therefore, it is in that line that I submit the new leadership of the committee on ICT - the chairperson and the vice chairperson but the membership remains: Hon. Vincent Bagiire Waiswa, MP for Bunya West, as Chairperson; and Hon. James Kabajo Kyewalabye, MP for Kiboga East, as Vice Chairperson. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the leadership of the Committee on ICT be approved as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Oh! Justification?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have not heard my name on the sessional committee. I don’t know what happened.

THE SPEAKER: On a sessional committee? We are dealing with standing committees.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, every Member has to be a Member of a sessional committee. As you are aware, I am the former Leader of the Opposition and so I wasn’t a Member of any sessional committee and that is why I am asking where I am.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I am aware that you may not have been allocated but it is the responsibility of the Opposition Whip to inform me where she wants you to go. So, when she lets me know, I will bring the name here to be voted upon.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, in the event of the Opposition Whip delaying, you have the powers. I am saying this because this has taken long. I have been without a committee for long and now I am being assigned duties by some committees do their work against my will but because I am not deployed – so unless I am deployed now, I would like to ask you –(Interruption)

THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Madam Speaker, I have heard the former LOP complaining about his name not being read. But the former LOP is very knowledgeable about the working of Parliament. Today as we submitted the names of the Members to the standing committees from both the Government and Opposition sides - I know that there will be time for submitting his name and any other, and it was not supposed to be mixed up with these names. 

So, I don’t see any grounds for any complaints at all. The communication has gone to the Speaker and it will be announced at an appropriate time. So, is it therefore in order for the Member to complain when he should not be complaining?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think he is just anxious to work.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it is true that I am being anxious to work. But I am saying this because there are so many committees that are writing to me inviting me to go and attend meetings. I am doing work anyhow. So, I am wasting a lot of time. As you are aware, today the Government Chief Whip has announced the leadership of the sessional committees. It does not cost you even a second to announce my name – I am really anxious.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I will allocate you to the Bugisu Co-operative Union –(Laughter)– for the time being until the Opposition Whip gives me the committee where she wants you to serve.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise to seek your guidance. We all took oath to uphold the law and in 2006, we passed this law called “The Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 2006.” I am now seeking guidance in relation to two sections – Section 6 (b) on how the Leader of the Opposition is to be chosen and it reads thus: “Subject to sub sections (2) and (3), the Leader of the Opposition shall be elected by the party in Opposition to the government having the greatest numerical strength in Parliament.” The law states that the Leader of the Opposition shall be elected. But the same law under 6 (i) talks about the Opposition Chief Whip and it says thus: “There shall be in Parliament, a Chief Opposition Whip appointed by the party in the Opposition.” 
Madam Speaker, I am a member of the FDC. In our meetings at Najjanankumbi on one day, hon. Cecilia Ogwal was appointed –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, are you asking me to lift the veil to establish what happened at Najjanankumbi?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, for future purposes, we need to be clear on this because the law calls for an election and not appointment of the Leader of the Opposition – (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Order. Madam Speaker, hon. Odonga Otto holding the Floor wrote to us and said he had taken this matter to court. Is he therefore in order to bring a matter against which he took to court for interpretation in this House?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I don’t know whether he is in court or not. But this Chair cannot be required to rule on issues of the internal affairs of the party. Otherwise, I will have to attend CP, DP and so many meetings. That is not fair. Let us move on to the next item.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

RESPONSES ON THE REPORT OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON ENERGY ON THE PERFORMANCE OF ELECTRICITY SUB SECTOR IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as you are aware, the ad hoc Committee on Energy was represented in a synopsis form and represented for the third time. We have been expecting the responses from the minister, which were placed on the website over the last three weeks. So, I now invite the minister to respond.

4.47
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Irene Muloni): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You will recall the last time we dealt with this matter, I was asked to go and respond in writing on the issues that were raised during the debate. I was also asked to respond in writing on the recommendations of the ad hoc committee.

Madam Speaker, I submitted to Parliament two copies: One contained the responses to the honourable members’ questions amounting to 45 in number and I hope honourable colleagues have had time to go through those responses. Additionally, I posted the responses to the recommendations, 69 in total, from the ad hoc committee report. I now would like to request you, Madam Speaker, to allow me go through the responses to the recommendations by the committee. 

Out of the 69 recommendations, we concur with 56, disagree with 11 recommendations and partially disagree with two recommendations. I also would like to let the House know that the Executive went through this report and therefore the responses that I am going to present are the position of the Executive.

Madam Speaker, since we concur with 56 out the 69, let me now focus on those where we partially disagree and those where we do not agree. I will start with the two recommendations where we partially disagree and that is recommendation number three on page 135 of the report, where implementation of this recommendation should be after thorough investigation and proof that there was fraudulent claim of the monies by the company.

The second recommendation that we partially disagreed with is recommendation No.15 on page 159 of the report, where we do not agree with a part of the recommendation that requires converting the Electricity Regulatory Authority and Energy Commission with the operating companies being among its key departments.

I will now focus on the 11 recommendations that we do not agree with:
Recommendation on page 52 stipulates that Mr Kabagambe Kaliisa who is a PS in the Ministry of Energy, Mr David Ssebabi who is a Director of the Privatisation Unit and Engineer Elias Kiyemba who is the Managing Director of UEDCL, should be held jointly responsible for abuse of office and increase the loss factor when they irregularly raised the loss factor cutting from 33 percent to 38 percent. 

The Executive does not agree with this recommendation for the reason that may be it came out of a possible misunderstanding.

With respect to energy loss factor, there are two parameters: there is a loss factor that is employed by the regulator in setting the tariff on an annual basis. Now, the other loss factor which was employed by Government to arrive at a benchmark for termination of a contract with a private power distribution like Umeme and so this is the second parameter which is a policy matter and not a regulatory matter. Prior to this policy innovation of cutting the losses for contract termination to 38 percent, which was initiated during the restructuring of the Umeme concession there was no cap. 

Now under such circumstances, the losses would have arisen to a very high level without a threshold at which Government would exercise the option to terminate the concession. In that case, there was a need to set a cap but the issue was that at what level would cap be safe and so after discussions it was set at 38 percent. 

Due to the rise in the tariffs and owing to the introduction of thermo power, Umeme claimed that it was facing a rapid escalation of losses recording at one time 41 percent. Consultations were made with the regulator and they revealed that the losses at the time of restructuring the concession stood at about 34.5 percent.

So setting this threshold at 33 percent and yet the actual losses were above at 34.5 percent would mean that the concession would immediately terminate before you even sign the changes and, therefore, it was not a desired of the restructuring of the concession. So the 38 percent threshold which was in between the loss factor of 34.5 percent and 41 percent was the one that was arrived at as a cap.

Contrary to what the ad hoc committee indicated, it should be pointed out that the loss factor of 38 percent was never factored into the tariff at any one time during the period of this concession from 2005 to date. Therefore, the issue of any party benefitting from that 38 percent cap does not arise.

I will move to the next recommendation, that is, recommendation 2

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let her make her response then you can take issue. Just note down the areas you want to take issue.

MS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will move to recommendation number two on page 52 of the report, and on this one the recommendation was to hold hon. Dr Kamanda Bataringaya, former minister of state for energy and currently holding a portfolio for a minister of state for education, to be held personally and politically responsible for negligence when he sanctioned the raising to this loss factor capping from 33 percent to 38 percent contrary to an earlier position by a substantive minister Daudi Migereko.

It is for the same reason that I have just given that 38 percent was a cap and not a factor that was put in the tariff.

To note that, hon. Kamanda Bataringaya was not the minister of state for energy but rather minister of state for mineral development and he was holding the portfolio of minister of energy and mineral development at the time when the full minister was abroad on official duties.

MRS OGWAL: As I intimated last week, I was the last person to pick up my ipad from ICT and I have now learnt how to use it. I have scanned through, tried to see where but I have failed to get this document. The information she is giving us is very important and the report of Umeme is of national importance. I am wondering whether we continue to allow the minister to continue singing a song in our ears when we cannot follow. We are not following, we do not have the document, it is not in the ipad, and it is not anywhere. How are going to ask questions and clarifications? Can you guide us?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before we broke off from the plenary last time that document was on your ipads and it was confirmed by Members in this House that it was there.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: I want to confirm that the document is there but I think there is a problem with the network. We have been trying with afro scope since morning and even here. The document is here but it cannot open.

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, there is a response but they are supposed to be two responses. The responses on the ipads are the responses to questions raised during plenary but the general responses the minister is giving are not there.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that ipads came recently and people may be having a problem. The true story is that this document is there. I had to print for myself a hard copy because I have stationary in a private office. The questions that were raised are there and what he is saying is there is on page 8 and 9.

But what I know is that there is a network problem. Madam Speaker, the report is very important and I am sure the Order Paper came in today when Members never knew that energy was the item on the Order Paper.

They are right; they have not seen. I propose that you allow Members to go and look for network or Wi-Fi somewhere so that they get this report and read it. That is why you saw me standing up, Madam Speaker, because I have read and internalised it and I am ready to deal with it. However, Umeme touches all of us so they should go, read and understand it.

The other proposal I wanted to raise is that there are many issues the committee raised and the minister responded to them. We do not know why the committee raised those issues and why the minister is refusing them. I would also propose that maybe we give the ad hoc committee time to look through the responses of the minister and where the minister says “I do not agree,” the committee should come and tell us why the minister should not agree. 

Otherwise, for some of us here, it is a technical area. So I would plead with you, Madam Speaker, that we get this report, give it to our committee to go and look at it and they also prepare a response for us so when they come maybe on Thursday or Tuesday and we are able to know how to debate. For example, I have come ready saying that the minister’s response is not worthy. That is my proposal but the committee could come up and say, “No, it has some substance”. So, I would plead with you to allow the Members to look for Internet, allow the committee to look through the report and from there we shall proceed. Madam Speaker, it shall not cost us a lot. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Members, first of all, I want to inform you that the Order Paper was issued at 8.15 this morning. So, you had several hours to know what was coming.

Secondly, when we were adjourning last time, we assured you that the documents are on your ipads and that you should read them. I do not think that we should go and send this back to the committee. You listen and respond.

MR KAFUDA: Madam Speaker, yesterday the document was sent on the Web and we were accessing it on the ipads but we have a very big problem of the network. When we are outside Parliament, we use the Airtel network and the bundle which they gave us is very little and one cannot access the network.

THE SPEAKER: But how come hon. Nankabirwa is able to access it and she is near you? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am the Chairman of the Bugisu Co-operative Union and I am using Orange. The correction I want to make is that, the Order Paper was sent at 10.46 a.m. not 8.00 a.m. It is here, Madam Speaker. That is the time it was sent. When I saw it, I had to get my copy before coming but my colleagues are saying they never had network. You are aware, Madam Speaker, Members could have got ready last week or the other week but as we go along we tend to forget. That is why we are pleading with you to be kind and allow us to go and look for network, or I can lend them my Orange network. But for now they can go out and –(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have an appeal to the hon. Minister to be courteous enough to avail the hard copy to the chairperson. Really, should the chairperson of the ad hoc committee be restricted to a soft copy? I thought I was actually supposed to get this before so that we can see areas where we can build consensus with my committee members but I have been incapacitated, Madam Speaker, as I do not have a copy. I thought I would have gotten a copy as a matter of courtesy to help us fast-track this recommendation. I would love that you humbly direct her to give me a copy right now.

THE SPEAKER: But really honourable chairperson, with all this technology right in your hands, why can’t you just read it? It is on your IPad.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, as other Members have stated, this is a very important report especially where there have been actual rebuttals. We need to compare whether what she is reading is in tandem with the soft copy. I would have no problem following with the soft copy but I thought it would have been courteous of her or Government to give me a copy. Then I could have shared it with my colleagues who are comfortable with soft copies but we have not had - actually, these responses could have called for our committee to sit and decide on a position. Definitely there are areas that they could have pointed out and that we could have said no, we were misguided. But this is a committee that came out with the report after hearing all the stakeholders.

MR SIMON MULONGO: Madam Speaker, I thank you so much. Yes, we have the challenge of technology. If you look at our Ipads under the Alfresco server we have committees, parliamentary library then we have Parliament of Uganda. If you go under Parliament of Uganda, we have various documents from Bills, committee reports, Hansards and so on. 

Under question and answer, 26 days ago the minister did present to the House a response to Parliament on the issue we raised in the committee report. If you tap onto it, the document by the minister is there. I am not sure whether it is just a question of network because we are in the same operating environment and I am able to access mine.

That is one but, secondly, Madam Speaker, I think that the procedure in tackling this report would be that we flow with the report. Instead of the minister selecting areas to respond to, we want to flow because first of all, the committee had terms of reference, which informed the structure of the report and the report is structured in such a way that there is a logical flow. So if we want to selectively tackle certain areas, we may lose out on the logic of the flow of the issues raised in the report.

So it would be good that we start with the first recommendation. Once the minister has no objection to it then we pass it. If we come to recommendation one and the minister has an issue to raise, she will then raise it and say something either in support or partial support or complete objection and she will give her justification. The debate will ensue and then we conclude on it. So, Madam Speaker, it is my opinion that we should have flowed with the report from the beginning starting with the first recommendation onwards and not to just go selectively. Thank you.

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I remember when we adjourned you guided that we had dealt with the debate of the report, and the minister was expected to come back to the House and respond to the issues that hon. Members had raised. I had also expected that once the minister comes, she would go through the responses and then if there are issues we have with these responses, we would raise them. 

It is unfortunate that the network is not working; otherwise, procedurally, I would have expected the minister to take us through – actually not partially but even through all the responses so that we can follow the logical flow and then react where necessary. But of course, we cannot now go back – I am not the one to rule or guide but, Rt Hon. Speaker, it would mean going back again to debate afresh and then come back with responses. 

I suggest that the minister gets back to us and go through all the responses and then, we react and pronounce ourselves on each response. But since the network is off, I would ask that you give us time until when the network is restored or we get some hard copies. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, the question of voting on the recommendations would come last; the minister has already told you that out of a certain number of recommendations, they have accepted 56 and she is only addressing those with which she does not agree. We will then come back to them and say, “On this and that we agreed…” That is how we would move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you are right. You know Umeme report affects many people and that is why you see members are interested in it. Personally, I had to carry my iPad and a hard copy of the minister’s response plus the report. Unfortunately, for other Members, they have no report because the internet is off –(Interjections)– No, for your information, Madam Speaker, this report has annexes  and the report alone is 160 pages; and if you were to download them using this Wi-Fi, you would have difficulty doing it; the message you will get will be, “Safaricom cannot find the server.” I have seen a friend here try that but he could not. 

So, Madam Speaker, I suggest that we treat Umeme report as an exceptional report. The reasons are: Who were involved? People consuming power are even deep in the villages and we are begging – by the way, Madam Speaker, if you have read it on the internet, the most expensive electricity tariffs are in Uganda. (Interjections) Yes, I have a print out here. And the reason our tariffs are the highest is because we produce power in Jinja; those who do not produce it buy it more cheaply than we do. 

I request that, Madam Speaker, you task the committee chairperson – As we wait for Wi-Fi, I will give him my hard copy to go with so that he can look through it on our behalf since they are the ones who went through it from the beginning to the end. (Laughter)

Secondly, Members came on 6th of February because you had told them that the Minister would come – I saw all of them in the Chamber ready. But today, it is the end of March, almost two months later. So, Madam Speaker, you have given us more than two months to go through this report. We have erred and ask you for forgiveness but we request that we allow our committee to look into it; let us look for Wi-Fi and get the report so that we are ready to deal with it. Otherwise, should we fail to do that – it is already 5.00 p.m. and you know, after we were assigned to committees, some people are already celebrating up in the canteen. You know what happens and so, we need some time. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members,  this is one of the most expensive reports to this House because we gave it the first set; made the second set; made the synopsis; made the forth synopsis. So, I will adjourn this debate to tomorrow and no more than tomorrow because you have four sets of these documents in hard copy. And it will not go back to the committee; the committee did their work and presented it; it is now our business. So, this will be the only item in the Order Paper tomorrow. Let us move to the next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF COMPENSATION FOR ROAD PROJECTS OF PEOPLE AFFECTED BY THE CONSTRUCTION OF ROADS IN UGANDA OVER THE LAST 10 YEARS

5.11
THE MINISTER FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr James Byandala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This Parliament decided that I bring information on roads worked on and compensation for the past 10 years. I have compiled the information and it is posted on the iPad. But knowing that we are in the transition period and there are network problems, I decided to send 300 hard copies to the Clerk to Parliament. (Applause)

My report shows you the name of the road, the year we did the compensation, the approved evaluation amount, the paid amount, the outstanding amount, the total number of the project-affected persons – who we usually refer to as “PAPs”. We have the paid PAPs, the outstanding PAPs to be paid, the percentage paid and on each road, we have remarks attached to them.

Let me also give this information that the amounts we pay out are not determined by the Ministry of Works and Transport but by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, where the Chief Government Valuer is situated. We request the Chief Government Valuer to assess the areas we want; he gives us the values and we post them so that the PAPs are free to agree or disagree. That is the point. We then go ahead to implement it. 

Now that everybody has the report, the roads are all listed there – but this does not mean that those are the only roads we have worked on; what I have extracted are the roads we have worked on and compensation issues for the right of way was an issue.

Since we do not have a lot of time and yet we have a lot of work to do, I will request you to go to the last page and you will see the summary under each column of what has been done. Madam Speaker, you will realise that in most of these, we have not paid 100 percent because of some problems; for example, some of these are that we cannot identify the owner; nobody can authenticate the actual owner and so, we cannot pay unless we are sure to whom we should pay. As soon as we get concrete evidence of the owner of the land or the “Kibanja”, we then pay. 

Let me also take this opportunity to request MPs that as we come to work in your area, I know it is a constitutional right that we first pay the affected people. But I request that you convince your people to allow me continue with work even before the compensation because Government of Uganda is stable and is here; so, we can pay any time. 

Let me report that the people affected by Vuura – Oraba Road allowed us to start work without having paid any shilling. But as I speak now, we have paid about one hundred percent and the work is progressing very well. 

Madam Speaker, unless somebody has a peculiar question to ask on this, I beg to put this to rest; the roads are well spelt out and the columns are very clear. That being the case, as you may recall, hon. Harriet Ntabazi posed a question on the Fort Portal Bundibugyo – Lamia Road regarding compensation. I was also requested to give some information on that aspect. 

This road is 103.6km and those of you who have used this road would realise that the terrain requires a lot of cutting to expand the road and hence, affecting the people whom we refer to as PAPs. A total of 5,136 PAPs were affected in the construction of this road. The total value of money we had to pay is Shs 14,376,296,960. Right now, Shs 13,760,445,569 has been paid to 3,834 PAPs. This represents a percentage of 74.6. This means that we have a balance to pay of Shs 615,851,391 and this is for PAPs totalling 1302. 

We have the money to pay and we are going to pay them in the fourth quarter. My ministry has finished all the paper work and as you know, the new payment systems introduced by the Ministry of Finance – we have already posted them to the Ministry of Finance and as they release the fourth quarter, Ministry of Finance will be in position to pay all these people. 

I apologise on behalf of Government for delaying to pay them all. But I am sure the people of Bundibujo and those of Ntoroko are happy with the work. Where it took them five or six hours travelling from Fort Portal to Lamia and Bundibujo, it now takes them less than an hour. This is the Government of Uganda; the Government of NRM taking services to the people. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, really, this is not for debate; this is for information to assist you address your constituents and update them on where things are because it is clear. Some have been paid and there are a few who are missing – okay, two minutes each. 

5.25
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was almost convinced by the minister. But he seemed to be making a political statement. Money is property for the intended beneficiaries. What we are saying is that we all need the roads; there is no doubt about that. But also the people who are entitled to this money are not getting it and we know it is the responsibility of Government to pay. As they construct the road, there is supposed to be counter-funding from Government, which Government is not doing. 

When you say that you have the money, it is inferred that the ministry has now got the money. Then, why do you conclude by saying that the Ministry of Finance will pay them? I do not know whether you are serious about that statement. 

The point I am making is that, whereas we want the road, we want you to expeditiously provide that in your budget. You are telling us that the money is there, but again you are taking us to finance; that will take us to another level of releases. In fact, counterpart funding has failed very many projects and we want you to speak in that respect and not just make a general statement for the people to listen. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.26
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek three clarifications. One, what sort of verification goes beyond valuation stage that the minister is talking about? In his statement, the minister says that verification is actually going on and that is why the affected people have not all been paid. So, I ask, what sort of verification is that going beyond the valuation stage?

Secondly, we have the road reserves and the road but the challenge we have is that the ministry does not have any legal document that authorises Government to own the road reserves. I do not know why the ministry has been reluctant to secure land titles for the roads and the road reserves. 

The challenge that comes from that is that we will compensate people until Jesus comes back; because Government is not sure which land is theirs and which is not. 

Finally, the compensation of individuals – in my view, there are about 58,000 people according to one of the reports he has presented. It does not take a full year or even a month to know 58,000 people. I am speaking as Shadow Minister for Works and I am warning Government that when we come to power in 2016, we are going to do it. 

Madam Speaker, I have been a member of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure since 2011 and I have seen that that is where Government messes up. Even the quality of roads we have is not the best because we waste a lot of money compensating where we should not be doing so and we tend to imagine that the projects can take any time they wish to be taken. Any reasonable project must have a timeframe for it to yield results and that is why we have different financial years.  	

Madam Speaker. So, we think that when we get to 2016, if a project is for one year, it will be one year. The minister should take note that honestly, we need this project to take the course it should. I thank you.

5.29
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the minister for presenting responses. However, I have a few clarifications in regard to the Vvura-Arua-Koboko-Raba Road. When I raised these issues, I particularly talked about people who were asked to open accounts. We have no problem with verifications and so forth. But the genuine property owners who were affected were listed and asked to open accounts in banks, which they did. However, when it came to payments, no money has been paid. We are still wondering where the money is. Is it still with UNRA or the contractor? Where is this money?

The last clarification is in regard to Arua Airport. There were issues in which I had to intervene personally in order to bring the community and CAA into harmony. But I noticed that one of the stumbling blocks was about the earlier land that was taken without compensation. CAA took it up but they have not honoured the obligation to pay for that land. A figure of about Shs 360 million was agreed on. However, to-date the family still waits for it though there is already progress on the work at the airport. So, can you give us some information in regard to what is happening to these two projects?

5.31
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to bring to the attention of the minister the land acquisition and compensation for citizens along Kyetume-Katosi-Kisoga-Njenga Road, which is being planned for upgrading. A company was hired and it assured people that it would compensate them. Valuation was done and results brought back after three years.

As a Member of Parliament, I am finding it difficult to contain a situation where I have not been hired to act as an arbitrator between UNRA or Ministry of Works and the people who are supposed to be compensated. My office here is always full of people who have problems with the valuations that were done. I have to every time transport them between my office and UNRA Offices, which is not my responsibility.

I have decided to bring this matter to the attention of the minister to ensure they get arbitration nearer to the people and assign them with the responsibility of re-evaluating especially for those who have got problems. Indeed, some people’s property was undervalued.

So, I kindly ask you to take this matter quite seriously and take away the responsibility that is not ours by answering this question. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.33
MS MARGRET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the minister for updating us on the construction of all the roads in Uganda. I extend great thanks to the Government of Uganda for constructing that Vvura-Arua-Koboko-Kaya Road. It is one of the best roads and with the best constructed bridges.

I also would like to inform you that our people in Maracha and Koboko are very considerate. They are ready to give land away for the road to be constructed without any payments. However, my question is: when are you paying off those who have not been compensated?

Two, some people’s property was undervalued and with more problems coming up - where should such problems be reported and who is responsible so that I can direct my people there, to process their compensation?

5.34
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you and the Parliament of Uganda for allowing me to table my petition in this Parliament from which this report has been generated. The petition also yielded many results and benefits for my people. Immediately that petition was presented on the Floor of Parliament, I made a follow up with the minister’s office together with the responsible engineers. These offices immediately took to paying off the people of Bundibugyo. 

The report that has been presented here, for the first time, is very correct that the people down – about 75 percent – have now received their monies. The only challenge is – my request was that we settle these people once and for all because paying them in bits does not really sound well.
There are some people who got paid in one Sub County but those responsible would skip a sub county in between and get to clear people in the next one but still paying them in bits. What I am saying is the criterion of paying is not yet understood though people are being paid off slowly.

Let me also take the same opportunity to thank Government – we would take a long time to travel from Bundibugyo to Fort Portal – it was like travelling from Fort Portal to Mbale; we would take seven to eight hours on the way, which is 45 kilometres. Now, we take only half an hour. Those who came to visit our district and those who have been there as committees, can bear me witness on this. I thank the NRM Government and the Government of Uganda for the support given.

5.36
MR BOAZ KAFUDA (NRM, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just want to seek some clarification from the honourable minister. I notice that this is another loophole of swindling money from Government especially in the Ministry of Works and Transport, when it comes to compensating people for these roads.

Government has clear plans for these roads. Those roads have been there because when you look at Mbarara-Ntungamo-Kabale-Katuna Road - that road has been there for a long time. It was only being rehabilitated or expanded. That road already had some reserved land. So, I do not know why people came and encroached on that reserved land in order to get compensated. 

This is another issue - we need to come up with a policy on how to protect road reserves from being encroached upon by the people.
Secondly and on the issue of compensation, hon. Minister, I do not expect to wait for you to first come around to construct a road so that you can compensate me. That is out; maybe, for the roads that have been around like the Fort Portal –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us hear from hon. Rusaniya, hon. Akol, hon. Kiboijana, hon. Lugoloobi and hon. Kyomuhangi.


5.39
MS BEATRICE BARUMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiruhura): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the information that he has given us and I want to thank the NRM Government for constructing the Nyakahita-Kamwenge Road. We now take like three hours to our home and so, we are very happy.

My concern is about the people who were affected. You know this road was constructed by the Chinese and while they compensated those people by the road side that were affected, there are people whose places they would go and connive with the chairpersons LC1 in the absence of the owners of the land and they got this murram. The Chinese are very tactical. Now it is a big problem and these lands are now very badly affected because when you get murram from that piece of land, it is not habitable again. 
So now, who will do that because I tried to lead some of those people to UNRA and we were not helped? So, Mr Minister, are you aware of that and how can those people be helped? I thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

5.40
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to join my colleagues in thanking the minister for the work that you are doing by working on our road. I want to look at project activity No. 23. 

The minister talks of acquisition of land for UNRA stations, ferry landing sites and weigh bridges but does not mention or identify which ferry landing sites or UNRA stations. I am interested in this matter because there is a ferry that has been long outstanding; the ferry that is supposed to link the Teso sub-region with Kamuli in Busoga. What is the problem? Have you – (Interjections) - that one. Is it about the ferry landing site that people have not been compensated or is it just about the funding for this ferry? 

Two, this is a related matter. When these roads are being constructed, traffic is normally diverted to pass for quite a number of kilometres through the community and district roads and in the process, these district and community roads get seriously damaged. The culverts are broken and by the time the traffic goes back to the main road that has been completed, the district roads are left in bad shape. Now, if we are compensating people for their land, what about those districts whose roads have been damaged as a result of the main activity of constructing these tarmac roads? Is there any compensation that they are entitled to or does the Ministry of Works or the contractor take it upon themselves to restore these roads to their original state because this is an additional cost to the district –(Member timed out_)

5.42
MRS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I too would wish to appreciate the Government of Uganda for the construction of Nyakahita-Kazo-Ibanda Road. 

Having said that, I need a few clarifications; under No. 18, the minister talked about land acquisition for the road reserve for the Nyakahita-Kazo-Ibanda-Kamwenge-Fort Portal Road and I kept wondering because the road network was there much as it was murram and what they did is working on it and of course tarmacking. So when it comes to land acquisition, I kept wondering whether they were acquiring some land or it is a new terminology under Ministry of Works being used for those already existing roads. 

Number two, there are those claimants who have not been compensated along that road and particularly, I am concerned about 50 people at Omukatongole Trading Centre, Kikyenche Sub-County between Kazo and Ibanda. I have tried to liaise with UNRA and at one point in time, two officers visited in the names of Kyadondo and Chris Manyindo. They talked to the people because they wanted to riot and they calmed them by telling them that a surveyor was to come and take some measurements and hopefully, that was to be done by January. But as I talk, nothing has been done in terms of compensation.

Madam Speaker, I would wish that the Ministry of Works and UNRA could talk the same language. At one point in time, they will tell these people that we are waiting for the Government Valuer and at another point in time, there is a surveyor who is awaited, then at another time that they do not have the right information – and you know your registration of the people to be compensated. So my people, through me, have been giving me list after list and I talk- I feel equally frustrated – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lugoloobi and then hon. Komuhangi. But hon. Members, let us not reopen this matter. Yes, I will give you.

5.45
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you so much, Rt. Hon. Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: She has spoken from your area.

MR LUGOLOOBI: I want to thank the minister for the report. However, the report does not adequately cover land acquired for ferry operations. For instance in 20.3, it is indicated that the money was paid but I have information that the land that you acquired for the operation of the Kasana-Mbulamuti-Kamuli Ferry has not been paid. You acquired five hectares there at the landing site and the gentleman of the land has been pestering me to contact you and I have done so but this money has not been paid. 

I am worried that one of these days, this man is going to deny you access to that ferry. In fact, the Rt. Hon. Speaker uses the same ferry to Kamuli and last Sunday, I watched you as you were crossing. I am worried that this man may have to block access soon or later because this land was acquired in 2011 but the payment has not been effected and yet this the land that this man was using to grow crops and over all these years, the man has terribly become bankrupt and he can no longer feed his family because UNRA or your ministry has not been able to pay.

But I want to commend you for the ferry because it has been such a big boost for our area and for the district of Kamuli as it has since improved trading operations between our two districts. I thank you very much.

5.47
MS MARGARET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you very much. I thank the minister for the statement but it was so unpleasing for the minister to say that payment can be done at any time. I think that as Government, we need to get more organised. We should have scheduled payments across the country for all the roads so that people are aware when they going to be compensated and when there are delays and what reasons are there for the delays.

Madam Speaker, this does not only happen with the Ministry of Works but also with the Ministry of Energy. When they are extending power lines for instance the power line from Kawanda to Karuma, the entire stretch is not compensated at all and people keep asking. So that is the very reason as to why we should have properly scheduled time payments and the people are aware about the payments.

Then another issue is about the ferry from Zengebe to Namasale. You know the Namasale side is well constructed with shelters and toilets provided but the side of Zengebe has nothing and yet I know that land was identified and we identified the owner but I do not know how far the acquisition has gone because nothing has been done at all. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Anne Auru and then we close with the member from Koboko.

5.49
MS ANNE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you Rt. Hon. Speaker. I would like to thank the NRM Government and the Ministry of Works for the work that they are really doing on roads.  I think we have made it in the roads sector.

Madam Speaker, this is a statement for road projects in the last ten years but in Moyo District, Government of Uganda contracted Sietuko company to construct Moyo-Adjumani-Atiak road in 1996 and because of the LRA war, they had to leave before they completed that project. What happened? 

There is a clan whose murram was used for constructing the road and since then, they have been following up with the Ministry of Works. There was conflict between the Chief Government Valuer and the PS. I think there is just mistrust and because of that, for over 15 years, that clan is still following up the payment.

I would like to know if such people will also be considered for payment within this duration. They are following up and they would like to go to court but they are not financially empowered to follow this legal issue. We should not subject our people to suffering to that extent when they offered their land to be used even before compensation is done. Thank you very much.

5.51
MR AHMED AWONGO (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister and the government for the good choice of contractor for Vurra-Arua-Koboko road. These people have done a wonderful job. Right now, from Arua to Koboko takes us 40 minutes while in those days, we used to take two and a half hours, sometimes even three especially during the rainy season.

I want to request the minister that he should come back and look at Nebbi-Pakwach road. That road has a problem maybe because the constructors were in a hurry at that time and it worked on it at an alarming speed. Unless that is looked at immediately, we may have a bigger problem to attend to in future. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I want to ask something, which I have been asking and no one has answered. This House was under a lot of pressure to approve a loan for the infrastructure of the 14 municipalities but I have been to almost all of them and nothing has happened at all. I want to know who is in charge of that project. The other day, we went to Kumi. You go through Mbale and you can hardly drive. So, what has happened to that money? We were under a lot of pressure here and we had to move very fast to approve that loan. 

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I thank my colleagues. Those who have appreciated what Government is doing, thank you very much. It is also a culture for people to appreciate and I like those who have made positive criticism on some issues. That is how we should work, move this country and turn it around.

I will start with the one you have put across to me, Madam Speaker, concerning the 14 municipalities. This project is being administered in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. It is not in my sector of transport. (Interjections) Yes, that is what we decided.

Let me try to answer the questions and comments. Hon. Mwiru said that people are not being paid. This is something I cannot understand because the table is showing percentages of payments and all of them are quite high. They are in ‘90s, so saying people were not being paid is totally untrue.

He was wondering about Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Ministry of Finance has made changes in payment and all the money is retained at the Ministry of Finance. Yes, it is from Ministry of Transport but then we just make the necessary documentation and send everything to Finance. They are the ones who are handling the payment.

My colleague asked, “What are you verifying?” You know, these are public funds and you cannot just dish out money. You must be sure that this is the real person who is taking money. If we were not doing this, we would be making double payments, getting into litigation and these are issues we do not want to get involved in.

Someone said no legal documents for the road reserves were acquired. This is wrong. There is a procedure and process. When I come and compensate you, the next day you just do not get a document. Even if you are buying land yourself, you can pay and take even a year before you get the document because there are processes in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. What I can say is that we shall try to expedite the process of getting these documents.

Another honourable member asked, “Why does it take so long to know the people to compensate?” People change, people are moving, families are large. You go there and deal with this one. As money comes, everybody surfaces. We have to take care to ensure that we do not pay the wrong people.

My colleague, the shadow minister, I think was the one who said that we compensate where we should not even compensate. This is not true. We are very mindful and mean with our money. We get value for money and we cannot pay where we should not. People should know that these roads existed but as we upgrade them, we change the alignment because we are upgrading them from district roads to national roads. 

In national roads, the alignment or horizontal curves change because we designed them at a higher speed. If you go for higher speed, the curve must be gentle. They cannot be sharp otherwise, if you put a vehicle on a curve of the district road where vehicles move at 50 kilometres per hour and the national road is 100 kilometres per hour, you will definitely get off the road because the curves are too sharp. That is why we expand and change alignment. Whether the road was there, all these issues happen and we have to compensate.

The Arua people opened accounts and we have not paid them. We have to understand, hon. Members, that Government pays in the system of quarters. They give you this quarter and if it does not carry everybody then you have to wait for the next quarter. We are paying in quarters and as you know, we have been coming here for extra money and at times, the total release is not the same. What you plan is not what you get. We are operating a cash budget.

On Arua airport, yes, there are issues of compensation and we are handling this. I will go to Arua and try to sit with the people there because in my view and for those of you who have been to Arua, we may need to relocate that airport. It is in the middle of the city, so, it is time we thought whether we should leave it there or relocate it to a better place.

Mukono-Kyetume - the initial evaluation was done many years ago but we have a system where we revisit the evaluation figures. They expire and then we revise them. Right now, as I speak, many people are on that road in Kyetume for payment. May I add that those people are not disturbing you; this is part of your work. But you can send them to my office and I will handle them. That is why I am there.

DR BAYIGGA: Madam Speaker, I am appealing to the kindness of the Minister in charge of Transport. It is very difficult for people to continue to come to Kampala to search for the MP’s office and then they direct them to the ministry. So, I wanted him to be kind enough and set up structures to see how such people can be handled at lower levels. It is not difficult; just hire a firm to work on that and that firm will establish an office within a stretch so that people can be assisted. It is difficult and that is why I am bringing it to your attention, sir.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, after the valuation, we post these values and people are given time to look at them. If they have any queries, they come to us and we settle them; if we do not agree, we go into negotiation. But we cannot just keep people there. However, if they are a large number, you can gather them, so, I can send my team there to explain to them for easier interaction.

Hon. Kafuda said that in the ministry we are swindling money through this compensation – this Masaka-Mbarara-Kabale Road was there and now, they are getting more money. Ugandans are becoming more alert because if you take that road you are talking about, we did not maintain it where it was but we expanded it and hence – and if you remember, we were even taken to court; works were suspended by courts of law. We had to halt things and start moving together to ensure compensation was done.

Hon. Rusaniya talked about Nyakahita-Kazo-Ibanda Road taking away murram without paying. This should not have been the case because the contractor should pay and where they have scooped murram from, we go through the environmental impact assessment. They have to make good – but if there are peculiar cases, I am ready to handle them since the contractor is still here, we can ensure that they pay.

On Gweri Landing Site being compensated, we are buying land to compensate many landing sites. Most of these landing sites did not have facilities like toilets and shades. So, we are acquiring more land so that whoever is waiting for a ferry can have a shade somewhere and have tea and a place to ease themselves. 

You also talked about the famous Kagwara-Kaberamaido-Kamuli Ferry. I have explained this issue several times; this was initiated by the Prime Minister’s Office, we surveyed the lake to ascertain the route, we even designed the ship. But when we were ready to tender for the construction, we were told that there is no money. But we are still discussing; we may not need the big ship – maybe we will get a smaller ferry to ensure that our people get transport.

You also mentioned that during the construction and upgrading of roads, traffic is diverted onto the DUCA roads – district, urban and community access roads – and they get spoilt. When traffic is diverted, they are supposed to make good as they work; it is up to the local authorities to alert our supervisors and the contractors so that things are properly done.

On compensation of some roads, this is a matter of process because they will soon be paid, especially on the Nyakaita-Kazo-Ibanda. You can assure them that we are determined and the government is serious about paying them.

About giving conflicting information, I apologise for it. This is because at times our people want to please people by saying what they want to hear. But we are improving to ensure that things get better.

Regarding land for the ferry not being paid – that is Kayunga-Kasana as hon. Lugoloobi mentioned, you must remember that we have had a lot of problems with this ferry; some people said, “We do not want; you go there” until the President had to come there and decided where it should be. That is when people accepted it and then we had to delay the payment of our people. 

Another member mentioned that we take too long to pay everybody when we are constructing. This is simply because the requirements needed for compensation are bigger than the available funds. So, we have to do it – we try our level best as you can see that the percentages are high; things are going on very well.

On the Sietuko case, in fact I was reading about this case this morning in my office; it happened long time ago and I am going to send it to my technical people to see what can be done to this clan people so that they are paid.

On Nebbi-Pakwach Road, do not worry because the Ministry of Works and Transport is there and the NRM Government is there. Right now, we are about to sign a contract for the rehabilitation of Pakwach-Nebbi Road. Next month, you will see us on the ground. Let me take this opportunity to announce that – if things go as I want, next week on Friday I will be in Gulu – (Interjections) - just give me a minute. I will be in Gulu to inaugurate work to rehabilitate Gulu-Kiryadongo Road. So, we are moving systematically to ensure that our people are being helped. (Interjections) Yes, please?

THE SPEAKER: No, we have finished with that.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. That was the last question; thank you very much for the interest you have shown. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister and I invite the Members to keep that document carefully so that you can keep track of what is happening as regards the concerns of your constituents. Let us move to the next item. 

DECLARATION OF THE ACP PARLIAMENTARY ASSEMBLY ON RECENT PROPOSALS ADOPTED BY THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT WITH REGARD TO UGANDA AND NIGERIA

6.07
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I present this report, I would like to thank you, members of CEC and my party for designating me to serve as Commissioner in this Parliament. And I pledge to serve each of you equally, including the Independents. (Applause) 

This is the report of the delegation that was in France to attend the 35th session of the Assembly of the African-Caribbean-Pacific Group and the EU. The members of the delegation comprised: Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, Deputy Speaker as leader of the delegation; hon. Bihande, hon. Sanjay Tanna and hon. Rose Akol as members of the delegation. 

This is the declaration that we are supposed to communicate to our parliaments of the ACP; it is a declaration of the ACP Parliamentary Assembly on recent proposals adopted by the European Parliament with regard to Uganda and Nigeria:

The Parliamentary Assembly of the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of states, meeting at its 35th session in Strasbourg, France on 14th to 19th March 2014.

The declaration reads:  “Having regard to the European Parliament Resolution of 13 March 2014, on initiating consultations to suspend Uganda and Nigeria from the Cotonou Agreement in view of recent legislation further criminalising homosexuality in the two countries; 

Having regard to the resolution, on challenges to the democratic accommodation of ethnic, cultural and religious diversity in ACP/EU countries adopted by the ACP/EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly in Prague on 4th April, 2009 (ACP/EU/100.460/09/fin);

    a) WHEREAS as many as 76 countries in the world consider homosexuality a crime with five countries foreseeing the death penalty for such crimes” – Members, please, note that some of these countries are member states of the United States of America.
”
    b) CONSIDERING that one of the universal held cardinal principles of democracy is to accept deferring opinions on matters of principle and that democracy and human rights do not allow forceful imposition of unilateral points of view by one country over another sovereign country;
    c) WHEREAS the laws passed in Uganda and Nigeria were proposed by democratically elected parliaments and complied with all the necessary legislative procedures including consultations with a cross section of their population;
    d) CONSCIOUS of the need to respect the rule of law and the right of sovereign governments and their democratic institutions, notably their legislative institutions to reflect the will of their people; 
    e) WHEREAS a number of member states of the European Union, among which, Netherlands, Demark and Sweden as well as other countries such as the United States of America and Norway have decided to either withhold aid directed to the Uganda Government or redirect aid away from the Government to civil society;
    f) WHEREAS homosexuality is already punished with a 14 year prison sentence under section 145 of the Uganda Penal Code Act enacted by the British Colonial Government, with seven years’ imprisonment under section 214 of the Nigeria Criminal Code enacted by the same British Colonial Government; 
    g) WHEREAS the right of a society to determine its moral values and norms must be understood as a fundamental human right under principles of sovereign protection;
    h) RECALLING that ACP countries have consistently respected the rights of the EU and other countries to determine, defend and legislate for their own cultural values and norms, such as laws outlawing polygamy, which are on the contrary permissible in many ACP states; 
    i) WHEREAS recent developments have indicated that ACP countries have exercised their democratic rights to defend their cultural values and traditions, which form the bedrock of their social development and ethics; the European Union has exerted pressure on them to disregard the wishes of the majority of their people in the name of democracy and human rights as they perceive it;

    1. Regrets the deliberate application of double stands in addressing democracy and human rights issues as manifested in the reaction of the European Parliament in relation to the issue of sexual orientation and homosexuality in ACP countries. 
    2. Recalls that in ACP countries, these have not been issues of controversy among their own people who have co-existed with such differences on the basis of established social behaviour and acceptable standards of decency.
    3. Reaffirms its rejection of any attempt to pressure the ACP countries into accepting values contrary to the wishes and aspirations of their people and regard such attempt by the EU as running counter to the values of parliamentary democracy, which it espouses and having nothing to do with the Cotonou Partnership Agreement. 
    4. Regrets that some ACP countries are being punished for observing and upholding the generally accepted norms in their societies. 
    5. Urges the EU to accept that at this time, there is no common ground between itself and Uganda and Nigeria on the question of sexual orientation and homosexuality. 
    6. Calls upon the EU to respect the democratic processes of sovereign states and to refrain from taking action, which could undermine the basis of its development partnership with the ACP group including the attainment of the objectives of poverty eradication and sustainable development and to desist from tying sexual orientation and homosexuality to development aid and co-operation. 
    7. Instructs its President, that is the President of the ACP, to forward this declaration to the ACP/EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly; the Pan African Parliament, the European Commission, the EU Council, the European Parliament, ACP National Parliaments and Governments in particular to the Governments, Parliament and the presidents of Uganda and Nigeria and the African Union.”

Madam Speaker, this declaration was drafted by our leader of delegation, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, with colleagues of the ACP. When we presented this declaration to our colleagues in the ACP Parliament, we received overwhelming support from all the members of the ACP countries.  (Applause) 

We were requested to urgently present this declaration to our member Parliaments of the ACP and in particular, also, to our presidents of the countries of Uganda and Nigeria. 

So, Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a copy of this declaration of the ACP Parliamentary Assembly on recent proposals adopted by the European Parliament with regard to Uganda and Nigeria. I beg to lay. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, our delegates to the ACPEU group. Do we really need to debate; what the delegation said is our position. 

6.17
THE MINISTER FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr James Byandala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the delegation for formulating this resolution and I also thank our colleagues of ACP for supporting us. 

I stand here for only one point; I appeal to everybody that let us reduce on talking and commenting on this matter. We have passed our law and it is operational. This provocation by journalists who quote people and try to make the matters worse is unnecessary. We should just say, “The Act is there and I have no comment”. They are picking some loose-talk and they keep telling them that people are going to be killed, which is not the stand of the Government of Uganda and the majority of Ugandans. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.18
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, PWD): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to congratulate our delegation to this important forum. The resolutions they have made, we share with them and accept them as the position of Uganda. 
Madam Speaker, I appreciate this new paradigm shift that national parliaments are coming in to play a central role in ensuring that countries, particularly in Africa can play a significant role in deciding the destiny of Africa. 

Recently, Madam Speaker, H.E the President was addressing the Pan African Parliament in South Africa where upon he pointed out that African leaders had another option of how they can resolve problems in Libya. But a no-fly zone was declared by NATO that African heads of state cannot even get to Libya to resolve this conflict. What transpired, of course, was the killing of a head of state in Africa, which can happen not only to Gadhafi but even other heads of state.

This Homosexuality Act has not only been passed in Uganda. There are other countries that already passed this before we came on the scene. But the greatest question we ask ourselves is: Why haven’t the countries that are now taking punitive measures taken the same measures on the countries that passed that law earlier? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.20
MS BARUMBA RUSANIYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiruhura): Thank you. Madam Speaker, I would like to congratulate the delegation for making us proud. But most especially, I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for standing with Parliament in passing this law. Accordingly, let me also thank the President for assenting to the Bill.

When the President came to celebrate with the Pan African Parliament, there were many people including people from outside Africa. I must say that as Ugandans, we were very proud because everybody looked at him as a hero. But even that, I want to thank Ugandans – because really the future belongs to the fearless. As Ugandans, we are enjoying this peace because some fearless 27 men went to the bush and brought it to us.

So, in the same way, Madam Speaker, you took it upon yourself and with this Parliament – and I want to thank hon. David Bahati and you really passed this law. (Interruptions)

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. While we appreciate what the honourable member holding the Floor is saying, there is need to appreciate everybody who has contributed to what we are rejoicing over today. One of them is this House – because initially, the President revisited this Bill and wrote a very harsh letter to the Speaker. We must not also forget the fact that the Speaker of this House stood her ground to take us where we are now.

When you appreciate only the efforts of one person, you are giving credit where it is not due. We must appreciate the fact that the Speaker stood her ground. If she had not, the President would not have had an opportunity to do what he did. (Applause)

So, come on, is she in order to isolate the tail end actor and leave the people who started this whole fight?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the victory belongs to the people of Uganda. Please, conclude. 

MS RUSANIYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Maybe on this, I think the Hansard can bail me out because I first thanked you, Madam Speaker, for standing with this House before thanking the hon. David Bahati. I think everything is on record. Maybe my sister was not listening.

Anyway, I was saying that Uganda is lucky to have wonderful people to represent it. When this Bill was still on debate, at one time, hon. Mrs Cecilia Ogwal stood her ground on the Floor of the Pan African Parliament and defended our culture as Africans. I recall that she almost got beaten by some of our people, including those from South Africa. Anyway, I want us to congratulate ourselves because if we passed it and the President failed to assent to it, it would not make sense but being the listening President he is, we need to appreciate his effort.

On that day when he addressed the Pan African Parliament, everybody looked at Uganda as a hero on the African Scene. Thank you, Madam Speaker.
 
THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon.  Mwiru – but we do not need to debate this matter. All we need is to endorse the position of our colleagues.

MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I appreciate the work done by this resolution. When I saw my senior colleague – I wondered what type of – you should be strong. We are very proud of what we did. This is a sovereign state. And the so-called donors have sometimes shied away when it comes to other issues.

We are talking about the morals and values of the African people – (Interjections) – yes, they have done nothing. Remember how they kept quiet about the passing of the Public Order Management Bill, which infringes on the right of the – So, we need to sound a message to them that Uganda is a sovereign state; they should leave us to do the things the way we want to. I have heard of the blackmail about the aid – Madam Speaker, I had the opportunity of visiting Reyadh – there are Islamic countries that  are willing to give us money that does not attract any interests; the money only attracts maintenance fees. Government should get serious. These people send to us the so-called aid, but in the end, they take it away because they want to dictate on what we should be doing even in our homes. Some of us feel so insulted by these so-called donors when they tried to blackmail us on our rights and how we should be doing our work. I think they should give us a break. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.26
MS ALUM SANTA: (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity that I have been yearning for. This is because there is this saying that states that: “The fish usually starts to rot from the head.” If you had not stood your ground as the head of this institution, Madam Speaker, I believe that we would not have been where we are today.
I also would like to support the proposal of the European Parliamentary Group and to say that we started this thing and they have endorsed it and we are again endorsing it 100 percent.

Allow me to also thank the delegation for the unity they exhibited when they were out there. (Applause) This facilitates us, as institutions in this country, to speak one language to our people because we are not here for ourselves but for those people. We speak and see for them. All along we have been seeing that they were not in for this homosexuality.

Further, I would like to thank the committee. Finally, back to you, Madam Speaker, as a female Speaker, this issue of human rights was really very much against the unborn babies. We know that babies come through a union between a man and woman. So, I thank you for standing for that as the head of this institution.

Secondly, if we had allowed men or women to pair up by themselves, it would be a disservice to women who are, first of all by our statistics, fewer. So, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for standing in for the women to make sure we do a service for them as the people’s representatives. (Applause) Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that this House adopts the declaration without amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Declaration adopted)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, we shall do the other items tomorrow because the Minister of Health requested me to excuse him for today. So, items 8 to 12 will be handled on another day. But tomorrow, as we have said, we have energy. Hon. Members, House is adjourned to 2.00 O’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.30 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 26 March at 2.00 p.m.)

