


Tuesday, 31 March 2020

Parliament met at 2.39 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR


THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting and despite the lockdown, the Constitution imposed certain responsibilities and obligations on Parliament.

This sitting has, therefore, been convened to actualise the requirements of Article 155 and 156 of the Constitution where Parliament is expected, after the estimates of revenue and expenditure have been laid before Parliament, to examine amongst others achievements on the votes, procurement plans, recruitment plans and implementation of Parliamentary recommendations of the preceding year and make appropriate recommendations.

The process is expected to culminate in the eventual approval of the annual Budget and workplan for the next financial year, the Appropriations Bill as well as the other relevant Bills to implement the annual Budget. 

These are; the Excise Duty Amendment Bill, 2020, the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2020, VAT (Amendment) Bill, 2020, the Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2020, the Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2020, the Appropriations Act and Appropriations Bill.

Section 14 of the Public Finance Management Act requires that by the 31st May, all the above processes would have been completed so that the Budget is finally presented in early June, 2020.

Honourable members, you will also be aware that a curfew has been imposed taking effect today at 7.00 p.m. Therefore, our sitting should be such as to permit the Members and staff to leave early enough to be home not later than 5.00 p.m. We shall, therefore, be frugal in our activities for today.

However, it will be unfair of me if I did not express my indignation and that of other Ugandans about the conduct of the Local Defence Unit (LDU) forces in execution of the directives on the COVID-19. The unnecessary beating of citizens is a matter of grave concern. 

Indeed, one would like to know the command structure of these LDUs, whom can we contact to complain about their activities or if they perform well, who do we contact to complement them? We need answers on those issues before we continue with the lock down and its directives. We acknowledge the need for the lockdown but let us have order in the way things are done. 

Honourable members, there were some matters of national concern and only two have qualified because the issue of the impact on the business community was discussed last week. The issues of load-shedding can be asked in a question to the minister, floods can also be handled separately. I will only allow hon. Angura and hon. Waluswaka to raise matters.

2.44
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. The matter I am raising concerns the congestion that we are now experiencing in Malaba and Tororo districts. As a result of the temporal closure of the border, trucks that are destined to Kenya from Sudan, Congo and other places have filled up the whole of Tororo. 

The queue from the northern corridor is now over eight miles from Tororo. May be, as I speak now, they could have reached Mbale. Then from this other side coming to Kampala, the congestion is beyond Busitema. 

This has put a lot of pressure on the management of the coronavirus team in Tororo because all those who leave their trucks packed in that queue walk to Malaba to find out why the cars are not crossing.

The congestion is becoming another time bomb because we do not know where some of these people are coming from and this has posed a very serious threat.

Above all, we have many Ugandans and other nationals now coming from Kenya using all the porous border posts with intentions of crossing to Uganda to destinations that they may want to reach.

That is equally causing a very big problem and it is also unfortunate that the District Coronavirus Team has not received facilitation ever since they presented their budget.

We are in running battles with people across the porous border lines but I must say that my community is also vigilant and every day, they arrest many people who cross in through the porous points, invites security to take them for testing and finally, quarantining them but many times, security does not respond in time and people have threatened to lynch some of these people.

I request, as a matter of urgency, that the coronavirus team of Tororo be supported in order to help us mitigate the problem where importation of corona may come to the centre and cause us further mayhem.

There is also a sanitation and hygiene problem. These drivers are using polythene bags in their trucks and they throw them out by the roadside. This has also caused a lot of problems. We need to be supported to ensure that the border is either opened for trucks to flow and we get rid of the congestion or other measures to help us avoid a spark that will reach us here in the centre. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Leader of Government Business; this one is multifaceted. Can the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Planning say something about; first, the inability to cross and then the congestion.

2.48
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, we are aware of this problem and it has reached His Excellency, the President. Our colleagues on the other side are not allowing trucks to move.

At one time, they insisted that trucks being driven by Ugandan drivers should be handed over to Kenyan drivers. We said that it cannot make any sense. How can I give you my vehicle to drive? Supposing you crash it? And they abandoned it.

The other trick now is delay. When we are admitting vehicles from the other side, processing takes about five to 10 minutes but I am told that when we want to go on the other side, they take 20 to 30 minutes. That is how the traffic jam.

However, the President talked to his colleague and the information I received yesterday is that the situation should be eased. 

2.49
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA	(NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A video circulating on social media has shown the LCV chairperson of Bunyangabu District slapping the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) – (Interjections) Yes, of Bunyangabu.

Madam Speaker, I am raising this because –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter goes beyond Bunyangabu because it is part of the presidential directive to hand over the cars to the RDCs.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, the President directed that all Government cars be handed over to the District Health Officers (DHOs) and they command together with the RDC. However, it came to the notice of the general public and indeed, to the people of Butaleja that the LCV chairman of Bunyangabu did not only fail to hand over the car but went ahead to assault the RDC – (Interjections) Yes, assault. The chairperson is a man; the RDC is a woman. That makes it more complicated.

Therefore, my prayer is that Government should take immediate action, such that the RDC is arrested. (Interjections) Excuse me. Madam Speaker, we have seen police arrest someone simply for formality and in two minutes, that person is out without action taken. Therefore, I want punitive action taken against the LCV chairman, to be an example to the others to hand over Government cars and also follow the presidential directive. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I would like to rephrase his prayers. I think he should be asking the Government how they are going to implement the directives in the countryside, in view of what has happened.

2.52
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, what happened in Bunyangabu has been reported to us. Today morning, we were in what we call a war council. You know, this virus is a real war. Those of you who have not lived under wars – I am telling you – it is a real war. It is no different from the one we were shooting. You are hearing how people are dying and war kills people.

Disciplinary action has already been taken. From the latest information we have received, the LCV chairman has been arrested to go and answer why he beat that RDC. (Applause)

Secondly, you know, some enthusiastic security officers have been beating our people. I am sure you have seen it on television; LDUs and some police officers. We have also agreed that first of all, those who got involved in beating our people should also be arrested and punished. (Interjections) If Kasirye Gwanga, who happens to be my friend beats people, he has no right to do that. He has no right to beat people. You can teach or educate him. 

We have told the minister responsible that instead of beating people, please, educate them. Mark my words. The police have the right and duty to educate the wanainchi. If the wanainchi do not follow, then arrest them but do not beat them. There is a case. If you watched television a few days ago, there is a woman who was beaten on the spinal code and we pray to God that she does not become an invalid.

Therefore, we have taken very serious measures. I can tell you that we were together with the ministers in charge of security today about this issue. Please, if you see a case happening like that, report to the next police station and we shall take action. Thank you.

2.55
MR PETER MUGEMA (NRM, Iganga Municipality, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My issue is still on the issue of the powers bestowed on the RDCs. The RDCs are misusing these powers. The President yesterday talked about calling RDCs if one wants permission to go and give birth. You have to first walk to the RDC’s place and get permission from her.

There is a distance between where other people sleep and the RDC’s place. It is going to be very strange and difficult for a woman who is in labour to seek permission from the RDC or police at 8 p.m. when there is curfew. Mind you, the vehicle has to be stopped because I encountered that situation yesterday.

Yesterday, all my voters were calling my phone that they want my ambulance. My boys were fearing to go because they had to seek permission from the RDC. How are we going to handle this?

Secondly, let me get information from hon. Kaluya because we are from Iganga –(Interruption)

MR KALUYA: Thank you very much, colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the national order of precedence places the RDC somewhere much lower than the members of Parliament. When you look at all these different roles, the chain of command is supposed to follow in that order; that if the President comes, then the Vice President follows and so on.

We are now finding a conflicting situation - who implements the directive from the President and when does the command from the member of Parliament work higher than that one of the RDC? So, what is happening where we have the RDC of Bunyangabu being slapped is simply because may be the RDCs or we the members of Parliament do not know who is above the other when it comes to implementation of these directives? 

The directives are very clear but like the problem we have of the LDUs, where is the chain of command? Therefore, this is something that we need to put very clearly to the public, so that it can know who says what. We all go to the radios with the information from the President that is misinterpreted by some of us. That situation always arises and we need to address it. Thank you very much, colleague, for giving way.

MR MUGEMA: Thank you. Finally, Madam Speaker, on the issue of Umeme, majority of us are using Yaka. Most of these mobile money operators no longer come to their places of work. In the event that someone’s Yaka has got finished, you cannot refer to anything. These are villagers. Someone has to walk from Iganga to come to town to buy Yaka but the mobile money operators are not working. How are they going to survive because they will live in darkness? You can direct Umeme and see how we get a win-win situation.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Prime Minister was supposed to address the country on the implementation of the guidelines. He has not yet done so. I do not know. Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities – 

2.59
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Maj. (Rtd) Tom Butime): Madam Speaker, I will assist in explaining the responsibility of the RDC in the district. I am a former Minister of Local Government and a former RDC. A Resident District Commissioner is the official representative of the President in the district. Nobody supersedes him or her.

On national functions, the RDC is the chief guest or guest of honour. The RDC is the Chairman of the Security Committee of the district and in his meeting, there is a Chief Administrative Officer, the Internal Security Officer, the DPC and the area army commanding officer.

Madam speaker, the member of Parliament has got his role. That role does not clash with the role of the RDC. They are generally only parallel. If there is a function at the district and a member of Parliament arrives, the RDC remains the representative of the President and the chief guest at that function. Yes, the member of Parliament does not take over, not even the minister. I thank you, Madam Speaker.
3.02
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on very important national issues. In his directives, the President informed the country that the standard operation procedures will be implemented by the Prime Minister.

However, there is something that must be urgently done given that the responsibility was given to the Office of the Prime Minister. This is the issue of transporting the sick. This morning, as I was coming, I heard over the radio a very bad incident in Luuka where an expectant mother delivered by the roadside and indeed, in the process, she died. Nobody would offer to help her because of the directives.

I would like to suggest – we all agree that we need a lockdown. However, I would request that if the President comes out with directives, we must digest them and give advice to help us work as a team in as far as protecting fellow Ugandans is concerned.
Madam Speaker, -(Interruption)

MR SILWANY: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, while we are following the presidential directives, which are in good faith as far as stoppage of the spread of the disease in the country, -(interjectionsInterjections) – whatever - there are mistakes that are being made by the implementers. 

The information I would like to give is that I saw an LDU officer arresting a woman from a car because she was alone in the car instead of three as directed by the President. The LDU asked the womenwoman; “where Where are the other two people? You are alone in the car.” It happened in Kireka and I was in shock.

This means that people have wrongly perceived this message. We need to establish a committee to give clear information to the population so that people do not misuse powers. 
Looking at the case of the chairman LCV causing the fight that should not have happened - because he is the political head of the district. They should talk and agree with the RDC and not just grabbing a car from him. They should negotiate so we can move as a team in fighting the disease. Thank you.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving information – (Interruption)

MR KABAZIGURUKA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I had a very bad experience today. These directives are causing confusion. When I checked at Kiswa Health  
Centre today, there were no medics on duty, reason being that they were not able to transport themselves to their work station. So, there was total confusion. There were over 500 people who had come to pick ARVs. They were all gathered around each other and yet, this is what we are guarding against via the directives of the President.

Therefore, I would like to appeal to the Office of the Prime Minister and the other members of the taskforce to quickly look into the possibility of availing transport to the medics. The situation is terrible. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR SEBBAGGALA: Thank you very much, colleague for the information. In the interest of time, I will request that the Office of the Prime Minister coordinates this because when you talk of communicating –(interruption)

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that yesterday, we lost a mother. She had gone to deliver at Kikonda Health Centre. So, as mothers, emergencies can come in any time and can call for caesarean or any situation. She did not have the Shs 50,000 that the vehicle needed to transport her to Hoima Referral Hospital. We lost the mother.

It is very important, as a mother – There are women in the villages who are expectant and they may face emergencies. We need to address that.

Mr sebaggala: Madam Speaker, that is the situation all over the country. I am suggesting that as the Office of the Prime Minister tries to draw up Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), we should have boda bodas at parish level that are known, that are going to be used in this situation and that are registered to ease transportation. We cannot talk about vehicles that are very far. Boda bodas can ease the situation if they are registered. They must be fuelled by the Government so that Government can take responsibility.

Finally, this morning, I was called by students in India. Right now, India is in a total lockdown. We have many Ugandans in India who are crying. They have requested that as we did for the students in China, we should do the same for them so that – (Member timed out.) – Madam Speaker, let me finish this point.

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

Mr sebaggala: As I wind up, as we did for those in China, they have requested that we come in to assist them because they cannot move out and get anything; they are badly off.

With those few words, I request that since His Excellency, the President said he is going to give food to the public, they should use our numbers, which are known so that they can send money to all Ugandans because every Ugandan is suffering. 

They should send money directly to the contact numbers of all Ugandans and not only distribute food. Let them agree on a certain percentage that this money should be sent to all Ugandans who are suffering so that we reduce on the cost of transportation and also swindling. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I invite hon. Gonzaga, there are issues raised concerning access to health services, especially for maternal reasons.

First, there is a curfew. Even if a lady called the RDC in the night, she cannot move. How many have the RDC’s number? Can we make an arrangement where people can be rescued medically?

3.13
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, we have already addressed the question of health. All Government vehicles in the districts – (Interjections) – please, listen to me. Can I be protected, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, first listen.

MR KASAIJA: All Government vehicles in the districts have been ordered to report to the district medical officer, be they ambulances – (Interjections) – let me finish. Give me a chance, please. You can raise a point and we try to answer it.

The district medical officers are on call 24 hours – (Interjections) You will inform me later on. I am losing my train of thought. The only challenge I can see is that of a lady deep in the village who has no contact or telephone number. However, we have instructed the district medical officers to go on radio and give his or her telephone numbers. (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the minister to explain to us.

Mr kasaija: Honourable colleagues, I beg that we listen to each other. If we disagree, then, I will take the disagreement but I think that we should listen to each other. 

I am telling you what we have organised. It may not be sufficient –(Iinterjections) - then I will benefit from your contributions. You can say, Minister, I think this should be like this, but at least, we should listen to each other. I am telling you the situation in Government, as I know it.

The challenge, as one colleague has mentioned, is the question of fuel. I would like to assure you that tonight, money will have landed on the accounts of the Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs); the accounting officers, to provide for things like fuel, among others. 

My appeal to you is to send messages back home. The Government, through the RDCs, is going to make sure that our people know the telephone numbers of the medical officer – (Interjections) – Madam Speaker, I will seek wisdom from you on how we can go and improve the situation. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I thought that the motor vehicles, which have been commandeered, are to deal with the COVID-19 issue. Are they also supposed to run emergency medical services?

Mr Kasaija: Madam Speaker, these vehicles are to handle any emergency situation in the district. I was responding to the issue of our women who have died on the way in an attempt to access delivery services.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the Minister of Health.

3.18
The Minister of State FOR Health (Primary Health Care) (Ms Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start on a good note by appreciating you, Madam Speaker and the members of Parliament, for the effort so far made as we work towards preventing, controlling and  

mitigating this disease in our country.

It is true that there are many issues that we have not shared with our colleagues, the members of Parliament. I would like to start by saying that this morning, we had a tele-conference where we had all the district health officers (DHOs) at the headquarters.

Indeed, it is true that all the DHOs came on board this morning. I am glad to report to you, Madam Speaker, that a lot of issues were being discussed, including what we are raising now. 

To start with, one of the issues is transport for the health workers. My colleagues have put it rightly. This morning, it was not easy across the country, including Kampala City, where most of the facilities are. Many health workers could not come to work. However, others managed to do so. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that one of the key principles behind the measures that were put in place to prevent, control and mitigate this disease was that abruptness, just like yesterday because we do not want people to mix together. 

The issue of transport, where health workers were unable to go to work, has been handled. As I speak, they are working to give stickers to the private cars and they are also working to ensure that we have a vehicle gazetted for the health workers who do not have private cars. The Permanent Secretary has already sent that communication. This afternoon, a meeting chaired by the Prime Minister, has put a committee in place to ensure that the issue of transport for the health workers is handled before the end of the day. 

Secondly, transport for emergencies or healthcare services; Madam Speaker, as we handle this serious issue of COVID-19, we should remember that people have to receive medical care services. We discussed it this morning with the DHOs and we made that clear. 

Apart from vehicles being allocated for COVID-19, we had ambulances and vehicles for other health care services. For that purpose, the Resident District Commissioner is going to work hand-in-hand with the DHO. Tomorrow, again, we are going to have conferences to see that this issue of transport, especially for pregnant mothers – people who have no transport - is addressed as urgently as possible. 

There were issues raised about no prior information being given for these directives. Madam Speaker, I would like to say that from an epidemiological point of view and COVID-19, a new virus with no immunity, there are a lot of challenges in terms of mitigating the problem. The advice from the scientists, which the President based on, is that when you announce, you do not give a lot of time for people to mix together. 

I would like to say that these 14 days that have been given, Madam Speaker, are days that we, as leaders and the entire country, should utilise in order to follow up the people who have been in contact with the victims and treat them.  We have told the people of Uganda how we should utilise these 14 days effectively. It is given for a purpose with a principle. Otherwise, it is true and I expect, as you said, that the Prime Minister will give a comprehensive summary at an appropriate time. 

However, on the part of the Ministry of Health, we are trying everything possible – teleconferencing brings all the DHOs together. If you ask your DHO in the evening, he will tell you that every morning we have a teleconference.  I would like to pledge to you and to these members of Parliament that when we work together and put these measures in place, we will mitigate, prevent and control COVID-19 in our country. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I would like to propose, in respect to the women who might need the antenatal services, that suppose the Government were to register all those who believe are due in the next fortnight. The LCs can do that; even if they live somewhere, they can find them out and monitor them. 

MS MORIKU: Madam Speaker, I would like to pledge to you at this critical point in time that such suggestions are very welcome. I think it is quite wise to have our people on the grassroots register these mothers and then follow them up right from the villages so that we have a record of them, as you have suggested. We will take that up and do it together with the DHOs as we do the teleconferencing. 

3.25
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Madam Speaker and honourable members, first of all, I would like to thank the Speaker for sustaining this House, otherwise these issues would not come out. 

Madam Speaker, let us address ourselves to the Constitution of this country. The Prime Minister is the Leader of Government Business. Of all the ministers that have come up, none of them has expressed that they have had meetings with the Prime Minister. Secondly, when you follow the President’s address, he has regularly stated that the Prime Minister will give other areas of concern. 

Madam Speaker, you have heard hon. Matia Kasaija, who is very rare here, expressing a number of issues. Where you do not have the Prime Minister coming to the Floor of Parliament and giving credible reports about what is happening – recently, I saw hon. Amelia Kyambadde and I would like to thank her so much; she express her pity - these are all areas for the Prime Minister to address. 

These ministers are labouring in vain; either at media centres – he has over nine ministers under his docket, but the Prime Minister is very rare here. Right now, his seat is empty and the Deputy Prime Minister is also not around. People are being beaten and the Prime Minister, as the Leader of Government Business, must be at work at this time. 

I watched T.V yesterday when the President addressed the nation and I noticed that the Prime minister was not there; these are areas of weakness. There is no traffic jam; he has a lead car and he is not a Member of Parliament or an ex-offico; he is supposed to execute his duties as a Prime Minister. 

On the issue of the beatings and mothers giving birth along the road - I saw a former Minister, Victoria Ssekitoleko, expressing concern about people rearing their animals but how will they get food to feed their birds and sell eggs? However, the Prime Minister is in a Benz – we cannot move like this. 

Hon. Matia Kasaija, thank you for your performance but can you go back and sit with your Leader of Government Business? The Speaker is playing her role. These members of Parliament have no Speakers to help them move on the roads. They are going to beat them soon yet you too, are a Member of Parliament - and this is a man who is supposed to take care of us and give us information periodically. However, ever since the emergence of COVID-19, the Prime Minister is very rare. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I hope that the Prime Minister, if he does not come, sends at least one of his Deputies because he has two Deputies who are never here. 




3.28 
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Madam Speaker, thank you for the opportunity. I would like to thank the Members for the concern but yesterday, I found a very serious issue in the village. While the Ministry of Health struggles to get things in place, there is a problem of electricity in all hospitals. When I went to my district hospital in Kapchorwa, I found that they have power for only 10 minutes and it is off for five days. 

Therefore, as you look for fuel for the vehicles, one other area that we must handle is electricity. If we have emergencies to handle in hospital and there is no electricity - even for the RDC to charge her phone, then how are they going to handle the issues of emergencies? Therefore, electricity is a very serious matter. The Ministry of Energy should look into it especially in the villages. We are going to lose our people.

Madam Speaker, the other issue is water. In the hospitals, there is no water to wash hands. Electricity and water are key issues that we must also handle as we address the issues of health. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I Think let us call the ministers of Trade and that of Public Service, then I will get hon. Karungi, hon. Kibalya and hon. Gutomoi.

3.30
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, honourable ministers and colleagues, I would like to inform this august House that ever since this COVID-19 issue started, the Prime Minister has been chairing task force meetings. It is where I am coming from and the issue of the Local Defence Units (LDU) was high on the agenda.

I raised it and even yesterday, Gen. Muhozi, the Chief of Defence Forces (CDF) also pronounced himself very strongly on it. He committed that he is going to find out which LDUs are actually doing that.

Therefore, honourable members, if you have any specific incident, please give it to us so that they follow up on those specific LDUs who are doing that. I wish to submit.

3.32
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg your indulgence to listen to me. First, I must declare that I am a member of the national taskforce on this COVID-19.

This morning, from 11 o’clock up to about 2’oclock, the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister chaired a meeting of the national taskforce and indeed all the issues, which you have raised here, were discussed especially logistical issues and those to do with these unfortunate cases where mothers have lost their lives. 

Indeed, at the conclusion of the meeting, we set up functional committees which are going to work on all the issues you have raised, for instance the issues of emergencies, fuel and logistics for the RDC and district teams.

Yes, the RDC may seem very far away at the district level but we agreed that people of necessity do not have to seek the RDC. There are teams which have been established, including the LC I chairperson. Therefore, there are grassroots teams, which can actually move very quickly and relay the information that is required.

Somebody does not have to wait because the LC chairperson is there. He can provide the necessary information and room was granted for private vehicles, boda bodas in case of an emergency to transport a patient to the nearest health unit, which can handle that problem.

The members of Parliament of course are not out of this. First, as members of Parliament, it is their duty to advocate, to talk to the people and to teach their constituents about the dangers of this new attack that has come. 

They are also ex-officio members of the district taskforce teams so they work together. There is nobody who has been left out of this issue. It is a common tragedy that is attacking us, it is a war and all of us must be in this together.

Madam Speaker and Members, the Prime Minister has not just been seated. In fact, every day, he chairs meetings on this Coronavirus. We have been struggling very much with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to even raise the necessary resources so that our people do not suffer and do not face tragedy because of this.

Madam Speaker, I can say that I think at the end of the meeting that we had this morning, the situation is likely going to be better and some of these issues, I can say with certainty, are not going to recur. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. As I invite hon. Karungi, members of the Cabinet, I think you must understand our frustration on the lack of information. You have been meeting every day; you meet with yourselves, you advise yourselves and you go to your homes. For us, we do not know, the country does not know. That is what is missing. Now if we had not sat today, where would we get the information?

3.36
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for Health for what she has told us. We have seen you working so tirelessly; we really appreciate.

My issue of concern was about districts like mine - I know there could be other districts - which have the same challenges. In my district, we have only three vehicles – what you can call vehicles. Three vehicles for 17 sub-counties, moreover mountainous sub-counties; it is a great challenge, Madam Speaker.

I suggest, Madam Speaker, like one of us said, that we allow some public vehicles. We can identify them and give them some stickers or any kind of identity maybe at sub-county level to help us in transporting the sick and other emergencies. We should also identify some motorcycles because I have three sub-counties, which are mountainous, and a vehicle cannot get there.

Therefore, at least for such sub-counties, we need to identify some motorcycles that can stand in the gap. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.37
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We just wish to put this on record that we are set and ready to follow and abide by the regulations and the directives given by the Head of State.

Madam Speaker, our challenges come from few areas. We are the chairpersons of our health committees in our sub-counties, like me in Bugabula South; I am the chairperson of the health committee. Therefore, 

if there is something concerning health in my constituency, I need to be informed.

We appreciate ministers coming here to say that they are sitting and have agreed on this but we have left the information of COVID-19 to be managed by the media. They are the people that are informing the public instead of maybe one day saying, as the chairperson of the health committee in my constituency, I will invite my Executive and my doctor in the constituency, we agree on the modalities and we invite the RDC. The former RDC, whom the minister said is above – (Interjections) - to me, no, maybe in your district. The law says when I am not in my constituency, the RDC will be the chairperson – only when I am not there.  

Secondly, when I am there, the RDC becomes the guest of honour. No, the RDC cannot be the guest of honour where I am - no, may be you are talking about a different constituency and a different district. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, what I want to put clearly is that we want to work as a team. Ministers, the coordinating committee, the task force, the Office of the Prime Minister and everybody. Let us work as a team because other diseases are still there; the pressure is there, mothers are delivering everyday and all these other diseases are happening.

THE SPEAKER: Please, honourable members, we have not done work.

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, as we talk about this situation, we are putting emphasis on vehicles, motorcycles and fuel but we have not considered the people who are on the islands and who use boats. 

As I speak, I am sorry to bring bad news - you know our former sub county chief – Ssekiboobo passed on 20 minutes ago. He had just come to town to buy newspapers but as he walked about, he slid a bit. However, he could not even get any assistance because the entire town is dependent on four ambulances. Therefore, it is high time the ministry and Government considered – we have over 200,000 people residing on the lake shoreslakeshores but they have not been considered. 

That is the information, I wanted to give; the people on the islands should be considered as well as we deal with the COVID-19 pandemic.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, as I finalise, in my constituency, the first person they can only think to reach is me. It is my telephone number that they mostly call. So, if there is anything, let us also be part of the arrangement to better manage those areas. We are just begging for stickers to facilitate our movement on the road. 

Look at the embarrassment if Kibalya is arrested by these LDUs; before he even answers, they have beaten him up. We are just begging for stickers. We need to manage this. Let us know that we are in this together. There are other diseases and other challenges still; we need to manage them well for us to effectively do our best for this country. We should help the President and everybody, to manage this collectively.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I can see hon. Sarah Nakawunde squeezing in but Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; you are the most senior here. First, how do we handle the members of Parliament yet they are on duty but they are in danger of being arrested for driving private cars? Something must be done for the members of Parliament to move.

Secondly, what are the plans for the islands? Are you hiring boats? Do you have steam boats?

3.43
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Most of the activities concerning Coronavirus are being done in Kampala. However, there are some activities that need to be decentralised. I hope that what the minister has explained will be put into practice because those people do not have fuel and protective gear. 

On my way here, I met some police officers on the way and they said, “You, members of Parliament, have not helped us. We do not have protective gear.”

Madam Speaker, the health workers and police officers are at high risk of contracting the virus; they need to be helped.

His Excellency, when he was addressing the nation last evening, did not talk about rent. Most of the businesses have been suspended but at the end of the month, the landlords will ask for their money from the tenants. We need the President to say something about rent. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: As I invite hon. Gutomoi, honourable members, please, tell the police and the health workers that last Tuesday, there was a very passionate debate in this House on the welfare of policemen, policewomen and the health workers. It was moved by hon. Rwabushaija and we spoke very passionately about the need to support them. So, it is not true that we have not said anything on their issues.

3.45
MR GUTOMOI ABACACON (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I travelled from Lira this morning up to Parliament and the experience has been very interesting. Along the way, I stopped at almost 30 roadblocks. Some of the challenges related to these roadblocks have been mentioned here. 

Some of these officers who do not know us - when you explain yourself to him or them, they say, “You are a Member of Parliament, where is your car? This is not the car you are supposed to travel in.” I was using my private vehicle (TX) but it has been a serious challenge.

In Lira, I attended a task force meeting yesterday, in which we appreciate the Indian Community in Lira for donating some items - 1,000 pieces of hand clothes, about 500 pieces of facemasks, 15 litres of hand sanitiser and 75 pieces of bar soap of 800 grammes – to the people. These were received by the District Health Officer of Lira and witnessed by the RDC and GISO. Some business communities – 

THE SPEAKER: Are you reporting on that?

MR ABACACON: They have come out with a budget, Madam Speaker, which I wanted this House to study so that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Ministry of Health – because this is very important. We do not have any good place in case we get people who test positive for COVID-19. They have proposed isolation centres in my constituency, at an LCIII centre called Barafoi. This is a place, which needs renovation and they have come out with a bill of about Shs 215 million. 

So, what are we going to do about these cases because all districts have not done this but Lira has done?  

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask you to pass on that information to hon. Moriku? She is the Minister of State for Health and she is there.

MR ABACACON: Thank you. That is what I wanted to bring to the attention of the Minister of Health.

THE SPEAKER: Members, we now need to go to the Order Paper. I know things are very hot but – 

3.48
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This year, the Commission provided Members with this diary. On the third page of it, we have the national order of precedence of Uganda. The RDC is No. 33, the LCV is No. 34 and the members of Parliament are No. 17. 

Madam Speaker, you gave this to us for a reason. Today, when the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities said – I do not know whether he is setting a different order of precedence because I know there is only one order of precedence. Let us not be diverted. I beg that my OB withdraws that statement because it is very dangerous and is going to cause a lot of confusion here. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I have heard members of Parliament – (Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, apparently when you speak very loudly, the microphone goes off. (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: I am sorry. Madam Speaker, I have heard Members here asking for stickers. I have a different view. Members of Parliament, as we have read the order of precedence, your ID should be enough to enable you go through the checkpoint. (Interjections) We would possibly need stickers for the staff. 
This morning on my way to here, it was just the ID that let me through but if Members think that a sticker is more important than the ID then it can be provided. 

On the issue of the Prime Minister, Madam Speaker, you need to direct the Prime Minister to come to this Parliament because yesterday, the President directed him to make clarifications on a number of issues; the SOPs. 

Therefore, he should come here, present and we debate. He would be able to pick some ideas here. All these matters that we have been raising would not have come. If the Prime Minister does not come here, tomorrow we will have a worse situation because tonight, we are starting to have a curfew and that may create more problems. We still have about three hours. He should be able to come here and help us. 

Finally, the President gave a directive for Government cars to be pooled to help the health workers. Can’t these vehicles be delivered to specific hospitals to enable the staff use them? There are some medical personnel who do not have transport. Some of these vehicles can be commandeered to specific hospitals to enable the health workers to move. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I just want to clarify that the worry of the Members concerning vehicles is that the President said that there should be no private vehicles on the road and the Members do not drive Government cars; they drive private vehicles. That is why they want to know how they are going to move here and so on.

3.52
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The last time we were here, Members raised very many issues to do with the current situation. You gave these issues to us, as a committee on the taskforce, and we took these issues to the taskforce. They were discussed and solutions were reached. 

We expected the Prime Minister to brief the country. Since morning, some of us have been waiting for the Prime Minister to brief the country. It is true he has had meetings but that is not a good enough excuse for him not to address a press conference or even come here. 

We cannot lament, as Parliament, about the Prime Minister. I would like to request you, Madam Speaker, that you direct the Prime Minister to address the country today and not tomorrow. There is a lot of anxiety and people are waiting for answers. 

Finally, there is an impression being created that members of Parliament have to go and beg the RDCs for information and permission. They will tell you that the RDCs have answers. We cannot be referred to the RDCs. We want answers because the public wants answers and the answers must be given to us. 

We represent the people of Uganda. We do not expect to go and get answers from the RDCs. We expect ministers to give us answers so that we give these answers to the public. Therefore, we reject this business of being told to go to the RDCs or the district teams. Before the districts and the RDCs get answers, the members of Parliament must get answers. 

Therefore, we request the Prime Minister to address the country today on what is happening so that we do not get problems tonight. Thank you.

3.55
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the national taskforce for whatever they have been doing. 

To me, they focused so much on preventing the disease from coming to Uganda but they did not prepare the country and the district health staff to confront the disease. 

In my district, up to now, the district health teams do not have protective gear. There have been outcries from the public in all the districts; patients are not being attended to. However, health personnel have codes of conduct. They know what they are supposed to use to attend to patients but the ministry has not provided this. 

Secondly, I request the Prime Minister to go as quickly as possible and harmonise activities at the districts. What happened in Bunyangabo District will happen in every district. In Nwoya District, the RDC is working on her own, the Chairman LCV is working on his own, the CAO is also working on his own and politicians like us are on their own. Therefore, there is no harmonisation at the district, except Gulu District. They have exhibited a very different character because of the experience of Ebola. They are working as a team and the Chairman LCV is leading the fight.

I also request the Prime Minister to go as fast as possible and harmonise the activities of the taskforce so that we can see how to pitch in. Members of Parliament cannot fit into a disorganised system. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to request that whereas the President has stopped us from distributing food, some of us have got something small in our constituencies. I do not know how we are going to harmonise this. My district. I am speaking like this because we have-

THE SPEAKER: Order please.




3.59
MS SARAH BABIRYE (NRM, Youth Representative, 	Central Region):  Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to thank everybody who has spoken about COVID-19. My issue is a little bit different from what has been said here.

I request the Office of the Prime Minister to talk to their staff in this time of panic. They should be friendly enough and ready to move when there is need. Apart from the Coronavirus issue, there are other issues we have had as a country and they seem to be neglected; issues to do with disasters.

As we speak, in Lambu Island, in two days, we lost two children as a result of floods. We have been writing to the ministry and telling them what is happening but none of them visited that place for the last one month.

Whereas I appreciate that we have COVID-19, but there are also challenges that are taking the lives of the young and the old. I request the Office of the Prime Minister to talk to their people not to be arrogant. We know that they are overwhelmed but they should be friendly when there is a crisis. Thank you, so much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, for the issue of energy, the minister is here and she is going to answer.

4.00
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker and members for sacrificing time to come and work for the country. This issue is a serious one and from His Excellency’s speech yesterday on private vehicles and boda bodas; our leaders of Lira district have overwhelming calls. A mother delivered from the regional referral hospital, she has been discharged and she was supposed to go home but there was no way she could move.

These people believe in us as their leaders, they ask; “Honourable member, what do we do? I cannot carry my wife home because private vehicles are not allowed.”

I referred him to the Office of the Resident District Commissioner, who was nowhere to be seen. These are the challenges; how do we handle them as leaders?

We have the district task force but there is no protective gear even at the hospitals and health centres. There is no fuel and this is what we have to discuss, as Parliament, to help our people.

Thirdly, if as Parliament we do not pronounce ourselves on the issue of loans, most of the business community and the lower people do their businesses on loans and yet the banks are harassing them. Can we make a pronouncement as Government to tell them to halt it for a period of either two weeks, one or two months so that our people are not disturbed? Banks want to take their homes.

Coming from my home to Parliament, I was stopped in about four points. If only we had stickers, we would move freely as members of Parliament. I beg that we have the stickers and not identity cards. Thank you, so much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know that this subject is very exciting and everybody has things to say but we need to go back to the Order Paper. We shall do other things after we have taken the finance Bills.




4.03
MS CAROLINE KAMUSIIME (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukiga): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. We all know that we need water more than anything else in fighting coronavirus. Whereas they are talking about reducing prices and so on, there are some districts where we do not have water at all. For example, in Rukiga District, there is no water even in the health centres. I can give an example of Bucundura Health Centres II and III, which have no water.

I keep asking myself, how we are going to protect ourselves without water. I expected the Minister of Water and Environment to be here to tell us. This is so urgent, if anything, they should go for national water. 

Secondly, about mothers dying while giving birth, the minister talked about Government cars. In my district, we only have two cars -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, that issue has been raised already. 

MS KAMUSIIME: This is not about one district; we need to join hands and fight this virus.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, that issue has been raised by three other Members already.

MS KAMUSIIME: I support the colleague who said that at least if they can allow some few boda bodas and private cars because mothers are dying.

THE SPEAKER: That has been raised many times.

4.06
MR GORDON BAFAKI (NRM, Kazo County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I speak, so many consignments of cargo are coming into this country especially from China and apparently, it has not been stopped, the way the President directed.

Among the cargo are the masks. You very well know that China got this virus way back in December and apparently our traders do not visit the factories where they are getting this cargo and yet Ugandans are busy frequenting pharmacies picking all sorts of masks and gloves and putting them on. This is a time bomb.

We may not know whether this cargo is contaminated or not. Apparently, the National Medical Stores, which the Government uses to procure some of these gadgets, also gets them from China.

We need to know the safety of Ugandans because people, including members of Parliament and if you asked where they bought them, they will say they bought them from the pharmacy. Which country did it come from and nobody knows? You must either find a way of sanitising them or the Ministry of Health should tell us whether they were examined by the National Drug Authority.

Why do Ugandans wear masks yet you should wear a mask when you have been declared sick so as not to transmit to the rest? However, Ugandans are busy putting on masks and even causing themselves problems.

Madam Speaker, it is a big problem. Think about it. 



THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue raised by the Member about whether those items are approved to be in this country is serious. The minister will have to explain to us but let me ask the Chairperson of the Committee on Health to say something. We sent him on a mission with colleagues. It should be the last contribution and then we go back to the Order Paper.

4.09
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Michael Bukenya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You appointed a small technical committee to visit a few facilities and we have only had two days to visit the ones in Kampala and Wakiso.

While appreciating what Members are saying about their different districts, the situation in Kampala and Wakiso is no different, even in the main centres. We visited Mulago and Naguru hospitals. We also visited Entebbe Hospital and Uganda Virus Research Institute (UVRI). 

The challenges are the same as those people are facing in their districts. Whereas most central units have well setup teams to manage the cases and also to screen, when you go to Mulago, the screening teams are not there. On the day we went there, they came after we had arrived, after midday. In the hospital itself, there is no supply of personal protective equipment. There is even no additional budget for the facility. That is why on day one, there were challenges even with feeding only one patient. Secondly, it is actually the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) that was running the emergency services because I think they are used to war situations and were ready. When we proceeded to Naguru, it was a similar situation.

In Entebbe Hospital, they have a well organised team - credit goes to the Ministry of Health – and a well setup structure. However, they are not facilitated with resources and personal protective equipment.

At Uganda Virus Research Institute, they are doing tests and have a capacity to continue for a while, but this is all with donor support from World Health Organisation, Centers for Disease Control, and Medical Research Council (UK). They have given them facilities. 

Briefly, what Members are saying is genuine. That is what is also happening in Kampala. Therefore, we request the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Ministry of Health to fast-track a supplementary budget to facilitate these centres because apparently, the health workers are at risk. The day you get one health worker infected, it is going to be a bad scenario. (Applause) 

Personal protective equipment in public and private facilities and education of everyone is very vital. The Ministry of Health, local governments and security should be working together as a consolidated, multi-sectoral team, not everyone doing their own things because it is a bit challenging.

As we proceed to other areas outside Kampala, the situation is not much different. The situation in Wakiso is not much different from what is in Kanungu or Tororo. There are challenges in screening, case management and protecting the security team, UPDF, and health workers who are at the frontline. The conventional health workers in the different facilities are just improvising, including for feeding. In Entebbe, they last paid risk allowance on the 18th and they are not sure on how to progress. They are working with the local government to improvise on fuel and feeding the patients that are there in isolation. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, briefly, that is what we have done so far and I would request that the finance ministry and health ministry take it up.

About the teleconferencing, I got information this morning from my own sources that out of the 130 districts, only six District Health Officers (DHOs) could manage to teleconference. So, we have to improvise on better mechanisms of communication with all those people. We can simply use WhatsApp and tell them what to do on a central WhatsApp group, rather than going for technology which cannot access all the other districts. Out of 130 districts, it is only six; that is dismal!

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, that was a report from our committee which is overseeing the exercise in the health centres. Let us go back to Item No. 3.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

4.14
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I wish to move that the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2020 be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Do you have a certificate?

MR KASAIJA: I beg your pardon?

THE SPEAKER: Do you have a certificate of financial implications?

MR KASAIJA: Yes, Madam Speaker; I have the certificate.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is the Bill’s first reading.  

MR KASAIJA: Should I submit the certificate of financial implication?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back in 45 days.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

4.16
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I wish to move that the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2020 be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? 

(Motion Secondedseconded.)

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. Where is the certificate? Is that the same?

MR KASAIJA: It is the same certificate.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. It is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for expeditious perusal and report back.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE TAX PROCEDURES CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

4.16
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, although the third Bill is included here, we do not intend to move it because there was nothing that we were amending.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

4.17
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I would like to move that the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2020 be read the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? 

(Motion Secondedseconded.)

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE STAMP DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

4.18
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker and colleagues, I would like to move that the Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2020 be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? 

(Motion Secondedseconded.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, both have been seconded. They are sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back within 45 days.






BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2020

4.19
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I would like to move that the Bill entitled “the Appropriation Bill, 2020” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? 

(Motion Secondedseconded.)

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. The Bill is committed to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back within 45 days.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE ANNUAL BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

4.19
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the annual budget estimates for the financial year 2020/2021. They are accompanied by certificates of financial implications. 

Madam Speaker, I have a list of documents that I would like to lay on the Table together with the budget estimates. They are:

1. 	The certificate of compliance of the budget for financial year 2019/2020 with the National Development Plan. I beg to lay.  

2. 	I beg to lay on the Table the budgets for self-accounting departments, commissions and organisations set up under the Constitution and the opinion of Government on these budgets;

3. 	I also lay on the Table a statement of multi-year commitments of Government for financial years 2020/2021-2024/2025, section 13, part 10 (c);

4. 	I also wish to lay on the Table a statement of the budget by myself attesting to the liability and completeness of the budget, section 13, part 11 (c); 

5. 	I lay on the Table a list of accounting officers, which is in accordance with section 13, part 11;

6. 	I also beg to lay on the Table a certificate of gender and equity compliance of the budget for the financial year 2020/2021 as per section 13, part 11 (e)(i),(ii);

7. 	I also lay on the Table the performance of projects under section 23, part 4; and

8. 	I also want to on the Table a certificate of financial implications for the budget for financial year 2020/2021.


THE ALTERNATIVE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

4.25
MR FRED TURYAMUHWEZA (FDC, Rujumbura County, Runkungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to lay the alternative policy statement for the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives for the financial year 2020/2021. I beg to lay.

4.26
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the alternative policy statement on agriculture for the financial year 2020/2021. 

THE SPEAKER: Noted.

4.27
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the alternative policy statement for the Ministry of Local Government for the financial year 2020/2021. 

THE SPEAKER: Noted.

4.27
MR FRED TURYAMUHWEZA (FDC, Rujumbura County, Runkungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay the alternative policy statement for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the financial year 2020/2021. 

THE SPEAKER: Noted.

4.28
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay the alternative policy statement for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for the financial year 2020/2021. I beg to lay.

4.28
Mr roland mugume (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to lay on the Table the alternative ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Health for the financial year 2020/2021. I beg to lay.

4.29
Mr mathias mpuuga (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table the alternative ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Education and Sports for the financial year 2020/2021. I beg to lay.

4.29
Mr Jonathan Odur (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the alternative ministerial policy statement for the shadow Ministry of Public Service and the Presidency for the financial year 2020/2021. I beg to lay.



4.30
Mr Charles Abacacon (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to lay on the Table the alternative ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for the financial year 2020/2021. Thank you.

4.30
Mr William nzoghu (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I, the Shadow Minister for Works and Transport, wish to lay on the Table the alternative ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Works and Transport for the financial year 2020/2021. I beg to lay.

4.31
Mr William nzoghu (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the alternative ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development for the financial year 2020/2021. I beg to lay.

4.32
Mr Charles Abacacon (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to lay on the Table the alternative ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities for the financial year 2020/2021. Thank you.

4.32
Mr DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the alternative ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Water and Environment for the financial year 2020/2021. I beg to lay.

4.33
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the alternative ministerial policy statement for the sector of energy and mineral development for the financial year 2020/2021. I beg to lay.

4.33
Ms lucy akello (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table the alternative ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Science, Innovation and Communication Technology for the financial year 2020/2021. I beg to lay.

4.34
Mr gershom sizomu (FDC, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table the alternative ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Rehabilitation, Relief and Disaster Management for the financial year 2020/2021. I beg to lay.

4.35
Mr benard atiku (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the alternative ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs sector for the financial year 2020/2021. I beg to lay.

4.35
Mr benard atiku (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Once again, I beg to lay on the Table the alternative ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Defence, Security and Veteran Affairs for the financial year 2020/2021. I beg to lay.


4.35
Mr muhammad kivumbi (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the alternative ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Internal Affairs for the financial year 2020/2021. I beg to lay.

4.36
Ms joy atim (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the alternative ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of East African Community Affairs and Regional Development for the financial year 2020/2021. I beg to lay.

Ms Betty Aol: Madam Speaker, I wish to say that we also worked on Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA), human rights and Information and Communication Technology (ICT), which were not put on the list. I wonder if we can also lay the alternative ministerial policy statements for those sectors on the Table.

The Speaker: If they are available, lay them.

4.37
Ms santa alum (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the alternative ministerial policy statement for Kampala Capital City Authority for the financial year 2020/2021. I beg to lay.

4.37
Ms betty bamukwatsa (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the alternative ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology and National Guidance for the financial year 2020/2021. I beg to lay. 

4.38
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the alternative policy statement for human rights for the financial year 2020/2021. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Leader of the Opposition for completing their obligations to lay on the Table the budget and the alternative policy statements. 

Honourable members, the Parliamentary Commission sat and we thought that in order to protect our parliamentary community, we would not conduct the normal process of inviting all the MDAs here with several members of staff and also staff of Parliament. We thought the budget should go directly to the Budget Committee instead of arranging for these sittings. If members of the committees have comments, they should send them directly through their chairpersons to the Budget Committee so that the process takes approximately two weeks. 

We are not sure how long the lockdown is going to last. It may take longer than we think; so we thought we should get the budget out of the way so that if we are going to go on recess, we will have done the most important constitutional obligation of this House. However, for that, we shall have to suspend some of the rules. I would like to propose that maybe one of the chairpersons or the Chairperson of the Budget Committee could move a motion tomorrow so that we formally suspend some of those procedures and condense the process so that we only spend a fortnight on the budget process. 


4.40 
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that guidance. We all understand the circumstances under which we are operating as a country, and therefore, Parliament is not an exception. 

Madam Speaker, I am here seeking for your indulgence on a matter that has been on the Order Paper since the Ninth Parliament – 

THE SPEAKER: Can we finish the issues? 

MR ATIKU: Madam Speaker, it is in relation to the budget process. This is in regard to the regional cities. They have been on the Order Paper and were presented by the former minister

Madam Speaker, both ministers are here – 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members. Please, listen. 

MR ATIKU: Madam Speaker, the matter I am raising is part of the budget process and therefore I was begging that since we have quorum, we could as well – because this is a matter which was already debated. If you put the question today, we would pass these motions so that the process of handling this budget goes concurrently with us being able to have these regional cities passed. 

If we do not do it now, I do not see any other moment when we shall do it. We should do it now so that the budget process is in consonance or accommodates these regional cities, Madam Speaker. I beg your indulgence. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we are alive to the situation. It was our intention to have these cities handled in January but we were not able to do so for many reasons. If you are available tomorrow – 

4.43
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Bugweri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and dear colleagues. It is true we are going through a budget process. However, I think we do not have to undertake a ritual. 

I have had the opportunity to look at the policy statements in the sector which our Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs oversees. None of them is reflective of the current situation. Can anybody stand up here and say that all the policy statements that have been laid reflect what is going on in the country? Even the alternative policy statements being laid now – none reflects the current situation. Any process that does not take into account the crisis the country is facing is purely an exercise in futility. 

I will give you this, colleagues; the anticipated revenue which we thought we would raise the next financial year, 2020/2021, has certainly taken a nosedive. Hon. Matia Kasaija is fond of making the sound “swiiii.” Colleagues, I sympathise with people talking about cities because they are not a priority today. (Applause) I want my Jinja City. Who doesn’t want a city? However, is it a priority today? 

Madam Speaker, as we process the budget, including us, and I agree with you, we can suspend some of the rules. The Budget Committee should take into consideration the realities of today. Hon. Matia Kasaija, my counsel would be you should now direct all these MDAs to look at their priorities again and we have realistic policy statements. The priorities that were given in those policy statements have been overtaken by events. 

I do not know whether hon. Lugoloobi is here but he is the Chairperson of the Budget Committee – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wanted us to agree first; would it be fine for us to move a motion that we suspend some of the rules? That is what we would have preferred. 

MR KATUNTU: I agree that we may suspend some of the rules but the committee being charged with this responsibility should be guided that the country is currently facing a crisis. There are no revenues even to talk about; how can we start making these demands, which do not make sense, in my view? I submit, Madam Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: I hope that the minister will be able to say something about that - reflecting the realities of today in the budget. However, can the Chairperson of the Committee on Trade and Industry move a motion tomorrow for the suspension of some of the rules. Prepare a formal motion for tomorrow. 

CERTIFICATE OF GENDER AND EQUITY COMPLIANCE FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021 IN RESPECT OF ADDITIONAL 48 VOTES


4.49
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I wish to lay on the Table the Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance for the Financial Year 2020/2021 in respect of an additional 48 votes. I beg to lay.

ADDENDUM 2 TO SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE 2 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

4.49
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker and colleagues, I wish to lay on the Table addendum No. 2 to supplementary schedule No. 2 for financial year 2019/2020. I wish to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back.

STATUTORY INSTRUMENT ON THE PREVENTIVE MEASURES AGAINST CORONA VIRUS (COVID-19)

THE SPEAKER: Is that yours? That is for the Attorney-General. However, if you are able to - I do not know-  

4.50
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker and colleagues, I would like to seek permission of this House; because of what is going on in the country, we are obliged to look for money to see how to fight the enemy. Consequently, I would like to move that I lay on the Table a supplementary budget for Shs 284 billion under vote 130, Treasury Operations, for financial year 2019/2020 to cater for mitigating the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Maybe with your permission, Madam Speaker, let me just give a few details. The health sector is asking for Shs 62 billion, which is not the full amount. The security people are asking for Shs 81 billion - (Interjections) – The local - 

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members!

MR KASAIJA: The Ministry of Local Government, to deal with what we have been discussing this afternoon, needs Shs 36 billion. The disaster management support for the vulnerable, including Kampala, have budgeted for Shs 59 billion. The ministry for ICT wants Shs 14 billion. Kampala City Council Authority (KCCA) alone, to handle the situation, they have estimated - (Interjections) - Do not worry, colleagues, you will debate and approve. My job is to do what colleagues have asked me to do, but you have got your constitutional right to accept, reject or delete as we have done before. Kampala City Council Authority is asking for Shs 30 billion. I get to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have been discussing the need to support the campaign but it is important that a committee looks at this before we finally bring it back to the House. Therefore, before the Budget Committee embarks on the other work, let them look at this one urgently and give us a report so that we can take a decision on how to move.

However, having said that, I hope that in the end, it will reflect support to the whole country because the way it is written, a lot of effort is being placed in this city but not in the rest of the country. So, please examine it and give us a report.

MR KEFFA KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, about a week ago the minister presented a paper on the economic impact of the coronavirus. In response to that paper, a number of challenges were highlighted and some of them have even since been aggravated. The situation is more serious now than when we discussed about a week ago.

What had been agreed is that the minister would come back to us with a paper on how the Government is proposing to respond to a number of challenges that are coming up. There are issues of loans, private businesses, how people will be surviving. Now, all these are being mentioned and I am a bit worried that we are somehow responding in an ad hoc manner to the different challenges that are coming up.

What I would have expected, Madam Speaker, is that the honourable minister would have presented that statement, allowed the Members to debate it, and it would have informed his response and probably the supplementary budget that he is presenting today. My worry now is that he has presented a supplementary budget without our input and first having that discussion and hearing from Members. 

The only opportunity we will have to debate this - Okay, partly it is in the Budget Committee but the other opportunity would be a little bit late when the committee finally brings back the report to the plenary. Madam Speaker, when are we having that statement as you had ordered?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know when the minister will bring it but we had also set up our own committee to give us a position on the economic impact on the population.

MR ELIJAH OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You gave us an assignment and we are ready with the report to be presented even if you said today. Madam Speaker-

THE SPEAKER: Can you circulate it?

MR OKUPA: We can circulate to the Clerk to put on the iPad then tomorrow, we can present it. I had brought it to the attention of the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, this afternoon. We said we are ready. So, when are you bringing yours? It would be better to present them together for harmonisation. They told me he is ready to have it also tomorrow. If he can confirm that then tomorrow, that would be the first thing. 

I would like to agree with the vice-chair on the issues raised, they are very pertinent. We should have had that before we go into that. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: So, the action on this will abide the debate of tomorrow. Honourable members, that means you may have to stay here this week.
4.58
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, I would like to first of all, thank you, for the patience and to thank hon. Keefa, for what he has raised. 

However, Vote 130 is basically the vote that is used for repayment of our debts. Multinationals, that is IFM and World Bank, have for a time being suspended repayment of loans and interests in light of the Coronavirus pandemic. That means all our payments, until they lift the ban, are supposed to be used in the fight against the Coronavirus. I had hoped that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, would have said that we now have got a window and have resources, which we are supposed to pay but that we are going to redirect them towards the fight against the virus.

Unfortunately, the minister is coming to present a supplementary, which seems to indicate that some people are planning to take advantage to cheat the people of Uganda. From what hon. Keefa said, if you want to take it to the Committee of Budget, which we have over loaded, wouldn’t it be procedurally right, Madam Speaker, that the Minister of Finance, Planning, Economic Development comes here tomorrow to give us details on what he is proposing so that members can have a feel and discuss it? 
This would also help us to look at the implications of the taxes because he laid tax Bills here - so that we know all these taxes. 

I have just made a perusal - they look like they are demanding more taxes yet businesses have gone down, the livelihood of people is now in disarray, people are not well and many countries are now allowing their citizens not to do this and we are doing these incentives – our minister is saying he needs a supplementary while not declaring to us sources. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right, Madam Speaker, that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, from what I saw, he said he wants to get from the Contingency Fund. However, we have said that we will send it to the committee. That committee will make a report to us to guide our debate on this matter.

5.01
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I remember very well that it was a Tuesday, and the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Matia Kasaija, was supposed to come the following Thursday of that week to give us what he sought are the interventions his ministry is going to make. There is no way you will discuss a supplementary without looking at the interventions, which Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development intends to take. My well-considered view is: let us look at the interventions that hon. Matia Kasaija intends to take. It will be from there that we shall look at the resources he needs to make those interventions.

We cannot discuss – (Interruption)  

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, hon. Katuntu, for yielding the Floor. It is important that we debate the impact of COVID-19 on our economy but also, it is important to note that there are urgent things that we must do to fight the spread of this virus. For example, the Minister of Health who was here - the materials that they have in stock, the gloves and so on, of course are not enough for the whole country. Even the little they have is going to get exhausted within one and a half weeks. So, we must balance. Yes, we have to look at its impact on the economy but at the same time, we need money to do things now, not later. For example, we need fuel. That is the information I am giving you.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, for the information, hon. Bahati. First of all, I don’t see any contradictions. What you are saying is that you need the money. What we are saying is what do you need this money for, and what do you intend to do? From there, you can say this particular amount, we need it now. This one we might need it in the mid or in the near future. That is what we are asking of you. 

So, Madam Speaker, may I, therefore, request – (Interruption) 

MR KASAIJA: Thank you very much, hon. Katuntu, for allowing me to give this piece of information. The sectors that presented this budget to the Prime Minister’s Committee, which is coordinating the fight against this disease, must give detailed indications where they want to spend the money before we disburse it. If you allow me tomorrow - and I hope they will have finished - I will come and tell you this is going to be spent like this and this before you take decision on that ground.

Secondly, I would like to apologise to this House. When I commit a sin, I admit it. I agreed when I made the other statement to you on what the impact of this virus is having on the economy and I said that I would come back on Thursday, I could not come back on that Thursday because we had to agree, as a Government, which way to go. You remember I said I will have to go to Cabinet first to get Cabinet approval on the steps that Government needs to take in order to eliminate the damage that this virus is doing to our economy. It is that process that delayed me because there are also other very important issues including the war against this virus; that is why I was not able to come back on Thursday. 

Tomorrow, I will be ready because the paper is ready. I will come and submit it if I am allowed to do so.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you particularly. In circumstances like these, sometimes people who are not very well-mannered take advantage. The only chance this country has is to have the Parliament sitting every day to oversee what is going on. That is the only chance we have. 

I would therefore suggest - and I agree with hon. Matia Kasaija - that one, he first comes back tomorrow, Madam Speaker, if it may please you, and he briefs us on what he had promised. After we have debated and contributed ideas, as a country, we can then look at the supplementary budget. It would be neater. Let us do first things first. We know there is a crisis but let us not rush in a very untidy manner. I so pray, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. Honourable members, I think we have agreed that the minister will come back tomorrow and give us the right information and our committee will also take time to scrutinise and then give us a report. We shall try to do all that work during the course of this week. 

Honourable members, I had allowed the chairperson of trade to come and move a motion tomorrow but I have been assisted by hon. Veronica Bichetero who is ready to move the motion now for the suspension of those rules to assist us in shortening the time for the consideration of the Budget. (Interjections) Why don’t you want to listen to her make her presentation?



5.08
MS VERONICA BICHETERO (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. 

I would like to move a motion so that we do not have to wait for tomorrow to move one. Considering the emergency situation that we find ourselves in because of the coronavirus, I move, under rule Rule 16 that rule Rule 147(2), rule Rule 148(2) and rule Rule 148(4) be suspended to enable the expeditious processing of the Budget. 

Madam Speaker, we need to circumvent the provisions of our rules so that the Budget Committee considers the Budget directly and avoid the sectoral committee processes. 

Madam Speaker, under rules 7 and 8 of our Rules of Procedure, you have the authority, by virtue of these rules, to suspend. I beg to move the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, is the motion seconded? Seconded by several members.

5.12
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know we are all alive to the fact that we need to expeditiously process the budget for the next financial year, whose implementation begins in July henceforth.

However, I also know that this country has critical sectors that we all know. I would like to propose that even if we want to suspend the rules, there are some critical sectors like health, which need additional scrutiny, when we are processing the policy statements, most especially now that they have not even catered for the current situation that is going on.

There is also the defence sector, which we cannot just let go because I believe, having been a member of the Budget Committee, that it can get overwhelmed.

I beg that we allow a few critical sectors like health, defence, education and agriculture to process their individual sectoral budgets and then come and report to the Budget Committee so that they do it concurrently and in the end, they submit to the Budget Committee so that we do not miss out certain things. Otherwise, we shall end up operating outside the law and also messing up the already volatile situation. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had said that all committees will access the policy statements and that you are free to make your comments on all of them and send them to your Chair.

The reason was that we did not want you to assemble the agencies here. We do not want the agencies to come here in big numbers. Once you have done your work electronically, you could have just one meeting of very few people.

We are not saying that they are not going to be scrutinised. We are saying, do not bring all those people here; the minister coming with 30 people, the Prime Minister coming with 150 people. That is what we are trying to avoid. You will certainly scrutinise, make your comments electronically and then you can meet once, if it is very necessary. We do not want 100 people coming here to meet with the committee.





5.54
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rule 148(3) of our Rules of Procedure says, “The Budget Committee shall present its report to the House not later than the 15th day of May of each financial year”.

That means if we took into consideration that between 1st of April up to 15th of May – that is 45 days in which sectoral committees would be working. Madam Speaker, we would like to plead for your indulgence. These committees of Parliament; the sectoral committees play a big role. The Budget Committee consists of 30 members and these members cannot know each sector in detail.

Madam Speaker, since you do not want cars here – which we all agree with – we would allow the sectoral committees to look at these ministerial statements and the Budget in detail. We can give them a deadline on which to submit to the Budget Committee. Because they have understood the sector very well, they will make better comments than the Budget Committee. (Applause)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, my brother. When you look at the process of the Budget, which was put in the Public Finance Management Act, it was as a result of the experience of budgeting that we go through. For instance, a budget of any country is the projection of income and expenditure. If tax measures were brought to be discussed today – as we talk now the economic base where we earn money is eroded. When you bring a policy of a tax measure where you are going to make a projection of figures to pass a budget you need time because you need to collect data.

The Ministry of Finance knows that from the last quarter you have lost Shs 1.5 trillion not collected. You are suspending the rules today to make a projection of a tax policy where you are going to get income to support your budget. What data do you have now to base that we process and suspend the rules that you go through the budget process? I would agree with hon. Mafabi that let us look at the sectors, which are critical and then go with figures with the correct data.

Otherwise, if we pass a budget which is not practical you will not achieve what you want. Let us leave the Public Finance Management Act as it is then we go through it, it will make your achievement.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether you have understood that we are not operating in normal conditions. You are proposing that we remain here until the end of May; 400 people to gather here every day until May?

MR AGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am wondering if it is procedurally right that we must move to suspend the rules in order to implement the proposal you are making? 

We are not short-circuiting the procedure of preparing the budget but we are adjusting on the way we do it largely because of the circumstances we find ourselves in.

Two, if I heard you well in a way, we are complying with some of the directives that are limiting the number of meetings of people.

Our Rules of Procedure under rule No.8 empower you to give the guidance that you would like us to follow during the meetings to prepare the budget without suspending any rules.

Rule No.8, the procedure in case not provided for and precedents. This empowers you to guide given the current setting of the coronavirus epidemic we can follow through, because it has not been there before but now that it is here you can guide without necessarily going through suspension of the rules-(Interruption)

MR MULINDWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Disruptive situations call for disruptive measures. When the going gets tough the tough gets going. In the situation that we are in now, under rules No.8 and looking at our bill of rights right from Article 20 to Article 45, when you analyse them very well, life first.

In these tough situations we have to take the extraordinary measures to address the situation. If the budget cycle under normal situations as my colleagues are proposing is supposed to be followed that way, we are only left with two options:

    i)   To either suspend the budget cycle. 
    ii) Or take the disruptive measures. 
I would like to propose that we carry the disruptive measures to address the current situation. Thank you.

MR AGABA: Madam Speaker, the coronavirus crisis is not an epidemic in Uganda but a pandemic and the whole world is going through the same circumstances.

This rule would empower you to give the guidelines you are giving in the way in which the committees shall sit, process the budget and then have it presented so that it can be passed. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I issued these guidelines last Tuesday. I have renewed them today. We are not operating in normal circumstances. We cannot afford to be here every week.

We must stay here as short as possible but I thought that we should complete our constitutional obligations to work on the budget.

That is the position, we shall work on the budget within two weeks; you have now got the policy statements. We gave you ipads please study them, make your comments. You can have one meeting of each sector before you hand over to the budget committee. Thank you.

5.25
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. With your guidance, hon. Katuntu addressed a very pertinent issue but personally I would have no problems even to suspend the rules to deal with the budget but the question still remains, which budget?
I would have expected that as we talk now Government would be freezing the fourth quarter release so that when we talk about Government spending any money, it is in respect of addressing the crisis as is. Even the budget we are talking about-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, that will be what you will tell the minister tomorrow when he comes with his proposals. Tell him that you are proposing to suspend a, b, c, d it is premature.

MR MWIRU: That should apply even to the budget.

THE SPEAKER: Can the committees look at it and advise us. Thank you so much. That is our position we shall work as quickly as possible to ensure that we complete the budget process.

I had hoped that we only sit for today but we have unfinished business so the House will reconvene tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. I have seen the Prime Minister here; tomorrow we want you to address this House and the country on COVID-19. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Please go home by 6.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.25 p.m. and adjourned till 
Wednesday, 1 April at 2.00 p.m.)



 









