Wednesday, 25 March 2015

Parliament met at 2.08 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS 

 The Oaths were administered to:
 Dr Philemon Mateke

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Dr Philemon Mateke, this is not a new place for you; you have been here before. The rules remain the same with some slight modifications, but the purpose of this House remains the same. It is the highest legal forum for the people of the Republic of Uganda. Policies, laws and budgets cannot work until we approve them. You are an old hand in these matters. 

I welcome you back to Parliament and give you the Constitution, which you have just sworn by to uphold to help you in your operations, and our Rules of Procedure, which are a bit different from the ones you used in the past, which I request you to go through so that you know exactly what we are doing here at this moment. 

You are very welcome again, enjoy your stay here and help us to serve the people of Uganda.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, today is Prime Minister’s Question Time. We will not have much communication. I welcome you to this sitting. Let us proceed with business - two minutes.

2.15
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Whenever there is a new person in this House, it is now our culture to welcome them. Hon. Dr Mateke is not a new person in this House. You were here before and you have collected a wealth of experience. It is always said that when you have grey hair, it is wisdom. Our prayer is that, that should really be the case because in this House, sometimes we get very disappointed and frustrated. 

As a father to very many of us here, we know that your coming here can be a blessing if you allow it to be. In our hearts, we usually have two things, which speak to us whether we like or not. These are: one, is the good one and the other is the bad one. My prayer is that hon. Dr Mateke will always try to guide the young ones. This House is meant to be for a mix of people. But this mix will need also the people of his calibre to really help them with this wealth of experience. 

You are most welcome. I know you are here with your daughter and all of us are now your daughters. You are most welcome and we are very happy about you here and also the sector you have been appointed to - development. We need a lot of development in Uganda. The system is not working in Uganda whether we like it or not. If systems were working -(Member timed out.) 

2.17
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, I would like to take this precious time to welcome hon. Dr Philemon Mateke, who is a team player and team builder as I believe. He has special qualities that the appointing authority found in him. He has a very rich experience in the management of public affairs and the people of Kisoro, where he comes from and where he is a district chairperson of NRM. We were very happy when His Excellency the President appointed him Minister of State for Regional Co-operation.

We believe that this is value-addition not only to this House, but also in Cabinet since the Cabinet has averagely a young generation. A young generation cannot perform without the rich experience of the kind of Dr Philemon Mateke. 

I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us hear from the Cabinet.

2.19
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to, in a special way, welcome our distinguished senior colleague, hon. Dr Philemon Mateke. Hon. Mateke has been in this House for a long time. One of his remarkable contributions apart from the many things he has done for this country and Kisoro District, in particular, was that before this House got the Parliamentary Commission in the Sixth Parliament, the Members of Parliament elected hon. Mateke to be the Chairman of the Welfare Committee of Members of Parliament.

I recall very well he did commendable negotiations for the terms and conditions of service for Members of Parliament then. I attribute the birth and the contribution the Parliamentary Commission has made to his initial work, which he laid as Chairman of the Welfare Committee.

He is welcome back to the House. I know that his experience in Cabinet, in Parliament and in the region places him at the centre of harmonising the relationship, trade and co-operation that exist in the Great Lakes Region and beyond. 

I take this opportunity to congratulate him on behalf of Government and of the National Resistance Movement. We have a lot of hope that he will make a commendable contribution in adding value to this House and to Cabinet.

I would like to inform the honourable Woman MP for Gulu that hon. Mateke left Cabinet when systems were functional and systems are more functional than they were. Therefore, he is coming to continue from where he stopped. (Applause)

Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, tomorrow there will be an Easter Carols Service in the Parliamentary Conference Hall starting at 5.00.p.m. That is immediately after Plenary tomorrow. The notice is given by Rev. Canon Christine Shimanya, Chaplain Parliamentary Anglican Chaplaincy.

Also, tomorrow at 10.00 O’clock, the Appointments Committee will be sitting, as I announced yesterday. Members of the Appointments Committee who have not yet received notice, it is hereby given. We will be meeting in the South Committee Room to handle the vetting process for the Attorney-General, the Deputy Attorney-General and for the Minister of State for Higher Education, Science and Technology. Take note and let us finish this business quickly.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE SPORTS POLICY FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITY

2.22
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION, SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Mr Speaker, allow me also to welcome hon. Philemon Mateke. In Teso, they say “age is wisdom”. He has come with a wealth of wisdom to make a fundamental input in Cabinet. I congratulate him.

On the issue of the item, which is on the agenda, Mr Speaker, allow me to inform members of Parliament that as of now, we do not have a policy on sports, specifically for people with disabilities. The policy that we have is a general policy on sports. However, Government realised the need to have a specific policy on sports for people with disabilities and we are discussing with Ministry of Finance. We are in advanced stages of formulating it and when we are ready, we shall come and present that policy to this House. 

Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not yet 3.00 O’clock; so, we go to the next item. 

2.24
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Representative, Central): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. However, if you remember and if we go by experience, a statement of this nature would have to be on record and it would have to be written. I tried to look at my iPad, I have not seen this document.

Mr Speaker, if you remember the resolutions we talked about, I am afraid the honourable minister has not given us a comprehensive picture of the matter that we raised about this topic. I do not know if it is necessary for me to remind her of the content of this resolution or I do not know if you would like to give the minister more time to go and prepare adequately. The issues we raised were a bit comprehensive and required a more detailed explanation but it looks that as of now, the minister is not prepared.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable minister said that she is not coming back with a statement but a policy for the approval of Parliament because as of now, there is no policy. There is only a general policy on education but no specific policy on sports for people with disabilities. 

They are in consultation and that matter, when completed, will be brought to the House. Therefore, we do not expect the statement again before that. We would like to see the policy. The only thing the minister has not told us is the timeframe within which she expects to come back with this policy. Honourable minister, can you give us a guide on when this matter could happen?

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Mr Speaker, if we are given six months, we shall be ready with the policy. However, we shall also invite Members of Parliament with disability to come and make their input. It has budget implications and far-reaching effects in as far as re-aligning the other policy in order to sieve out matters of people with disabilities alone. 

Therefore, six months, Mr Speaker, is sufficient enough.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF 
THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND (NSSF)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you recall that we exhaustively debated this matter yesterday. When we reached decision time, we were unable to take the decision because the recommendations were not easily traceable. However, they have now been grouped. You also recall we were supposed to exclude matters relating to three items: recruitment of top management, dismissal and nepotism in general recruitment of staff. 

Those matters, we agreed upon, were in court and it was my ruling that the matter would be sub judice. Therefore, we will now process the recommendations and take decisions on them. Members had said they had amendments. Maybe where there are amendments, I will be proposing them. I call upon the Clerk to go to the recommendations as they are presented.

Recommendations from the executive summary

Recommendation No. 1

The committee recommends that a disciplinary action should be taken against implicated officials.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that okay, members? I put a question to that recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Recommendation Two

The committee recommends that CMA be held responsible for facilitating Umeme Limited to violate its concessional obligation, a situation that puts the interest of Uganda at risk.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that recommendation. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
Recommendation Three

The committee recommends that the responsibility of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should stop at appointing the regulatory bodies and leave other players to play their part as good and corporate governance dictates.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, it was agreed, as a colleague suggested, that it was quite fake if we take the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to be held responsible in light of the fact that there was no particular minister referred to. 

Secondly, we have already had change of guard; we have a new Minister of Finance. We suggested that the person who was by then the Minister of Finance should be the one held responsible rather than leaving it open that -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. This is a separate recommendation. This is on “Responsibility of the Minister of Finance should stop at appointing the regulatory bodies and leave other players to play their part.”

I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Recommendation Four

The committee recommends that Government should explore the possibility of having the stock market as a public company in order to enhance transparency and separate the rights and responsibilities of traders and owners of the market, which are currently fused.

I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation Five	

The committee further recommends that the requirement of consulting the minister on or during investment decision-making should be abolished. The board and the management of the pension fund or system should take full responsibility. Instead, the minister should engage in policy build, regulation and audit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That is the point where we actually want the minister who was by then responsible, named rather than leaving it general. Which minister are we holding responsible?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Nobody is being held responsible here. “The committee further recommends that the requirement of consulting the minister on or during investment decision...” Maybe we should identify that and deal with it to put the Member of Kitgum at rest. (Laughter) 

I put the question to this recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Chapter Two

Recommendation One

The committee recommends that the Minister of Finance and the Attorney-General should urgently institute reforms to enable quick and efficient investment of social security funds in the equity market.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that recommendation. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation Two

The committee recommends that Mr Ivan Kyayonka be forced to vacate the board of the NSSF due to his irregular action in pushing NSSF to purchase Umeme IPO shares without the approval of the Solicitor-General.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to-

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, my colleague, hon. Niwagaba argued before this House that agreements involving acquisition of shares do not require approval by the Solicitor-General. This recommendation seeks that someone be held responsible for not seeking for that approval. Therefore, I wonder how you can reprimand someone for doing something that is not against the law.

I would like to propose that this recommendation be dropped.

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Niwagaba was right, referring to the URBRA Act. However, in this particular incident, the Solicitor-General was required to give advice for NSSF to engage in a transaction above $ 50,000. Court has so far pronounced itself on that issue in the case of Nsimbe v. NSSF.

Secondly, it involved scrutinising the government concessional agreement with Umeme. It required scrutinising the supply and distribution license between Umeme limited and Electricity Regulatory Authority, which was limiting the company to float shares beyond.

Further, the Solicitor-General noted - because at that time, Parliament was still debating the status quo of the company during the report of the Ad hoc Committee on Energy to investigate the electricity sector. That is why the Solicitor- General was clear that perhaps they went ahead to transact business even before seeking his advice and by the time they sought his advice, they were already in advanced stages in purchasing their shares. Therefore, he noted with concern, that seeking advice from the Solicitor-General is not a mere formality.

Mr Speaker, that letter of the Solicitor-General was laid on Table. Regarding that, today, it is causing an issue subject to debate of Parliament. It has caused - because of non-consultation and reference to the advice of the solicitor-General, the status quo today of the license of the company, which floated the shares in which NSSF bought the shares and that was part of the term of reference that the committee was given to examine.
Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, are you rising on this specific issue? Okay, I will have hon. Ibi first.

MS EKWAU IBI: Mr Speaker, looking at what we saw in the report, specifically page 15, I think this was self-evident. I applaud this House and urge that we pass this recommendation as it stands. We cannot absolve Mr Ivan Kyayonka who apologised for the anomaly, in the meeting, the minutes were been captured. He appeared and accepted that he erred. Therefore, there is no way this House can absolve someone of such an error.

Since it was a requirement that the Solicitor-General had to give a hand, this was a prerequisite. We do not need to argue over this. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I urge the House to pass recommendation.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, I do not differ from hon. Ibi as far as the chairman of the Board of NSSF is concerned. I am very sure that Mr Ivan Kyayonka can read English. I do not assume he got an F9 in English. If the regulation says that this man was meant to consult the Solicitor-General and he went to purchase Umeme shares using the money of people who have been contributing to NSSF - whether he is our relative or not; whether he comes from where we come from; whether he has helped some of us to come here in some way -(Laughter)- I think it is time for us to decide, Mr Speaker, with honesty and we say, “Let Kyayonka go.” 

On several occasions, when we have matters of law and there is no Attorney-General, Mr Speaker, I am seeking your permission to request hon. Adolf Mwesige who is one of the best lawyers that we have in this Parliament to help us. Is this man safe to go away after giving out all this money of NSSF without consulting the Solicitor-General? Then, what is the function of the Solicitor-General? 

Mr Speaker, kindly, allow me to request hon. Mwesige to stand up and tell this House, as a very wonderful lawyer, what the law says so that we can take a stand. (Laughter) I thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Rubanda, what was the specific law?
 
MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Niwagaba quoted the URBRA Act, section 91. The clarification I would want from the committee is on one issue, whether acquisition of shares of such a nature requires approval by the Solicitor-General or not. Then, we move forward.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a specific issue and a big distinction. There is the scrutinising agreement but there is also the issue of acquisition of shares. Can you guide the House on that, Madam Chairperson? 

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. There has not been any specific difference on any investment that NSSF is due to invest in; whether  today or tomorrow that is being exempted by any law today from seeking the approval and advice of the Solicitor-General. 

The guidelines are the same for equity, capital investment, and any other investment that NSSF has invested in unless Parliament is to enact that law tomorrow. 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. According to section 30 of the NSSF Act, “All monies in the fund including the reserve account...” - which are not,  for the time being, required to be applied -  ”…for the purpose of the fund shall be invested in such investment as may be determined by the board in consultations with the minister.” 

Yesterday, I read Article 119 (5) of the Constitution. Buying shares is something floated on market and it is competitive. It cannot be that when I am competing with some other person and I want to invest money, I have to go and seek approval of the Solicitor-General when the Act empowers me to invest the money. 

Therefore, we have to define and know if the board decided and knew that the shares floated on the market, they needed to be invested money. The only problem would be if there was a loss of money when shares were bought; but they did not lose any money. I do not see why the chairman of the board is held responsible. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Nankabirwa. There are two things here. We are talking about investments and a member was trying to confuse investments and the buying of the shares. In the process of doing this, the agreements had to be entered into.

I participated in the earlier investigations of NSSF investments - Temangalo and Nsimbe. In all those types of investments, the Solicitor-General’s advice was sought.

On this specific case, for colleagues who were arguing that there was need, then why did the chairman afterwards try to ask for the Solicitor-General’s advice after the matter had come up?  That shows you that there was need to have clearance from the Solicitor-General. That is why they opted to do it after the matter came up because there were some board members who disagreed with him.

Therefore, we should not waste time here. Just put the question, Mr Speaker, and we move to the next recommendation. Thank you. 

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, this recommendation where it is a requirement that we seek approval is a creation of the law. Where there is a contract, Article 119 of the Constitution applies. If they were supposed to buy shares, they issued a certificate meaning that is the contractual obligation.

Article 119 (5) of the Constitution says, “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution no agreement, contract, treaty, convention or document by whatever name called, to which the government is a party or in respect of which the government has an interest, shall be concluded without legal advice from the Attorney-General, except in such cases and subject to such conditions as Parliament may by law prescribe.”  This is to ensure that you do not commit Government in a situation that will bring a problem. 

Therefore, I would think since it was a requirement that there be authorisation or approval, the recommendation should stand and hon. Ivan Kyayonka vacates. We should only be mindful that his contract is also ending. Maybe, we should put it in writing that it should not be renewed. 

I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is unfortunate the honourable member who made this submission is not here today. I heard that what he said yesterday was that in matters that relate to acquisition of shares, another law is superior and there is no requirement for the Solicitor-General to do anything about it. There is a law and he quoted a section.  That is where the honourable member for Rubanda is coming from in his debate. 

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, the URBRA Act is very clear in section 30 on issues of investment, where URBRA monitors and approves investment of all the pension funds but it does not mention any investment to do with equity. It deals with it in its entity as any investment dealt with by any pension fund, not only NSSF. 

In this regard, allow me to read this letter written by the Minister of Finance, which is very clear on this, “The role of the Solicitor-General-“

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the letters will not help us. We want the law. People have made mistakes in letters and they cannot guide us very well. We need the actual provision of the law.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, I read the report of the IGG, who I think is conversant -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you mean the law? 

MR KAKOOZA: Yes, that is what I am saying. This is his opinion on the shares bought from Umeme. She said, “NSSF shall not buy more than 30 per cent of any single IPO except where NSSF is the underwriter and in such cases the underwriting limits apply.” In her investigation she said, “If there was no loss and it did not go beyond 30 per cent-“

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the issue is not about loss. We are asking -

MR KAKOOZA: Section 30 empowers the board to take a decision to invest in shares allotted in Capital Market Authority.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me stand over this recommendation. I will look at the law myself and then we will see. (Mr Omach rose_) do you have the law there? Let me look at it. Please, read.

MR OMACH: Section 95 of the Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority Act, 2011 reads as follows: “Supremacy of this Act: This Act takes precedence over all existing Acts relating to establishment, operation, management and regulation of retirement benefits schemes and where there is a conflict between this Act and any other written law, other than the Constitution, this Act shall prevail.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, then, what does it say in relation to this?

MR OMACHI: Section 91: ”Regulations, the minister shall in consultation with the board by statutory instrument make regulations generally, for giving effect to the provision of this Act.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, there was a submission yesterday that, that law was specific on issues of acquisition of shares.

MR OMACHI: That is section 91(1) and (3) and 95 (3) states: “Any written law, which conflicts with this Act, shall be amended to bring it in conformity with the Act.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let me defer Two and we go to the rest. Let me look at it. 

Recommendation Three 

In light of the above, the committee recommended that Mr Ivan Kyayonka and Mrs Geraldine Ssali should be reprimanded for their dubious and irregular actions in the acquisition of shares.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They are related. So, is this whole chapter two related? Okay, let us go to – hon. Mwesige, can you go through this and advise, please? 

I need to know where it specifically states that in the area of acquisition of shares, the board will take the decision, and no requirement of the Solicitor-General’s opinion is overridden by this law. That is what was submitted on the Floor yesterday. Let us go to chapter three.

Chapter Three

The Committee recommends that the Managing Director, Mr Richard Byarugaba, and the Chairperson NSSF Board, Mr Ivan Kyayonka, be compelled to make good the loss of funds incurred of Shs 56,170,001 that resulted from the sale of Namirembe land.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we were debating this matter yesterday, I asked that I will be moving an amendment on this recommendation. First of all, when you are computing loss or gain on disposal -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Propose the amendment and then you justify.

MR MUSASIZI: My amendment is, instead of having this recommendation, we would rather have the recommendation that management, when acquiring or disposing off assets, should as much as possible ascertain the fair value of this property.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is general but this is specific to a transaction.

MR MUSASIZI: Yes, on the lost money, this recommendation should be dropped because the basis upon which it is justified is false. My justification is that when you are determining the value of a property, it should be based on the book value. This figure is not derived from the book value of this asset at the point of acquisition.

MR LWANGA: Thank you for allowing the information. When they came up with value, they included the cost of the transaction, which is never part of the value of the asset. That is just an expense that is incurred in the transfer fees and all that. It was all included and when it is taken out, there was no loss made. 

MR MISASIZI: Hon. Lwanga has put it very clearly. This Shs 56 million is the cost of transferring this property from lease hold to freehold; it was not part of the acquisition cost of this property and therefore it cannot form part of the loss.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that the position? Chairperson - 

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, everybody knows what it means to deal with land in Uganda, how land appreciates and the prime plot we are talking about is on Namirembe Road.

A plot bought at a value of Shs 715 million and then disposed of after one year at Shs 650 million and book keepers are telling me that there was no loss! Actually, our issue of transfers and the concern of the committee, was the under valuing. 

There were two issues: it is either that at the time of purchase of land, there was an over exaggeration of the purchase price; that is one and that is why we had required, Mr Jamwa, the former MD to come, but he could not due to court issues.

Number two, the intention to the Government Valuer. They presented titles, which were leasehold well knowing that the land was freehold. The prices differ.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way.  I am a member of the committee that made the report. Yesterday, I listened carefully to this matter of the land transaction and what was raised was that we needed to go deeper to investigate. The mistake that was done was at the acquisition stage where the land was of a less value but given a higher value.

That is where I saw some sense because one could easily see that the value of that land does not commensurate with what was actually given. The anomaly started right from the point of acquisition. I understood the point when I got back.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was it higher or lower?

MR RUHUNDA: They inflated the purchase price, so it was higher and when it came to selling, it was difficult getting the buyer. That is why the person who had failed the NSSF to have access had to give the price and that is how they got the clearance. When I got that, it is when I understood the problem.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, then, what would be the status of this recommendation as it stands now?

MR RUHUNDA: I would say that we drop the recommendation because it would be unfair. Mr Speaker, you realise that when we are dealing with something where Government has an interest and we are acquiring property, we use Government Chief Valuer to determine the value.

But in this case, at the acquisition, the Government Valuer was not employed. When they failed to employ the services of the Chief Government Valuer, the price that was used in acquiring it may not have been the real price. However, the price that they used in disposing it of was the actual price. That is why I would like to concur with the committee members that this thing be dropped because at acquisition, it was not used –(Interruption)
MR LUBOGO: Mr Speaker, the honourable member holding the Floor has just said that he is a member of the committee, which made this report. We are all aware that NSSF is a government organization. If it is acquiring land, the Government Valuer must be involved. So, if the Government Valuer put a value and the members who we gave the responsibility to carry out an investigation and report to the House, are now asking the same House to drop the recommendations -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, I think what we need to establish is: was the acquisition done by the same people? It is because there are names here. If the fault was made at the acquisition point and the people who made the acquisition are different from the people being mentioned, then that is where the issue is. But if they are the same people, it is okay and the recommendation can stand. Otherwise, if the actual loss was caused by the over inflation made at the time of buying – I need the committee’s chair guidance on this, please. Chair of the committee, is this the situation?

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The committee reached this particular position after it examined all the issues. The board members appeared before the committee as witnesses. Other witnesses such as the estates officer -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let me just put the question straight to you. Was there valuation at purchase?

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: There was valuation at purchase. NSSF has got a committee –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, was there a valuer’s report in regard to the value of the property?

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: There was valuation at purchase of the property by, I would say, NSSF. We examined all documents - valuation at purchase of the property and valuation at disposal of the property. First of all, I would like to correct the situation. These are institutions not individuals. And institutions have records. Whereas we did not cross-examine Mr Chandi Jamwa, the then Managing Director, there are officers that testified before the committee. They included the estates manager and other officers of NSSF. 

The issue that came to the committee was that there was advice from within NSSF; from the procurement officer, about the value when they were disposing of. He was complaining to the board about the under valuation of the asset at the time of disposal. The board members also appeared before the committee in which they said that they declined –(Interruption)

MS EKWAU: I am giving you very valid information. The accounting officer you are talking about is Mr Patrick Omong Okema. He is the one who requested the contracts committee to negotiate the price and the price that was arrived at was Shs 814 million. However, the contracts committee rejected the request for two reasons: First, that the recommendation of an award at the sale price had already been communicated to the bidder and that is the reason we lost funds.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, Can we pose at this stage since there are still other outstanding issues on this particular matter? Let us first deal with the Prime Minister’s Question Time. We shall come back and finish this later.

PRIME MINISTER’S TIME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had members that were outstanding on my list. But I do not see any of them here. 

3.04
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Women Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister is: The UPE Policy has made pupils to continue performing poorly especially in regard to the issue of automatic promotion. Teachers are saying it is that policy that makes pupils to perform poorly though we continue to blame teachers. 

Therefore, when is Government reviewing the UPE Policy relating to automatic promotion which has led children into reluctance to perform simply because they know they are supposed to be automatically promoted?

3.05
THE PRIME MINISTER/ LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, UPE has had quite a number of challenges and this is one of them. On the whole, the principle of promoting children is correct. If a child has weaknesses in certain areas, that child should be assisted to improve instead of being held at a stationary position. Nevertheless, Government has continuously reviewed the performance of UPE with the view to improving it and Government will continue to do this. And if there is need, perhaps it will be considered. Otherwise, for the moment, we are sticking on helping children to progress with their peers instead of being left stationary in one position and developing psychological and other negative effects.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.06
MS ROSE IRIAMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sometime back, the government directed the Karimojong to keep their animals under protected kraals but those animals went out of the hands of the UPDF. I would like our Karimajong animals -(Interjections)– which animals? Don’t you know the animals; I mean the cows. (Laughter) It is not the wild animals but our domestic cows. The animals went out of the hands of the UPDF and the Government promised to compensate. What happened because it is a long time now; since 2009 to date?

3.07
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, it is true that Ndugu Dr Chrispus Kiyonga, the Minister of Defence, who specifically supervises this sector, is bringing in timely information to the Prime Minister. I salute him for that. As you know we always work as team and I am the team leader.  It is quite in order that we have been making a lot of progress because we have been working as a team. I would like to advise the others to emulate that example. 

So, it is true that this matter has been followed up. The UPDF has been involved in this and the responsible Ministry of Defence is pursuing the process and at an appropriate time, they will give a statement on the matter to this House.

3.08
MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the Prime Minister whether he is aware that the planting season has started and if so, why Government has not distributed seeds to our farmers to start planting?

3.09
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I am fully aware that the planting season has started; I have already planted my maize. Secondly, the distribution of seeds and inputs has already started. There are some areas where this may have not been realised, but if they have not reached those areas, then efforts are being made to make sure all the parts of the country are covered, including Dokolo.

3.10
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like the Prime Minister to shade light on the information that has come to our understanding that Government is in the process of selling off the place where Ministry of Internal Affairs is located to an investor. 

3.11
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I do not have any information to that effect. So, I take it as a mere rumour. However, now that hon. Elijah Okupa has raised it, we will crosscheck to ensure that there is nothing like that.

3.12
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryadongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The only greater road - the Kigumba-Masindi-Hoima-Kyenjojo Road - within the Bunyoro Region has for so many years not been worked on. The people of Bunyoro have sent me to ask whether Government is still committed to constructing this road or not and if so, when will construction start? Thank you.

3.13
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, there are many roads, which have been constructed and there are many which are being constructed in Bunyoro Region, some upgraded to tarmac standards.

The road that my sister is talking about is one of those to be upgraded to tarmac standards and connected to the rest of Uganda. It is in plan.

3.14
MR JULIUS	MAGANDA (Independent, Samia-Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Between August and September of 2014, three primary schools – Lunyo, Bukalikha and Budimo - were affected by very strong winds. Letters were written to the district and one was sent to the Office of the PM for support to the schools, which lost their roofs.

However, to date, there has not been any communication on the reconstruction of these schools. The people of Samia are asking, when will these schools receive the support to construct the classrooms so that affected pupils can have a safe place to study in?

3.15
THE PRIME MINISTER/ LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I am sorry that our children in Samia-Bugwe South have had that problem. Nevertheless, Government has resources to ensure that urgent issues of that nature, requiring attention, are addressed. I will find out why there has been a delay in addressing this matter so that it can be addressed.

3.16
MR ROBERT	KAFEERO (Independent, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is Government policy that each sub county must have health centre III; and that each county must have health centre IV. However, some counties like Nakifuma where I come from do not have health centre IVs and for your information, the entire Mukono District has no Government hospital. We used to have Kawolo Hospital, but it was taken to Buikwe District.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The question?

MR KAFEERO: What is the Government’s plan in ensuring that we get health centre IVs in our counties?

3.17
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, my brother. The issue of Nakifuma touches all of us. The President, only a few months ago, chaired a meeting on improving health facilities in that area, including building a hospital there.

Nevertheless, the policy is simple; we are aware that there are some sub counties without health centre IIIs and some counties without health centre IVs. But as resources become available, we are reducing this number and Nakifuma will not be left out in this equation.

3.18
MR AHMED AWONGO (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to know from the Prime Minister whether he is aware of the increased prices of goods like cement and other building materials, and that this has been as a result of restrictions imposed by UNRA not allowing vehicles that carry more than 300 tons? This has already caused a big problem in Koboko Town where the price for a bag of cement has risen from Shs 31,000 to Shs 35,000? And this is not happening only in Koboko - I have done research in a number of-

THE DEPUTY SEPAKER: The question?

MR AWONGO: Is it true that UNRA has put restrictions on weighbridges not to allow vehicles to carry many loads. Is that true?

3.19
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, hon. Awongo is raising a very serious point. The country is investing heavily in infrastructural development especially the upgrading of roads. These roads are being destroyed by overloaded vehicles. Yes, it is true that the responsible Government departments like UNRA and URA have been given strict instructions to ensure that overloaded vehicles are arrested in a bid to protect our roads.

3.20
MR STEPHEN EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister is: Fifty five districts received bicycles for LCs I, but Bukedea District and others did not receive any. When are you giving us bicycles since we are going into the election period? Thank you.

3.21
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, this is a fairly frequent and legitimate question. We have supplied these bicycles in about 52 or so districts. The plan of Government is that, as soon as resources are available, we will ensure that the remaining districts also get these bicycles. The common question about how soon will depend on how soon resources are available. (Laughter) 

3.22
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The question I would like to pose to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister - I don’t know whether he is aware that there are a number of existing SACCOs in the villages including Bukomansimbi District? Many people have been attacked by thugs targeting this money being collected by SACCOs. Do we have any plans of establishing a farmers’ bank so that these people can use it to keep their monies?

3.23
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, the issue of SACCOs was encouraged because these were relatively small monies and peasants would be helped to keep such money in places nearer to their homes instead of banks, which are normally located faraway. 

I think the critical point is to ensure that adequate security is provided so that the money at the SACCOs is safe and clear. In that respect, Government is going to intensify security measures to protect such people’s money.

3.24
MR MUHAMED KAWUMA (DP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. For a couple of months, Entebbe Municipality has experienced intermittent electricity supply. As a result, there is shortage of water supply. National Water and Sewerage Corporation keeps texting us messages saying they cannot adequately pump water because of power outages.

The question is: my neighbours at State House, Entebbe have a hotline for power supply that is permanently on. Why can’t National Water and Sewerage Corporation and other related important institutions have hotline power supplies that - because we are going in a rainy season and there are likely to be water related problems that we may suffer as a result of power problem?
3.25
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, it is true that not only Entebbe but also other areas of the country have had problems of power cuts and intermittent water supply because of problems of power supply. The main reason, however, has not been shortage of power; it has been more to do with wiring; some of them are old and the like. I am aware that the Ministry of Energy, through its agencies, is addressing this matter and Entebbe Municipality will benefit from this programme.

3.26
COL. FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a question to the Prime Minister. Recently the three sub-counties of Nyabushozi were hit by tornadoes.
 
Mr Speaker, you will recall that one day, on your way to Mbarara, you stopped at Sanga and the Wanainchi confronted you with a question. I have written to the Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness and on further consultations, I was informed that there are no funds to attend to such disasters. May I know why there are no funds in the ministry to attend to such disasters? Thank you.

3.27
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, it is true that the budget for funds of tackling emergencies is normally limited and it would not surprise me if some of the votes have had problems with resources. Nevertheless, if there is urgent need, some extra effort may be made to mobilize resources to ensure the people of Nyabushozi are assisted accordingly. 

3.28
MR FRED Badda (NRM, Bujumba County, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Can the Rt Hon. Prime Minister tell this House how soon the Government will take to effect the swapping of forest reserve land that is hosting town councils and municipalities in this country, which counties have already fulfilled the requirements, one of them being Kalangala, Mbarara and some others, yet the land is being degraded and the land that was offered is also under degradation? 

3.29
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Well, if the honourable member is making reference to forest areas in urban centres – really, all you need is to ensure that the minister responsible - because there are many similar cases - pursues the matter and brings it to an end or conclusion. Therefore, give the facts to the minister responsible; he will be able to give you the time table of sorting the matters you are raising.

3.30
MS RUTH LEMATIA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Is the PM aware that comprehensive nurses in this country are going through double training? What I mean? The Ministry of Health suggested that one to get a certificate should train for three years and Diploma, four years. However, in Ministry of Education - the three years for certificate were reduced to two and a half. This leaves a gap in midwifery training. Now the PNFP have realised that they have abandoned comprehensive certificate training. It is now Government schools which offer certificate training in comprehensive nursing. But when these nurses come out, they are again asked to go back for six months for sort of workshop, which I believe is waste of Government money and plus the other money - I do not know where it is coming from.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, are you aware this encourages double expense in this country? Is it okay to push back this raining to three years so that the midwifery part is adequately addressed? Thank you very much.

3.31
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I am glad because hon. Ruth Lematia is an expert on nursing education. Her views and ideas, as a seasoned trainer, would be very welcome. Nevertheless the Ministry of Education, which is responsible for the training of nurses and Ministry of Health are currently reviewing both the content of the syllabus for nurses and midwives and the numbers are to be trained. I believe that this is going to be handled as well. That is the issue of dealing with comprehensive nurses and ensuring that they have appropriate and timely training.

3.32
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Can the Prime Minister inform the people of Tororo County when they will be finally granted a district status? (Laughter)

3.32
THE PRIME MINISTER/ LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I thought my young brother, the hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, would have told people of Tororo County that there is a moratorium on creation of new districts. Therefore, they should wait and when the moratorium is reconsidered, their case will also be considered.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, the honourable member for Tororo County knows there are other ways of –(Laughter)

3.33
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I am concerned about the status of Chinese presence in our fisheries department at Kajjansi. Could we be updated on the status of their continued stay there after their friendship project expired?

3.33
THE PRIME MINISTER/ LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I want to salute the Chinese people for the support they have given to the people of Uganda in various sectors, including fishing and infrastructure. It is true they are here on mutually agreed terms. If the agreements have expired, they can be reviewed and it is true that those Chinese who are here must abide by the immigration requirements, regulations and rules of this country.

3.34
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Extremely heavy trucks are plying the Tirinyi-Mbale Road. Why is this happening and when will it stop, looking at the state of the road, which is not meant for this level of trucks? They are really many. Why is this happening so suddenly?

3.34
THE PRIME MINISTER/ LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I had already made comments about the importance of protecting the investments we have put in our roads and, therefore, if heavy trucks are on any Ugandan roads, if they are overloaded, they should be arrested so that our roads can be protected. If they are using Tirinyi-Mbale Road and they are not arrested then the enforcement agency needs to be looked at. They must take stern measures in order to protect the peoples’ investment on our roads.

3.35
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This House pronounced itself on the issues regarding people being in conflict with wild animals, especially crocodiles. The question I am putting to you is: what measures has the government taken to protect the people who are drawing water from lakes and are always eaten by the crocodiles? And is there any form of compensation for those who are eaten by these animals?

3.36
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, it is the duty of Government to ensure that all people of Uganda are safe, but I also call upon the people Uganda to be vigilant and ensure that they protect themselves as much as possible. If a suspicious situation of that nature comes about or if somebody gets injured or dies because of the crocodiles, straight away the authorities should be informed so that the responsible Government department can take the necessary measures to protect the population and also to get those wild animals that may be causing problems to the population.

In this respect, the political leaders like ourselves should take lead roles in ensuring that the right authorities are informed in time for the necessary action to be taken.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are citizens in the gallery. Let me recognise them now. I will add the time towards the end. In the public gallery this afternoon we have a delegation of Busia  Boda boda Riders, represented by hon. Julius Maganda and Ms Barbara Oundo. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have Students and Teachers of Airforce Secondary School in Entebbe. It is represented by hon. Joseph Balikudembe and Rosemary Nansubuga Seninde. Please join me in welcoming them. You are all welcome. (Applause)

3.38
MR PETER ALEPER (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is a wish of every parent to have their child in a good school and now there is a shift from Government to private schools. What is happening is, the fees that are being fixed by the private schools is so high that parents who wish to take their children to those schools cannot afford it. What regulatory mechanism has Government put in place to ensure that the education in Uganda is affordable? Thank you.

3.38
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, that is a very fair question. It is true that education and quality education should be available to all the children of Uganda. It is true that private sector fees are normally higher and therefore may provide better facilities and therefore may lead to better performance. 

Nevertheless, Government is doing all it can to ensure that we equip both with scholastic materials and teachers in our schools so that children who are in Government, UPE and USE schools can also benefit from high quality education.

3.39
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, my issue is on intra-government contradictions. Whereas the government appointed the agricultural commanders for wealth creation and whereas we have NAADS, which is now procuring seeds and whereas we have the Ministry of Agriculture responsible for agriculture and the Ministry for Metrology, we see a lot of intra-government contradictions. Whereas the commanders in Kisoro were waiting for the right seeds as for agricultural zoning, which was done in 2010, NAADS delivered tonnes of pineapple seeds or cuttings for citrus fruits contrary to what was being expected by the agricultural commanders. 

Could the Rt Hon. Prime Minister tell this House and the people of Kisoro, why they cannot harmonise this and why they have contradictions because all the seeds were finally rejected by the people? 

3.40
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, if Kisoro has not received the right planting materials that is regrettable and that should be corrected as quickly as possible. There is need for proper co-ordination in the responsible Government departments. 

All I can say is that there is every effort to ensure that agriculture, NAADS and UPDF officers that are actively involved in supporting the wealth creation programme are as co-ordinated as possible. But since it is a relatively a new programme - initial few cases of lack of co-ordination do not surprise. The important thing is to make sure is that we close all those gaps so that the Wanainchi can get the planting materials as they should.

3.41
MR ACHIA TERENCE (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is: We in Karamoja are so delighted to have hydropower extended to our region and people are indeed so happy. 

But most time when we visit our constituencies, we find that there was load shedding for three or four days ago and this has been reoccurring. What could be the problem because this happens many times? What could be causing this load shedding on that line?

3.41
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): There are many reasons as to why there is no adequate power. I had already earlier said that one of the main reasons these days is either old transmission lines or related transmission because we have reasonable amount of power that is available. 

Now that the colleague has raised this matter – he should have actually raised it straight away with the line ministry concerned so that immediate corrective measures can be taken and the Wanainchi do not have to suffer for a long time because of load shedding caused by technical reasons. But the country has enough power.

3.42
DR MICHAEL LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. What effort has the Prime Minister put into place to follow up on presidential pledges such as the extension of a power line from Nangunga to Senyi and Nansagazi fish landing sites in Buikwe County South Constituency, which was a presidential directive in 2010? I thank you.

3.42
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, Government, as you would expect, attaches great importance to presidential pledges. Government has consequently asked line ministers in particular to ensure that presidential pledges are expeditiously implemented.

I do expect that this power line is part of those programmes that are going to be implemented. One could get the specific details from the minister responsible for energy.

3.43
MRS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): I would like the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to tell this House the minimum wage for our people. This is because right now, if somebody pays their babysitter Shs 60,000, which is the equivalent of US$ 20, when you divide that money by 30 days it means the person has to live on less than a dollar per day. Can you tell the people of this country what the minimum wage is so that when I employ a person, I know that I should not pay that person below a certain amount of money? 

3.43
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): The issue of a minimum wage is not a new issue. It has been extensively discussed in the country and in Government and no consensus has been reached on this matter. Therefore, we shall wait until there is a consensus and a final decision taken on the matter and then the country can be told about this minimum wage.

3.44
MS JENNIFER MUJUNGU (Independent, Woman Representative Ntoroko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what measures has Government put in place to prevent River Semiliki from bursting its banks again now that the rains are about to start?

3.44
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): It is true, as my sister said, that we are still victims of too much rain and too much sunshine. We need to advance so that we are able to manage the excess water. Government has been taking measures, especially in the Rwenzori area, to control the floods because we know that they are cyclic. I expect that the ministry responsible will be taking some measures to ensure that the population is safe. However, I do not have specific details but I would advise that you interact with the ministry directly responsible as you will get more specific guidelines on the matter.

3.45
MR MATHIAS BIREKERAAWO (DP, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am sure that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister read the newspapers yesterday and in particular the Daily Monitor. Those of us who watched the national television saw the manner in which the poor youth were arrested. Can the Prime Minister tell this House and the country at large - the Prime Minister knows very well that we fought for the rule of law, human rights and democracy - if his government is turning into a dictatorship? 

3.45
THE PRIME MINISTER/ LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): The people of Uganda are advised to be law abiding and peaceful. Contravention of the law has consequences and therefore to avoid the consequences, I advise the people of Uganda to be as law abiding and peaceful as possible.

Secondly, the law enforcement agencies should indeed enforce the law in accordance with the laws of the land. They should not go beyond what the law prescribes.

3.46
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The question I have is in regard to the Government’s move to implement the 2013 decision of this Parliament to increase the salary of doctors in the health centres. By the time it was implemented, they were one year in arrears. I would like to know when these arrears are going to be paid to the doctors. I thank you.

3.46
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): As far as I know, the doctors were paid as Parliament and Government of Uganda agreed. If there are complaints of non-payment of arrears, then the ministry responsible will address the issue of arrears to make sure that people’s entitlements are properly paid. 

3.47
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The question I have for the Prime Minister is in regard to our gallant soldiers in Somalia. Are you aware that the Minister of Defence and the Chief of Defence Forces have not ensured that our soldiers on the ground get their remuneration within the stipulated time? We have information that they have not been paid their allowances for three to four months.

3.47
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I am not aware of this information. Nevertheless, if there is any hitch or delay in payment of allowances or salaries to our gallant fighters in Somalia, this is a matter, if true, that is going to be dealt with quickly. We cannot afford the luxury of such a thing happening. If this information is correct, the issue will be handled expeditiously.

3.48 
REV. FR. JACINTO OGWAL (UPC, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, are you aware that for four successful years, the staff establishment in public universities is really stagnant at about 30 per cent, leaving a 70 per cent shortfall. This has very serious implications in the quality and effectiveness of teaching and research at our public universities. 

What is your government going to do in the coming year to improve on this? We know that those who are part-time lecturers in these public universities are hardly paid; they go without salaries and without remuneration and they stop teaching.

3.48
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, public universities are important institutions and most of us have gone through them. Government will do everything possible to give support to these universities. The question of 30 per cent being currently employed compared to the overall staff structure is rather surprising to me. Nevertheless, it will be looked at and Government will do whatever it can to support these institutions. 

On the question of non-payment of people who work part time, I think the laws of the land are clear; if you contract somebody to do a piece of work for a certain amount of money, you have an obligation, according to the laws of the land, to pay. Therefore, the employers should definitely, in accordance with the laws of the land, pay their employees.

3.49
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Last year in the month of May, this august House adopted a report from the ad hoc committee that investigated the energy sector, and the Executive adopted the same, which recommended that Umeme should be disbanded. How far have you gone in implementing this recommendation?

3.49
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, this is a subject that I will need to get more specific information about in order for me to give you some clear picture.

3.50
MS KEVINAH TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to tell the House when Busia Market will be built because we supply foodstuffs to the whole of East Africa. They have been telling us that it is going to be built but when are you are starting the construction? Thank you.

3.50
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I have got authoritative information from the Minister of Local Government that Busia is already in business. Come July this year, the construction of the market will start.

3.51
MR TONY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, under the Common Market Protocol citizens within East Africa are supposed to move, establish business and stay in any partner state without restrictions. However, recently the Parliament of the Republic of Tanzania passed a law restricting employment of non-citizens both in the public and private sector. 

May I know whether the partner states have taken a position to deviate from the provisions of the treaty and the protocol? If not, what are we going to do in order to avoid a repeat of the failure of the integration?

3.51
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, this is a very important subject. When we commit ourselves, as Uganda and as East Africans, on the way forward for our region, we mean business. However, if there is a deviation like my brother has said, what is required is for the countries of East Africa to sit together as a family and ensure that this problem is resolved in an amicable way, so that we can continue to move together. 

In future, challenges of that nature will come up but again, as a family, we should ensure that we resolve those issues and continue to move forward together and not repeat what happened to East Africa before.

3.52
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister about what happened to our road from Mbale to Lwakhakha. This morning I read a story in the New Vision newspaper, which mentioned a number of roads and said that due to the shortage of funds some roads, which had been expected to be worked on, will not be worked on. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, is the Mbale-Lwakhakha Road one of those going to miss out?

3.52
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, let me alert honourable members and the country that the list that appeared in the media is not authoritative. I have been assured in this House by the Minister of Works that the Lwakhakha Road is definitely on the agenda.

3.53
MS BETTY MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubirizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Government is implementing the project of rural electrification in Rubirizi and other districts. However, for the last six months or more, the poles were put up and left without wires. What plans does Government have to complete this project?

3.54
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, Government is committed to all the projects it has started. Government will, therefore, complete the project. The detailed schedule of implementation can be accessed from the implementing line ministry.

3.54
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last week we had a petition from the residents of Booma, Kyatuba, Kabeho and Kinoni villages in Lwemiyaga County. It was disposed of or handled in one way or the other. 

The issue I would like to raise is that last week on Thursday, one of the petitioners, a one Jovan Kikekitenderezo, was attacked. She is an old widow who is childless. She had bought land which is within the land that was said to have been bought by Uganda Investment Authority. She was hacked. I delayed to come here today because I had been called and told that her condition is critical. She is admitted at Nakasero Hospital. They cut her head and her brains were spilt. She is in critical condition. 

The question I am raising is: How can Government assist and give a helping hand to the victims of the land struggles in Lwemiyaga and in this particular case, come to the aid of this widow and childless lady, Jovan Kikekitenderezo, who had given 40 heads of cattle way back in 1995? She has owned this land since then, but was attacked and is in a critical state at Nakasero Hospital?

What plans does Government have to help and save this situation of the residents of Booma, Kabeho and Kinoni in Lwemiyaga County?

3.56
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, it is very sad that people are taking the law in their own hands to sort out contradictions over land in this manner. That must be condemned. People who have grievances should bring them to courts of law or other recognised dispute resolving agencies. 

It is true that we should also go and address the fundamental issues that bring about these conflicts - resolution of land disputes. It is true we have many land disputes in many parts of the country and I request political leaders and all those in authority - land boards, village committees and the like - to, as quickly as possible, help in resolving many of these land disputes. Otherwise, my advice is that those who are responsible or the suspects should be brought to courts of law so that the law can take its course.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this matter has been on the Floor for a very long time. Is there a way you can conclude this issue of Lwemiyaga with finality so that it does not come back to us again? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I take your guidance. I will be interested in us getting more details about this case so that working with those concerned, we can bring this unnecessary conflict with the citizens to an end. The citizens should settle down peacefully and focus on production and improving their wellbeing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Member for Lwemiyaga, you need to liaise with the Prime Minister to solve this matter. Honourable members, it is time. I have on my list Ibanda North, Kigulu South, Kyegegwa, Mukono, Serere and Bukoto East. Mitooma, Kioga. Let me write those down, and you know that I keep my word and that is why I keep following these things. I also have Kyenjojo and Kitgum. Those will be the ones to start.

4.59
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I reply to some of the issues raised in the Prime Minister’s question time, allow me to congratulate Mzee Philemon Mateke, who was sworn in early in the session. I need to congratulate hon. Mateke in a special way because it has been confirmed that the late Milton Obote had a very strong team to work with. (Laughter) I think we cannot ignore that. Not only has Dr Philemon Mateke given us a very powerful daughter to serve in the House, but he has come himself at this stage to make sure that he adds value to the Front Bench, which has constantly disappointed us by remaining empty.

I want to appreciate the diplomatic manner in which the Prime Minister answers questions. I believe it is high time that the Prime Minister becomes increasingly concerned about practical matters and decreasingly moves away from diplomacy. 

For those of you who have been following the political history in this country, the creation of new districts has been a menace and it normally comes at a time when elections are just a few months away. We would like the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to tell us that this will never happen again so that we can now agree, as a country, that all counties can become districts and so that we know that this year, we are going to budget for so many districts and next year, we also budget so that there is predictability.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, on the notice of business to follow, we have item 15, which is a motion for presentation, consideration and adoption of the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on creation of new districts. So. do not pre-empt that debate.

MRS OGWAL: I am just advising so that when they come to talk, they know how to deal with it. The predictability is absolutely important, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

I also feel so upset that in this House we have five workers’ representatives. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister stands here to say there is no specific policy on minimum wage and the five representatives of the workers are quiet and silent and not even challenging this. I wonder whether it is necessary for us -(Interruption)

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When the Rt Hon. Prime Minister made that statement, we took note very seriously. He knows very well that we have been having running battles with Government on that matter. I was even arrested because of that same matter. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister knows very well that the workers are ready to take him up on that matter. The matter is even at ILO and they gave Government one year, which ends in June. Therefore, there is something being done. 

Is it in order for my senior colleague to mislead the House by saying that we are here silent when actually we have been very serious on this matter? Even today, we wrote to him a note saying that if he comes back in that manner next time, he will not like it. Is she in order, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am required to rule on a point of order on matters that have happened in the House. You were arrested but not in this House, so I do not know. (Laughter) The matter that is in ILO is not before Parliament. Your other running battles with the Government are not inside this House, so this House is not aware. However, according to the proceedings of the House this afternoon and from the questions from the Member and the response from the Prime Minister, there was no support question from the representatives of the workers.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, you could not have been wiser in giving that ruling. In fact, the workers’ representative should have ruled the Prime Minister out of order when he was talking about that matter. 

The other issue of great importance, which the Prime Minister should have assured this House on, is the issue of police brutality. Police brutality is damaging the image of Uganda and it is really holding this country hostage. Nobody knows who is safe. The way the Prime Minister answered the question is as if the Prime Minister condones the brutality of the Police. Something must be done about this and if this matter is raised next time, the Prime Minister should speak convincingly that the Government has actually taken control of what is happening in the Police.

The fact that we have been told that the Police are now being trained as military personnel may send fears in the hearts of some ministers, who may in turn fear to discipline the Police because they know they are now military and not ordinary Police. However, please do your duty. That is why I feel that the reply that was given was not adequate. It did not convince me and I am sure many Ugandans outside there are not happy about it.

Many people have been arrested in the recent past and detained contrary to Article 32(4) of the Constitution, which says whoever has been arrested, whether Muslim or Tabliq, can only be detained for 48 hours. I am wondering why people are being arrested in the name of being Muslim and nobody knows where they are being detained, nobody knows why they are not being brought to court within 48 hours, nobody knows why the Government is abusing the Constitution of Uganda and nobody is raising anything about it. As a Ugandan, I am very concerned about this and the Government should take this seriously.

The right of children to education is one of the issues that were brought up by my dear colleague from Karamoja, hon. Simon Aleper. Thank you very much for that statement. However, you forgot to raise concern about the Karimojong children who are of school-going age and are on the streets here in Kampala. What are you doing about it? Before you challenge the Prime Minister about the general education of children, deal with the Karimojong children who are causing us a lot of concern. You must do something about it. 

In Parliament here, we have a special caucus on child rights. I am one of the members, although we have not been very active of late. Every day, we see these children of school-going age begging on the streets. We have UWOPA here; we see women carrying children, some of them pretending to be carrying twins, begging on the streets. Definitely we need to do something to clean our image.

Honourable Prime Minister, while people want to challenge you to answer questions also challenge them to answer some of your questions because that is national responsibility. Some of us as leaders and Members of Parliament must make sure we also take responsibility. We want Government to be accountable but we must also be responsible. I think this is a very important point that needs to be raised.  

Mr Speaker, regarding the issue of policy, this country has prescribed in the Constitution, under the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy XXVIII, foreign policy objectives. May I be told, as a Ugandan and not an ordinary Ugandan but a senior Ugandan, where is the foreign policy of Uganda? Where can I find it? Maybe hon. Philemon Mateke will help. (Laughter)

Finally, Mr Speaker, I know there are very many concerns but I cannot reply to all of them because of time. I would like to say that some of the presidential pledges are being fulfilled through the Office of the Prime Minister. Recently, a team of people went to northern Uganda, including my district, allegedly distributing articles for war-affected persons. This was directly from the Office of the Prime Minister and selectively -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, that is not what the rules say. First of all, you do not have a right of reply because it is not yours. The person with the right of reply is the Prime Minister. You are supposed to summarise those issues and propose policy matters on those that have been captured, briefly. It is not supposed to be a complete reply to the State of the Nation Address. (Laughter)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, you know the biggest problem I have is that I come from a rural area. I was brought up in a village environment -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That one is not on the Order Paper for now. (Laughter)

MS OGWAL: Forgive me if I digress a bit. However, the issue of policy I am raising here is that if the war-affected persons are being compensated, can we know what mechanisms the Prime Minister’s office is using to select those war-affected persons? The truth is, and I would like you to investigate this matter, those persons who got mabati, cement, motorcycles, bicycles and whatever else were all cadres of NRM. I am saying this not because I am pointing a finger at the NRM; some of you NRM are also being marginalised just like me. Therefore, if I see cadres of the NRM getting bicycles, I get terribly upset. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Just a couple of points; it is common in this House to come and lambast the Police and talk about police brutality. However, people are shy or they just deliberately refuse to talk about brutalities committed against the Police when in fact they are performing their normal duties.

We know very well that some few years ago when in Old Kampala, policemen on duty were murdered. We know that near Kiwanuka Street recently, a policeman on duty was killed. Therefore, I would like candour and objectivity when people are talking about issues concerning the Police.

Let me take this opportunity, therefore, to highly commend the Police for the great work done to contain unruly elements and elements -(Interruption)

MR NSUBUGA BIREKERAAWO: Thank you, Mr Prime Minister, for accepting to take my point of order. You have mentioned -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he does not have to accept.

MR NSUBUGA BIREKERAAWO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You have mentioned incidences when the Police have been killed on duty. This is very unfortunate, but should we say an eye for an eye? If a policeman has been killed, should the Police also kill the very civilians they are supposed to protect? Secondly, the Police have guns. 

Is the Prime Minister, therefore, in order to say that because the Police are being killed, therefore they should also manhandle and kill civilians?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that has not been stated on the record. You have just stated it now. It is incorrect; that is not what the Prime Minister said.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am making a simple point that let us be objective when we are talking about problems of law enforcement. 

Let me also ask fellow Ugandans to be as orderly and law abiding as possible so that they can avoid the problems that we see –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am at pains to put the Prime Minister to order. The issue, which was raised, was specifically about what happened in front of the American Embassy. Civilians were brutally arrested and this was brought to the attention of the Prime Minister. 

Is the Prime Minister in order to divert from what was brought to him concerning civilians being brutally arrested to other incidences concerning the Police, which have been equally brutal? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when the matter was raised the first time, the response of the Prime Minister was that it is important to be law abiding and if you disobey the law, there are implications. However, he also said that, that does not exonerate excessive force by the Police and that matter should be condemned. That is what I heard. 

That matter again came back in the response from the Leader of Opposition and he is responding to those. Therefore, it went beyond what was said in the first instance. Therefore, the Prime Minister is in order to make those responses properly.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. In making a final comment, my sister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, congratulated hon. Mateke on his much deserved appointment. My sister should have equally congratulated other honourable ministers who have been appointed to high positions in Government as ministers so that there is no discrimination. 

However, I must say that I agree with hon. Cecilia Ogwal that hon. Mateke is a very able and responsible leader. It is true that the appointing authority has indeed recognised this. There is only one thing missing - hon. Cecilia Ogwal, who worked so closely with hon. Mateke, is remaining behind. She should join hon. Mateke so that they can continue building Uganda together. (Laughter)

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural matter I am raising is whether it would be okay for the Prime Minister not to answer the questions that were raised by the Leader of the Opposition, especially in regard to arrests being done in my constituency, Mukono. He has skipped the question and yet it is quite important. People have been kept in detention for over 48 hours and the Prime Minister had an opportunity to give us an answer but he has skipped this. Would it not be procedurally okay if the Prime Minister gives us an answer about that particular matter? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedurally, the Prime Minister responded to those issues by saying that anything that the Police do beyond the law is not acceptable and detention beyond the required period of 48 hours is not acceptable. He already said that.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 09/1/09 TO THE MINISTER FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS

4.25
THE MINISTER OF GENERAL DUTIES, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The question is: What mechanisms have been put in place to operationalise and/or domesticate the East African Common Market Protocol that was signed in November 2009, and commenced on 1 July, 2010? 

I am standing in on behalf of the Minister for East African Community Affairs and the answer to that question is as follows: The Protocol on the Establishment of the East African Community was signed on 20 November 2009, and its implementation was launched on 1 July 2010. Under minute 100 of TT2010, Cabinet certified the Protocol on the Establishment of the East African Community Common Market –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Procedurally, Mr Speaker, somebody should have stood up to identify the question. In this case, our Hansard will be stuck because they do not know what the minister is talking about. He asked himself the question and is answering it. However, somebody should have stood up to identify the question so that his answer would be relevant to that question. Procedurally, I would like the House to guide the minister who is very experienced on this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Clerk.

QUESTION 09/1/09 TO THE MINISTER FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS

4.28
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): “What mechanisms have been put in place to operationalise and/or domesticate the East African Common Market Protocol that was signed in November 2009 and commenced on 1 July, 2010?” Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I thank the honourable acting Leader of the Opposition for abiding by the procedure. The answer is as follows:

The Protocol on the Establishment of the EAC Common Market was signed on 20 November 2009 and its implementation was launched on 1 July 2010. Under minute 100 of TT 2010, Cabinet ratified the Protocol on the Establishment of the East African Community Common Market.

In consultation with various ministries, departments and agencies, private sector organisations and civil society organisations, Ministry of East African Community Affairs prepared a Common Market Implementation Plan (CMIP) to oversee the Common Market Protocol (CMP) commitment in Uganda. In short, the CMIP was launched in November 2011.

The goals of the Common Market Implementation Plan are:

    a) To define the actions and measures needed to implement the Common Market Protocol in Uganda.
    b) To define the institutional framework for the Common Market Implementation in Uganda. 
    c) To propose responsible institutions for the actions required to implement the CMP.
    d) To provide a monitoring mechanism for the implementation of the same.

The Common Market Implementation Plan covers obligations under the EAC Common Market Protocol, breaking them down into specific activities to be undertaken by the lead ministries, departments and agencies. In addition, the Common Market Implementation Plan contains complementary measures that help to ensure that a conducive environment is put in place to support the successful implementation of the Common Market Protocol at national level. 

To do this effectively, Government developed an institutional framework to oversee the implementation of CMP. The framework is broken down into four levels: At the helm of the framework, a Cabinet sub-committee on EAC integration is in place. This Cabinet sub-committee provides policy and political guidance to the implementation process. It comprises of key ministers in charge of ministries most central to the implementation of the Common Market and these are as follows:

    i. The Office of the President
    ii. The Office of the Prime Minister
    iii. Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives
    iv. Ministry of Internal Affairs
    v. Ministry of Foreign Affairs
    vi. Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development
    vii. Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development
    viii. Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs
    ix. Ministry of Education and Sports
    x. Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries
    xi. Ministry of East African Community Affairs

Below this sub-committee on the EAC integration is the National Coordination Committee (NCC) on the Common Market. Implementation: This coordination committee is composed of the permanent secretaries of those institutions listed under the sub-committee above. The National Coordination Committee is chaired by the Head of the Public Service/Secretary to the Cabinet. 

This NCC provides overall technical guidance and oversees the implementation of the CMIP to ensure compliance with commitments and obligations under the EAC Common Market Protocol. For effectiveness and accountability, membership of the NCC is limited to those institutions central to the achievement of the Common Market to enforce the ownership and accountability of the implementation process. 

Below the coordination committee, there is the National Implementation Committee (NIC), comprising of senior officials from key ministries, departments and agencies charged with implementation of the Common Market. The National Implementation Committee is composed of the following organisations:

    1) Office of the President
    2) Office of the Prime Minister
    3) Ministry of Trade and Industry
    4) Ministry of Internal Affairs
    5) Ministry of Foreign Affairs
    6) Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development
    7) Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development
    8) Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries
    9) Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs
    10) Ministry of Works and Transport
    11) Ministry of Education and Sports
    12) Ministry of Local Government
    13) Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities 
    14) National Planning Authority
    15) Uganda Revenue Authority
    16) Bank of Uganda
    17) Capital Markets Authority
    18) Uganda Investment Authority
    19) Uganda Bureau of Statistics
    20) Private Sector Foundation of Uganda 
    21) Uganda Manufacturers Association
    22) Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry
    23) Islamic Chamber of Commerce and Industry- Uganda 
    24) SEATINI- Uganda
    25) Uganda Law Reform Commission 
    26) National Organisation of Trade Unions of Uganda
    27) Uganda Employers Association
    28) Uganda Registration Services Bureau
    29) Uganda National Bureau of Standards 
    30) Ministry of East African Community Affairs

For practical purposes, NIC is chaired by the Ministry of East African Community Affairs. The NIC is serviced by specialised expert sub-committees. Each sub-committee is chaired by the lead implementing ministry and incorporates representation from government institutions, private sector and civil society.

Each MDA appointed a technical officer as a member and an alternative to be the standing representative of the expert subcommittee. These expert subcommittees are:

    i) Expert subcommittee on free movement of goods chaired by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives.
    ii) Expert subcommittee on free movement of services chaired by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives.
    iii) Expert subcommittee on free movement of persons, workers, the rights of residents and establishment chaired by the Ministry of Internal Affairs.
    iv) Expert subcommittee on free movement of capital chaired by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
    v) Expert subcommittee on legislative reform chaired by the Uganda Law Reform Commission.
    vi) Expert subcommittee on communication and sensitisation chaired by the Ministry of the East African Community Affairs.

These expert subcommittees have full responsibility to ensure that the EAC Common Market Protocol is implemented in their areas of responsibility in line with the time limits set out in the Common Market Protocol.

Mr Speaker, that is the answer that the ministry has provided to the question that was raised. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are there any supplementary questions? 

MR OKEYOH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Thank you, honourable minister, for the response. The supplementary question I would like to put forward is: now that one of the partner states that ratified the protocol, the Republic of Tanzania, has enacted a law prohibiting movement of persons and also not allowing non-citizens to establish business, don’t you think this is going to jeopardise the protocol and the integration of East Africa and finally, the Political Union and Monetary Union we envisaged?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Yes, we have taken note of the decision that the Tanzanian Government has made. There is an East African authority, which is made up of the Presidents of the member states. This is a matter that I am sure would interest them when they next meet and we shall bring it to their attention. 

QUESTION 06/1/09 

TO THE MINISTER FOR INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION AND TECHNOLOGY

4.38
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): “Would the minister explain to the House the dangers that telecom masts pose to people’s health like breast cancer? What health standards must telecommunication companies comply with while erecting masts to ensure the safety of Ugandans? How does the ministry ensure compliance with these health standards? How many telecom masts have been licensed to each telecom company? Why can’t the telecommunication companies co-own masts to limit the number of masts erected?”

4.39
THE MINISTER FOR INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Do I have to read the question?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed with the answer.

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, question 06/1/09 was in four parts and in order to answer the question, I will read each part as I answer it.

The first part was about the dangers that the telecom masts cause to people’s health like breast cancer. 

A base station, or what we commonly refer to as a mast, is made up of a set of radio equipment that include antennas which are mounted on a supporting structure. The supporting structures commonly used consist of metallic masts or the towers visible on the hills and other high altitude points or smaller structures placed on building rooftops.

Base stations are necessary for communication between an access device, for example a mobile phone, and a respective communication network. Base station antennas receive and send messages to a mobile phone or another device by radio frequency radiation. However, this is non ionizing radiation, which is deemed not to be dangerous as it does not have sufficient energy to damage biological tissues in human beings like the radiation from gamma rays or x-rays.

The research on the probable health risks carried out by recognised institutions like the World Health Organisation, the International Agency for Research on Cancer and the Health Protection Agency have not established a link between telecommunication developments such as base stations and related risks of cancer, including breast cancer. This is based on the absence of convincing evidence that the radiation from the base stations causes damage to DNA to cause the development of cancer or other health effects in adults or children.

Mr Speaker, the second part of the honourable member’s question was: What health standards must telecommunication companies comply with while erecting masts to ensure the safety of Ugandans? 

Notwithstanding the absence of convincing evidence that radio frequency signals from these base stations cause danger to humans, bodies such as the International Commission on Non-Ionising Radiation Protection have developed recognised safety standards and guidelines that are implemented by the industry to limit operational and public exposure to radio frequency radiation. These guidelines on complying with limits for human exposure to electro-magnetic fields up to 300 GHz have been endorsed by the World Health Organisation and recommended for us by the International Telecommunication Union, and they have been duly adopted by Uganda.

Other precautions that the developers or operators are required to take, including establishing appropriate installation parameters for the sites as well as implementing administrative controls like restrictions to the base stations, include fencing, locking and warning signs.

The third part of the question was: How does the ministry ensure compliance with these health standards? 

Our answer is that through the Uganda Communications Commission, assessments are carried out to evaluate the compliance of base stations around the country with the respective guidelines I mentioned earlier by ICNIRP, which are related to the likelihood of human exposure to radiation or omission from such remittances. Inspections so far carried out show that the omissions around the various telecommunication sites in Uganda are within the limits permitted under these guidelines for human exposure. 

The ministry, together with the Uganda Communications Commission, constituted a technical team that also carried out a comprehensive study in 2013. The study looked at the communities chosen to represent the country’s various environments, including urban areas, trading centres, markets and towns, schools and hospitals, suburbs and rural areas.

The key finding was that the emissions from the sites are within the permissible limits as per the ICNIRP limits and do not cause any harm to human beings around the sites. The measures that were used was the exposure quotient, which has a threshold of one per cent as per by ICNIRP guidelines. The highest value measured was 0.76, which is way below the ICNIRP threshold. 

The last part of the question was: How many telecom masts have been licensed to each telecom company? 

Mr Speaker, the operators are not required to obtain authorisation from UCC for each mast they establish. However, clearance is required from the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) for each site that is granted after an acceptable impact assessment.

Currently, there are a total of 4,035 base stations around the country. The industry has also witnessed the emergence of tower companies namely, Eaton and the American Tower Company (ATC), which manage tower sites and offer physical supporting infrastructure to the operators for their base stations. Sixty-seven (67) per cent of the base stations now owned by operators are premised on facilities that are operated by these two tower companies. 

Lastly, the fifth part was: why can’t the telecommunication companies co-own masts to limit the number of masts erected? Our answer is that the telecommunication companies are co-owning masts or sharing sites in a bid to reduce their costs of operations and in response to public concerns regarding masts. That is why these telecom companies have got these masts companies and a number of operators are sharing one site.

In conclusion, I would like to inform and assure the House that my ministry is developing an ICT infrastructure blueprint, which will guide the future ICT infrastructure developments countrywide. This will be completed within the FY 2015/2016. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Any supplementary questions?

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before I brought this question, I had done quite a lot of research and my supplementary question is: Can you prove that all the 4000 masts erected have been cleared by NEMA?

Two, can you lay on the Table the guidelines you have for the installation of these masts in the whole country? 

Lastly, are you aware that these masts interfere with people’s health as well as aircraft? In addition, do you know the required distance between these masts and aircraft? I would like to know how you have guided them regarding the height and the required distance from residential areas.

4.48
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have a very brief concern. I am told that the radiation from masts have a negative impact on human beings. However, according to the answers from the Minister, it seems that the research he has done says that there is no problem with the masts. I would like to know whether that radiation, as they say, has no negative impact. 

In case there is a negative impact, have you tried to find out how we can go about it because we have many masts, especially in Kampala? We are very worried that this radiation shall cause us problems in the near future, like in 50 years from now. I thank you.

4.49
MS THEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to find out whether the Minister has gone out to find out about network problems from providers of phone companies like MTN, AIRTEL and many more. Banks are finding problems. Customers can line up for hours because the network is not available and mobile activities are slowed down because the network is a big problem. I thank you.

4.50
THE MINISTER FOR INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr John Nasasira): A supplementary question was asked if I can prove that all sites have been passed by NEMA. The answer is no; I will have to check with NEMA. 

On the issue of masts interfering with aircraft, there are no masts which interfere with aircraft. There are standards of minimum distance by the aviation authorities indicating where masts should be. In addition, these masts have got a warning light, and aircraft can see this especially when they are landing. Also, as you know, aircraft routes are known and before a pilot lands, whether in a helicopter or another type of aircraft, they are aware of the planned paths where they should pass. They know that they are not supposed to fly below a minimum distance between any objects that are on their landing paths or takeoff paths. 

As for the honourable woman MP for Kanungu District, hon. Elizabeth Karungi, I have said that there are no negative effects as far as research is concerned now. I have quoted global authorities, indicating that there are no known negative effects. 

This research continues, since technology continues to advance and the devices that we use continue to change too. You may realise that the mobile phones we had 20 years ago were heavy with an antenna compared to the mobile phones of today; they are lighter with less radiation. That is why there has been a debate. For those who watch news, on a British TV, BBC, the Minister was talking about the radiation of the sun and he said that it is even more dangerous to the skin glands than electromagnetic radiation from telephone devices.

Concerning the problem of poor network, we are trying to address it. That was slightly outside the supplementary question, but we are trying to address the problems in areas where there is poor network and poor quality of service. I would like to invite you to the customers’ parliament on the telecom debate on 31 March 2015. We shall advertise it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister.

4.53
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Women Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am concerned about a related issue, regarding the questions for oral answer that we ask. Often we come to your chambers and asked to raise matters of national importance and directives are given to ministers to come and make statements. However, sometimes it can take a year before you hear a response. 

I raised issues about a month ago particularly on two things that were urgent and important. One was the continued murders in the Teso Region, which are not followed through. People are killed in broad daylight, shot dead, and the suspects keep walking around. 

I also raised the issue of the Iteso who are in Abim, who had been attacked and displaced. The Ministry of Internal Affairs was directed to give a statement. Two weeks passed, three weeks and now it is a month. Yesterday, they burnt the homes of the people who migrated to Abim. Now they are back to the IDP camps. 

Therefore, I am wondering, of what relevance are there issues of urgent national importance if they go on for months? The ministers walk in here and out and do not respond. Mr Speaker, I thought you could help to cause the ministers to respond to some of these things; otherwise, it becomes a meaningless ritual as well.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is an important matter that you have raised. We have been raising this in almost every sitting. That is why now every time these matters are raised, a timeframe is given; we ask the ministers to come back to the House within a specific period of time and the date is also given, for example, “come back on Tuesday or Thursday on this matter”. 

This might have come up in the old times when we could just tell ministers to come with statements and responses without a timeline being given. So, now can I ask the Leader of Government Business to say something on these two issues - the killings in Teso and also the matter of the displaced people who are in Abim. They were attacked previously at the time the matter was raised and recently, the huts of the locals were burnt. Can we have a response on these matters from the Minister of Internal Affairs next week on Tuesday? Okay, on Tuesday afternoon we expect a response on these two issues from the Minister of Internal Affairs. Thank you. Can I have you on record, Leader of Government Business?

4.56
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Much obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, are we able to go back to NSSF? Maybe we call up the item and see if we can proceed. If not, we receive the motion on item No.7, if this one is not ready. 

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF 
THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND (NSSF)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was a matter which I had earlier asked the Minister of Local Government to look at and advise the House. Now that the learned Attorney–General is here, maybe you could help us with this. When buying shares, does the law require you to obtain an opinion or clearance from the Solicitor-General? That was the issue.

4.48
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fredrick Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I thank you so much. Indeed, my attention has been drawn to this issue. I am in possession of a legal opinion from my office, specifically from the office of the Solicitor-General, dated 28 October 2013. It is addressed to the Corporation Secretary, National Social Security Fund. Since it is a brief statement, let me summarise by reading through it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, advice was sought on purchase of shares in Tanzania Breweries Ltd and Co-operative Bank of Kenya Ltd by National Social Security Fund.

“Reference is made to yours dated 17th September 2013, Ref P/CONF/94, and 25th September 2013 Ref P/CONF/94 on the above matter.

We have studied your request and advise as hereunder: 

Section 30 of the National Social Security Fund Act provides that all monies in the fund, including the reserve account, which are not for the time being required to be applied for the purpose of the fund shall be invested in such investments as may be determined by the Board in consultation with the Minister.

Section 39 provides thus: ‘The Managing Director shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the fund and shall, subject to this Act and to the general control of the Board on matters of policy, be responsible for the general management, administration and organisation of the fund, and in particular- (c) for the investment of surplus funds from time to time; 
(d) for accounting of all monies received, paid out or invested under this Act.’

Article 119 (5) of the Constitution provides thus: ‘Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, no agreement, contract, treaty, convention or document of whatever name called, to which the Government is a party or in respect of which the Government has an interest, shall be concluded without the legal advice from the Attorney-General, except in such cases and subject to such conditions as Parliament may by law prescribe.’

When we read your submissions, there is no indication that they are a contract or a document creating any legal relationship. It is simply an expression by NSSF on how and where they intend to invest the surplus money collected and unnecessary for paying benefits at the moment.

Secondly, according to Section 30 of the NSSF Act, it is the responsibility of the Chief Executive Officer (Managing Director), Board and Minister to decide on investment of surplus money collected by NSSF. There is no indication that your intention to invest in the above companies by way of purchase of shares has been approved by the relevant body and persons as the law provides.” However, I think that was an internal matter, which I am sure they can respond to by way of evidence. 

“It is, therefore, our opinion that your request is not a contract or a document creating a legal relationship to necessitate our clearance in accordance with Article 119(5) of the Constitution. We, therefore, advise you to conduct the investment in accordance with Sections 30 and 39 of the National Social Security Fund Act”.

Mr Speaker, I agree with this opinion and it is self-explanatory. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does that opinion cover this particular matter that we are dealing with - the Umeme Ltd shares?

MR RUHINDI: Yes, it does.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Members, that was a matter that was fairly contentious but I think now it becomes clear. We can now go back to chapter two and take some decisions, if we are prepared. Can we proceed? We had finished with one and we stood over two. 

Recommendation: The committee recommends that Mr Ivan Kyayonka be forced to vacate the board of NSSF due to his irregular action in pushing NSSF to purchase Umeme IPO shares without the approval of the Solicitor-General

5.04
DR MEDARD	BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am very glad the learned Attorney-General has come. Earlier on, I was very tough with what was happening and I was on the neck of Kyayonka. However, now that the Attorney-General is telling us that the chairperson of the board and the management of NSSF were not required to consult them when they were buying Umeme shares, I would like to appeal to my colleagues to abandon this. We should not approve it because it means we shall be doing something contrary to the law.

The Attorney-General has been very clear and being a learned man, we all believe in Attorney-General Ruhindi. I repent. Thank you.

5.05
MS ANN NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I hope I will be helped by my colleagues of the committee. There were two purchases of shares; there was the purchase of shares during the IPO and then there was the secondary purchase of shares. The letter the Attorney-General is referring to is the opinion which the NSSF sought during the second time in 2014 and yet the process began in late 2013.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, this opinion is in relation to Tanzania Breweries Ltd and the Cooperative Bank of Kenya. It is not about Umeme Ltd. However, I asked whether the Attorney-General thinks this opinion covers the whole subject of acquisition of shares and he has said it does.

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I am also in possession of a letter from the Solicitor-General regarding his opinion during the purchase of shares for Umeme Ltd, which happened some time later after the purchase of Tanzania Breweries shares. We are also in possession of the opinion of the Solicitor-General when NSSF was acquiring shares in Umeme Ltd, that is, the second shares. 

In the first opinion, the Solicitor-General was not happy with the way NSSF requested for his opinion after they had acquired the shares and he noted it: “Please note, seeking the opinion of the Solicitor-General is not just for mere formality”. That is why when NSSF wanted to acquire the second set of shares, they went to the Solicitor-General and he gave a letter of no objection and approved.

Therefore, I find a problem with regard to the opinion the Attorney-General has presented. Perhaps, I should say that it was particular to the acquiring of shares in Tanzania Breweries. Otherwise, we would not have the same Solicitor-General giving a different opinion on acquiring of shares.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we have this position harmonised between the committee and the Attorney-General so that we can blend, because these are serious decisions. This is not something we should rush. Let these matters be harmonised so that when we come back tomorrow, we are clear about how we are going to proceed with this matter.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE HOTEL AND TOURISM TRAINING INSTITUTE BILL, 2013
 

5.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM (Ms Agnes Akiror): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Hotel and Tourism Training Institute Bill, 2013” be read the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Minister, General duties, Office of the Prime Minister, Minister of State for Internal Affairs and Member for Kanungu District. Would you like to justify your motion? 

MS AKIROR: Mr Speaker, the object of the Bill is to provide for the establishment of the constitution, administration and functions of the hotel tourism training institute and other related matters.

Honourable colleagues, the Bill seeks to re-orient the hotel and tourism training institute into a modern institute; to undertake tourism and hospitality training and to develop human capital of the tourism sector.

The Bill also seeks to improve competitiveness of Ugandans for jobs in the hospitality sector, especially under EAC Common Market Protocol.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, The Hotel and Tourism Institute Act was repealed by section 130 of the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001 when the institution had been transferred to the Ministry of Education and Sports in 1998.

The return of the hotel and tourism training institute from the Ministry of Education and Sports to the Ministry of Tourism which had not been legally formalised hence the need for a legal framework to re-establish the institution. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, when this Bill was read for the first time, it was referred to the committee. The minister has now moved this motion for second reading and has justified it. We can now hear from the committee what they advise the House to do with the Bill.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, it has been quite a number of days that business is placed on the Order Paper. However, when you call the relevant persons to present, they are absent. There are times when the chairperson of a committee is present and the minister is absent. There are times when the minister is present and the chairperson is absent. Yet we have some documents which are ready; they have already been uploaded on our ipads. You remember the Anti- Corruption Bill, it is ready for discussion; I do not know why it does not come? The PPPP is ready and that one is just a matter of concluding it; it is not yet done.

I thought these are simple matters we could just dispose of then, but somehow, they keep eliminating them from the Order Paper, yet the ones which are placed on the Order Paper the persons to present them are absent. 

Here we are waiting; the minister is available and I would like to thank her. For the first time, she has been diligent; but I do not know what has happened to -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this report has only three pages; can a member of the committee read it? Please. 

5.14
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County Dokolo): Mr Speaker, a report of the committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on The Hotel and Tourism Training Institute Bill, 2013.

Introduction

The Hotel and Tourism Institute Bill, 2013 was read for the first time on the 6 March 2014 and referred to the committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry in accordance with our Rules 117 and 118 of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament. In analysing the Bill, the committee was guided by Rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

Objectives of the Bill

The objectives of the Bill are:

    1. To provide for the establishment, constitution, administration and function of the hotel and tourism training institute and for other connected matters.
    2. Reorient the current hotel and tourism training institute into a modern training institution based on specialised and well-focused professional capacity to undertake tourism and hospitality training and ensure effective development of tourism sector human resource development.
    3. To improve competiveness of Ugandans for jobs in the hotel and hospitality sector especially under the East African Community Common Market Protocol hence effectively and sustainably playing a key role in growth and development of the national economy and social transformation.
    4. To enable the institute to provide full and part time courses of study and training in the field of applied learning and research as the minister may direct.
    5. To enable the institute to provide guidance on the national curriculum in consultation with the National Council for Higher Education for all public and private training providers in the hospitality industry at the tertiary level.

Methodology

In the process of analysing the Bill, the committee held a workshop in which they discussed the Bill with the following stakeholders:

    1. The Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities
    2. Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs
    3. The hotel and training institute 
    4. Uganda Wildlife Authority


Observation and recommendations of the committee

The committee observed that the tourism industry is one of the most important economic activities in our country. This is because the tourism sector contributes an annual estimate of Shs 1.7 billion representing 9 per cent of Uganda’s GDP. However, the hotel and tourism training institute is grossly underfunded hence it is not able to provide sufficient number of graduates to provide services needed in the growing hospitality sector. This has led to employment of under qualified staff and non-Ugandans in most of the hotels yet the rate of unemployment in Uganda is very high. Therefore, the committee recommends that the hotel and tourism training institute be provided with the necessary participation for it to grow into a regionally and internationally a clean centre of excellence.

The committee further recommends that the hotel and tourism training institute set a very high standard so as to provide highly skilled people appropriate for the labour market in the hospitality and tourism sector.

The committee observed that the Tourism Act, 2008 mandates Uganda Tourism Board (UTB) to carry out inspection and classification of hotels; however institutions in the hotels and tourism training are not represented on the board.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Hotel, Tourism and Training Institute be represented on the board of Uganda Tourism Board. 

Inclusion, the hotel and training institute has been in existence and requires the legal status to enable it to be under the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and antiquities and to access funding from the World Bank loan. It is in view of the above that the committee recommends that Hotel and Tourism Training Institute Bill, 2013, be passed into law and subject to the following recommendations.

Mr Speaker, I have the amendments which have been read before, they are in your iPad and when we go through the Bill then we shall do the amendments accordingly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we were just correcting because you said subject to something else, but it is to the amendment.

MR OKOT OGONG: We have the minutes of our meetings, they are here and I beg to lay them on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes.

MR OKOT OGONG: These are all minutes of our meetings. Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, very much. Honourable members, all that is to demonstrate that this is the committee report and in the absence of the Chair, another member immediately stepped in and proceeded with the business; that is the way these matters should be done, so that we expedite and do not make things difficult when they can be handled quickly.

Honourable members, the motion I now propose for your debate - the motion is that the Bill entitled: “The Hotel and Tourism Training Institute Bill, 2013”, be read the second time. That is the motion for your debate and debate starts now on the principles of the Bill.

5.21
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryadongo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the wonderful work done and I am here to support their recommendations, I have a few comments to make. 

Mr Speaker, in the hotel industry in Uganda, most chefs are not Ugandans, you find in these big hotels they are employing foreigners yet those jobs could be taken up by our local people; even the Kenyans are doing very well. I therefore want to support that this section be given money so that we can train our own children and citizens to take up these very important jobs and also compete favourably on the international market. Mr Speaker, I beg to support.

5.22
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to appreciate the committee and indeed the ministry for coming up with this Bill. It is very important for us to observe two issues here: First, that currently hotel and tourism training is done in a very scattered fashion; you really do not know who is setting the standard for training in this sector. Everybody presents one form of a paper or another. However, the actual output is not standardised and I hope that by coming up with this Bill, once it is enacted into law we will be able to standardise the training.

Secondly, what is important to me is the attitude of our people. I understand the complaints of this country that we recruit from Kenya. However, those Kenyans, if you have one in a hotel, work more - the output of one of them is equivalent to the output of 10 Ugandans who are absent three days a week. They go for funerals, and spend time on Facebook. 

Therefore, beyond this, there must be a deliberate attempt to change the attitude of our workers in Uganda. If you give Ugandans a job, they will be out competed as you watch; you would rather recruit from those other people whom we fear calling foreigners.

Mr Speaker, I visited an industry around Port Bell and the proprietor was complaining; he said that Ugandan girls and boys can be absent for three weeks; for three days in a week, they go for funerals, and when they go for lunch, they will come back at 4:00 p.m. If you are the investor; you surely cannot accept that type of workforce. 

I hope that with this streamlining, we will be able to inculcate the right attitude in our work force so that they merit the preferential treatment. I thank you.

5.24
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Mr Speaker, I stand to support the Bill and I want to say that the hotel and tourism sector has been under developed. In schools, children learn about food and nutrition, home management, but after that they have nowhere to go. 

I would not look at it from a point of only hotel business, but how do we train Ugandans to take responsibilities in some of these sectors? We say there is no employment in Uganda because as other members have said, our children look at hotel management as unprofitable. However I want to say that people in hotel industry and tourism make a lot of money.

My only challenge is to know who is in charge of this curriculum, what is their level of training? Is it a diploma or certificate, because when I look at the hotel industry, it is between BTVET and higher learning; we need to know where the Bill meets the challenges of the two institutions for purposes of its training curriculum.

I would also like to know, after the training, where do these students go? Are they going to remain in the tourism sector or can they be allowed to do other jobs for purposes of promoting tourism and wildlife. 

Mr Speaker, our hotels lack a lot and when we go out there, the welcome by Ugandan receptionists is not good. I think this will come in handy and help us to improve Ugandans to compete with other markets in the region. Thank you.

5.26
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the ministry for bringing this Bill and I support it totally because when we had CHOGM it was embarrassing that the country had to go and get people from Kenya to come and support us, simply because the capacity of our people was really wanting.

Mr Speaker, this is an institute that has been neglected. When you go to hotels in this country like my colleagues have said, you wonder whether these people have been trained or they are just picked from wherever to come and just offer a service and they are not scared. I believe that is why they are not even paid very well in some circumstances and perhaps that’s why they behave like that.

When we have institutions that will train our people with quality and qualification, I believe they will be catered for. Mr Speaker, I want to recommend - there is an institute in Kasese when you move around, you will hear young boys and girls speaking Lukonjo and you believe that maybe it is that institution that has been supplying young boys to support these institutions around, especially the hotels.

Therefore, we need this institution to train in hospitality. You know, this tourism sector is one of the institutions that are supporting Uganda in terms of revenue collection and we are not paying attention to it. 

Therefore, for us to attract more tourists, we need to put standards to ensure that we have quality services rather than having people who will push away the tourists including the local tourists because when you go to a hotel and you are a local tourist, when you are not catered for, you are likely to leave and never go back. I thank you.

5.28
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I strongly support the Bill and I believe that this Bill could have been passed long time ago. This has indeed been a big gap in as far as the industry is concerned.

It is true that as we are expecting a lot from our petroleum prospects that are about to kick off, I believe that if tourism is well funded then it could even do better than other sectors we are looking at. 

As Members of Parliament and the Executive, it is our responsibility to support this Bill. However, we should also look at other avenues that will strengthen this industry because it is one of the industries that I believe can do a lot in far as improving our economy is concerned.

Secondly, when we are interacting with members of the tourism board, I was greatly surprised that the funding of our tourism sector as compared to our neighbours is very law. In Rwanda, they are investing almost $3 million in tourism. It is the same arrangement in Kenya and Tanzania. But when it comes to Uganda, we are only injecting $300,000. If you compare what we are putting into tourism with what our neighbours are doing, we are miles away. 

I will greatly support this initiative. As we also try to support qualified people to work in the hotels, it goes without saying that even our domestic tourism – Ugandans have a tendency of believing that hotels and other leisure sites are meant for foreigners. We therefore need to sensitise our locals to spare time to visit our local hotels and this should also apply to Members of Parliament, we should take out our loved ones. 

I believe that we should live by example through ensuring that we teach our constituents about domestic tourism and we support this sector so that we can improve on our economy. I thank you very much.

5.32
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): I would like to thank the minister and the committee for coming up with this Bill. Mr Speaker, creating specific institutions is very good for our professional development as a country and in one way or the other, it is good for our employers because you reduce their work of trying to get related issues.

However, creating an institution is one thing and having an institution function is another. As we go forward in having this institution, we need to look at the overall value chain of this institution that enables it to function. Points of emphasis should be; have we given enough resources in terms of funds? This institute also needs enough resources in terms of staffing and IT infrastructure.

I would like to appeal to Government now that we are about to create this institution, let us give it the necessary support to enable it function because we have seen institutions like Busitema University struggling to break even. This university was crated but it has never been given enough resources to enable it perform its functions.

Lastly, we have Makerere University that is teaching tourism. With the creation of this institute, does it mean that the Bachelor of Tourism at Makerere is going to stop? I would like the minister to answer me in regard to that issue. I thank you.

5.34
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): I thank the minister for bringing this Bill and the committee for the good work.  I rise to support this Bill and say that in enacting this Bill into law, value will be added to the sector because this sector has been undervalued and several people go for it as the last resort. I have a daughter that I am paying for at the Crested Crane School of Catering in Jinja. She told me that after her course, she wanted to do a degree but there was no degree course in Uganda and that she would have to go to Nairobi. This puzzled me a lot. 

I am hoping that with the coming in of this Bill, it will actually help people like her who have a lot of interest in these kinds of courses to have hope. I support this cause and I will be happy if it is enacted into a law.

5.36
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi):  I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to speak to the principle of the Bill which I definitely support.

When we look at the  Tourism Master Plan that was launched sometime last year around 27 September, 2014, it was projected that tourism will bring close to Shs5.3 trillion which is equivalent to US$2 billion for 2014/2015 estimated to be one third of Uganda’s budget. 

It was also mentioned that by 2024, we would be having close to 150,000 jobs created in that sector. This means that the tourism sector is the most lucrative in terms of contributing to our economy.

When we look at countries like Sri-Lanka, they probably have a tourism institute that trains 600,000 people every year. It also goes ahead to control the charges per room because the charges can discourage the tourists. When they are training people to work, they also train the hotel owners on how to be courteous in charging tourists.  

If we come back to the hotel workers, I think our hotels have staff who are below the standard in terms of courtesy. While somebody is serving you, they even pour food on you and their mood is bad as if they fought the previous day with their spouse.  

So, I would really support that we have a hotel and tourism institute and also that institute should look at services incidental to hotel and tourism; for example there is tour and travel and hospitality. You know I am learning how to be hospitable. All these should be considered holistically. 

However - we shall come to that when we are discussing the Bill - why should we have a recommendation where the management of the Hotel and Tourism Institute is not included in the Tourism Board? Actually in other countries, the Hotel and tourism Institute is directly managed by the Tourism Board. I wonder why we should not just include them; they must be represented in the Tourism Board. The Tourism Board must be the one to run the Hotel and Tourism Institute and that is my suggestion. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.40
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke County North, Nakaseke): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to add my voice to those who have spoken before to thank the ministry for bringing this Bill. I would also like to thank the committee for the report. 

I fully support this Bill and I would like to say that it is long overdue, considering the high rate of unemployment of the young people in this country and yet there are so many job opportunities in this industry. If you went to any hotel today, you will find that the staff are foreigners or East Africans, but not Ugandans. This is because our own are not trained and that is why we complain and the employers complain that their productivity is very low. 

It is well known that for every Kenyan, you need four Ugandans to do the same job and for one Tanzanian, you need three Ugandans to do the same job. I attribute this to two things; the lack of training and attitude. However, attitude can always be changed by training. Therefore, if we have this institute, I think it can solve the two.

This hospitality industry is a very large industry and unlike other natural resource industries, it is undefeatable as long as we do not tamper with the environment. We have rich flora and fauna in this country and so, this industry can serve us forever.

Mr Speaker, the opportunities in the hospitality industry go across the border. If you go to the Middle East most of the hotels now employ blacks and if you want to know whether they are from East Africa and not Uganda, use the Swahili language. Every time I go to the Middle East, I try to speak my broken Swahili and they answer back in the fluent Swahili indicating that they are either from Tanzania or Kenya and not Uganda.

There are a lot of opportunities abroad which our young people can tap into. During CHOGM, there was an incentive for the locals to set up hotels. Many of these hotels employ non Ugandans and with the opening of the boarders in East Africa, we are going to have a problem. We are going to get an influx of Kenyans and Tanzanians, which is not a bad thing, but at the expense of our own children getting these jobs. We need to examine other areas of hospitality which can be taken up together with the hotel industry. 

Again when you go to the Middle East – I will give the example of Dubai Airport - you will find that most of the attendants in the duty free shops and the stewards are black but not from Uganda. That is an area that we can tap into. There are so many people here recruiting people for jobs in other countries but the opportunities are more in the hospitality industry than any other industry. 

Mr Speaker, I once challenged the manager of Emirates Airline and I said, you have daily flights from Uganda but why is it that there are very few Ugandan stewards and stewardesses working on this airline? He said that my people are not hospitable; that they usually apply online but Ugandans come least in the East Africans. I thus implore the House to pass this Bill. I thank you.

5.45
MR WAMAKUYU MUDIMI (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Mr Speaker, I thank the committee for the report and I support the motion. It is true that we have been lacking manpower in training. Last weekend I was in Doha and at the Hotel that I stayed, there were seven Kenyans working there. I then asked them how they came to Doha and they said that they are many in Qatar and they usually source them from Kenya. They earn $3,500 and they are accommodated. I asked if I could bring somebody from Uganda and they said that Ugandans are not trained. It is good but we want Government to tell us when they will implement this law, if we pass it. We may pass the law and they just shelve it. 

Secondly is the cost of training. Yes, we may want to train at national level but if the training cost is high, then it means the foreigners will come and train and the Ugandans will not. Is there any subsidy for Ugandans? I would like the honourable minister to tell us whether training will be fully funded by Government or there will be some contribution from students.

We have many tourism sites but the infrastructure is poor. I come from the areas of Mt Elgon and hon. Mutono has a campsite near my home. Many whites come to the site and say that the place is good but there is no road to access it. They always relocate to other places such as Kapchorwa and Kenya. He usually gets many guests and he has been moving around to lobby for a road and I am struggling with him. He has a very good facility there but there is no infrastructure there. 

Mr Speaker, as we look at training, we must invest in infrastructure. Many foreigners say Uganda is good but they cannot access those places because of the infrastructure such as roads and others. I support this but let us, as a country, invest in the tourism infrastructure.

5.48 
MR YOROKAMU KATWIREMU (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support the motion and I would like thank the committee for the report. The quality of any sector or organisation cannot be better than the staff that are in it. It is commendable that we now have an institute that we are going to uplift to a level, which will be able to train the right kind of staff for this industry.

Government needs to look at the hospitality industry in a holistic manner. It is okay to have an institute that will train staff but that is only one ingredient in the whole equation. The whole equation of hospitality includes a hotel, the way a tourist is received at the airport, and the general outlook of our airports. We have been urging Government to think of an airline for the country, to advertise the sector and this is only one of the ingredients within the sector. However, it will not be fully utilised if we do not think about the whole hospitality industry in a holistic manner. 

Government needs to look at the industry, identify the critical factors and parameters that will add value to this whole industry so that we can get optimum results from the investment. Just like some of my colleagues have said, our neighbours reap a lot of proceeds from tourism but it also corresponds with what they put in in terms of investment. I have been looking at the figures here - $1.7 billion as a contribution to our GDP, it can even be higher. We know that the tourism industry is a sure deal.  Given that, why can’t Government then sit down and make sure that it injects enough investment in a sector where you know surely that you will get appropriate results?

Mr Speaker, I definitely support the motion and I want to thank the committee but also, I ask Government to look at this industry in a holistic manner in order to get the best results out of the investment. Thank you.

5.51
MS THEOPISTA NABULYA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I just want to remind hon. Syda Bbumba that one time when she was holding the portfolio of Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development, we had an occasion in Mukono Collin Hotel. It was a tripartite occasion. We went out for lunch and the people in the service where we had held the occasion were all from Kenya, according to their name tags. I then asked her, hon. Minister, why don’t we have Ugandans here? This is an investment by a Ugandan. The people who are serving us right now are from elsewhere. It is good we are now in the East African Community but by that time, the community was not all that strong like it is today. The answer she gave me was to do with training; that the training here is not commensurate with the neighbours’ training. 

I then asked what we could do or whether we can’t take our people to that school in Nairobi. She said that is an arrangement that must be focused on. Therefore, the issue of training here in the hospitality industry is really lacking. There are no ethics; they cannot put on a smile when they are doing the service. There is no shame for a waiter to bark at you when offering service. There is a problem. I am so glad that the ministry is coming up with a Bill on this. Probably it will bring remedies to the problem because it is rampant and it is all over the country.  

She has given you an example of so many other people from our neighbouring countries working in the Middle East. We lack employment but we do not have the training. That means the curriculum of our training here for hospitality is still lacking. Are we going to be assured that the school being instituted will contain the relevant qualifications and a curriculum that is really ethical to bring up the people we want, the people with quality? I thank you.

5.54
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Ministry of Trade and Tourism and the committee for bringing this Bill. It is late but better late than never.  

The institution is going to train but we want to look at this curriculum that they are going to use, critically. I hope the ministry will really take much care to look into this curriculum because we have many training schools which train in tourism and hospitality. People are talking of having staff in these different hotels or people lacking customer care but it is the training that they get from these private institutions. This one is going to be a government institution but what about these private ones? If the ministry is transferring this institution from the Ministry of Education to their ministry, they better think about these other institutions which offer the same training.

I have ever picked someone from these institutions to work as a housemaid but the kind of skills that they actually acquire leave you wondering. Someone has been trained in an institution but cannot even manage just the housework. What about in a public place like a hotel? I think we need to look far beyond this institution and also look at what other institutions do.

I do not know whose mandate it is to do the inspections of these other institutions. I see that the committee observed that the Tourism Act, 2008, mandates the Uganda Tourism Board to carry out inspection and classification of hotels. However, institutions in hotel and tourism training are not represented on the board. The committee also needed to look at not only the representation but also what this board does. 

Mr Speaker, we may have people that are substandard but what about the people who own these hotels and who employ waiters from India and China for something that can be done by a Ugandan? What is the mandate of this inspection? Do they just inspect the building or classify the hotel? Why don’t they also inspect the kind of people that are employed so that we can also create employment for our young Ugandans? Even if a waiter is not really trained very well, those skills that they get in these substandard institutions can also employ them because I do not think those people that they bring from China and India are better trained than ours.

I also request that in this curriculum, we should include the training for tour guides. When you travel outside the country, a tour guide can take you wherever you want even if there is nothing that can really please you. So, tour guides are very crucial and important. In Uganda, I have seen the kind of tour guides that we have. It is just a matter of knowing that if you are going to Bwindi, you pass through here and here. They do not actually guide like a tour guide is supposed to do. They are just there.

With that in mind, can we also include in the curriculum the training of tour guides? This is because these tourists can be interested in even the small things and we also get money. We have some areas which are not - we need actually to encourage our staff – even the present staff – to be innovative. People are talking of money but it is not only money but creativity. When you are very creative, you can even use the little resources that you have to make people like what you have. I think we need to do more. We need to go beyond this institution and also look into the current staff that we have. 

I also encourage the ministry to interact with other international schools which have hotel and hospitality management. If we copy better skills, it can help us to make a better and good institution here. This is because you are just going to use what we have had. I feel that since the hotels attract international guests, we need to also copy some international skills to be included in our curriculum. 
 The curriculum is very vital but you also need to look at your board, Madam Minister. This board should also wake up and be innovative and not just inspect buildings and inspect the class of hotels. After all our hotels – even those that we call the Five-Star hotels, I do not know what this board has been doing. You go there and the kind of services that you get in those hotels; the food that you get – I do not know. 

Mr Speaker, we need also to have time and talk about this tourism board. We need to look at it critically and see whether they are giving us enough so that before we give them the trained people, they should also be trained themselves because they lack a lot. They lack creativity; they lack innovativeness. With that, I thank you, Mr Speaker and I support the Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, can we make shorter remarks now? We have debated this matter for a while now and time is going. I will have the members from Otuke, Yumbe, Nyabushozi, Mitooma, Bubulo West and then Busia.

6.02
REV. FR JACINTO OGWAL (UPC, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This Bill and the move to establish a hotel and tourism institute is welcome. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let us keep the remarks brief so that we can accommodate all the members.

REV. FR OGWAL: Mr Speaker, this Bill and the move to establish a Hotel and Tourism Institute is a welcome one. We now see that really tourism is a rapidly expanding sector. It really offers career opportunities and the career opportunities in tourism are enormous. When we see our country Uganda – in East Africa – the population is rapidly expanding. In a few years, our population will be really huge, hence that will demand also that more hotels and the tourism sector should be developed to cater for the needs, locally.

Internationally, at the moment in Uganda, we really have inadequate hotels to cater for our needs. I do remember clearly last year when there was the eclipse of the Sun in Nebbi, people swarmed there and we could hardly get a place. We could even hardly get water to drink. That tells us how unprepared our country is to host tourists at this moment. We have absolute need to build hotels and also to promote tourism sites all over the country. 

The best thing which we need in Uganda is for Government to come up with enough incentives so that many tourism players can develop more hotels and sites. I can clearly remember that in Kenya, what the ministry of tourism does is that at the end of academic year, a group of them goes to universities and they offer opportunities to these tourism students. They give them loans to go and start tourism centres and hotels. The minimum loan which was offered in 2007 was KShs 3 million and that is about Shs 100 million. This is the kind of incentive which the Kenya Government then gave. However, at the moment, I have not informed myself what kind of incentive it gives. I think this is a good leaf for the Uganda Government to borrow; that Government should inject some money as incentives to help young people and tourism players to develop this sector.

Secondly, for tourism to be properly promoted, there is need to also  transform our economy. We are talking of Kenya being efficient in training in the tourism industry and hotel management. Why does it do better than Uganda? In my opinion, Kenya is a monetary economy. In Uganda, we are still a peasant economy. If we would really like the tourism industry to develop, we as a country should transform our society from a peasant economy to a monetary economy. Once we have a monetary economy, then you can actually promote the tourism and hotel sector properly.

I do know that most of our students – now we have very many students in universities and secondary schools – have nowhere to go during vacations because we do not have hotels. We do not have students’ homes. We do not have lodges. We do not have motels in the countryside. They stay at home and they resort to drinking. The Government should really try and promote and inject capital into the development of not only hotels – hotels are very prohibitive in price – but promote also things like motels and promote students’ homes in regions. 


We should come up with a policy as a Parliament or as the Ministry of Tourism to come up with students’ homes. In most of these developed countries like America, Germany and Italy, the government and ministry of education comes up with regional homes where students from higher institutions of learning and secondary schools go and spend their vacations. They go on exchange programmes and various activities like leisure. I think this is a leaf which we should borrow.

Thirdly –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thought we agreed on the limitation of time. We are going to have two minutes each from now. I think the discretion is not being used properly. 

6.08
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support the committee’s report. The hotels and tourism sector give direct taxes to Government. Therefore, I support that we pass this Bill into law so that we train our people who can help Government in raising the revenue the government needs. I am also aware it creates a lot of employment opportunities for our own people. We need to look beyond that. 

On the issue of infrastructure - we have Lweza Hotel, which is a very nice hotel being built but the road from the main highway leading to the hotel stops very many people from using that facility. Therefore, Government must also look at infrastructure. We must have nice roads that can encourage people to use the hotels. We can train our people and they can do a very great job inside the hotels but people will not go there because we do not have good roads. This is another area we must look at.

We must also look at air transport. We have so many people who would want to come to Uganda. There are others who do not want to remain in Entebbe only but also go to Arua or Gulu and see the sites where our own people fought the British colonialists. However, the means of transport is a very big challenge that we have to look at.

Another point is cleaning the image of the country. Mr Speaker, right now even if you went out of the country, you will be asked whether it is still Idi Amin that is the President of Uganda. People do not know that Uganda has gone very far. They still have the impression that Uganda is a dictatorship type of country. Therefore, the ministry must do a lot to clean the image of the country to say we are now a different country. Amin is already gone and we have another President who has taken the country a step ahead. That must be known to the world.

We must stop other countries like Kenya. Kenya is out-competing us a lot from getting tourists from the way they have organised themselves. People think East Africa is only Kenya. Rwanda is also coming aboard. Can we show the world that there is a country called Uganda that has very beautiful fauna that people can come and benefit from. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the issue here is the hotels and tourism training institute. If we go to roads, we will be outside the debate. If we go to other infrastructural issues, we will be outside the debate. Let us focus on the matter before us, please.

6.11
MR FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to join my colleagues to thank the committee for the job well done. However, I want to appreciate that Government has really been moving towards developing infrastructure that can support the hotel industry. I have no doubt that at this stage and with the coming of this institution, we shall definitely develop the hotel industry.

I support that we, as Members of Parliament, reinforce this law about to come to ring-fence funding and any other necessary support that is required to ensure that Government allocates funding for this institution. This will enable us get quality skilled manpower that can bring back the image of Uganda as it was before. 

Uganda is indeed gifted by nature. See how we have survived and grown in this sector without skilled labour. No wonder that is why our labourers in all these hotels are abused, for instance because they are not comparable to other skilled labourers in the region of East Africa. Therefore, I want to call upon my colleagues that in this law, which we are about to pass, we should make sure we strengthen the funding and any other necessary support that can make this institution grow within the tourism industry. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.13
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. A lot has been said but I would like to also add my voice to thank the committee and the ministry for bringing up this Bill. Uganda has been named one of the favourite tourists’ destinations. Therefore, we need appropriate service to live up to the image and surpass the expectations. It is important that we become competitive so as to attract the tourists and also ensure jobs for our youths.

Hon. Syda Bbumba cited the numbers but she was moderate. Actually, it is said that for every Kenyan, you need six Ugandans and for every Tanzanian, you need four Ugandans. Why should this be? This is because our people are strong. Therefore, if they were trained, they would be equally competitive.

It is so painful that we have high levels of unemployment and yet the few that we have are being taken by the people from outside. As a result, it is important that we make our own people competitive. We need to have courtesy, hospitality and also change of attitude as it has been said. I do support hon. Naome Kabasharira that we need to train tour guides to make the industry competitive. We also need to train in community tourism so that as many Ugandans as possible can benefit from the industry rather than those who will visit the hotels.

Mr Speaker, we have been reminded that this institute has been there for some time. I want to attest to the fact that we had a superb Uganda hotel service and our people were being trained by this industry. This service did us proud for the time that it was there. It is possible that we can revive it and be competitive. The reason that it collapsed was because of the economic war but also due to lack of funding and necessary facilitation in the institute. 

Therefore, it is important that Government commits itself that when this law is put in place, there will be sufficient funding for the institute so that it can do its job.  Yes -(Member timed out.)

6.16
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to my colleagues for supporting the report and the Bill. I am glad that this Bill has come up. Maybe it will help us train our people well. 

Right now, the government training is going on in Jinja. However, it cannot help our students or children gain confidence because even where they are training from, they are squatting at YMCA. Thereafter, they cross over to the former Crested Crane Hotel and even the conditions there are not so conducive. If this issue of the institute comes up, maybe Government is going to do more in order to help build confidence among our children and the trainees.

Uganda is commended for good teacher training. This is because the teachers put in a lot of efforts but when you look at our hotels and tourism institutes including the private ones, I do not think much is being put there maybe it is because of low funding. 

At the institute in Jinja, the students there do not even have the courtesy and hospitality. It becomes very difficult and because of the moral decadence, what I observed is that when the students serve you and return the balance, they are looking at you to see whether you will give them a tip or not. This is moral decadence. 

Therefore, we would like you to even give courses and seminars to these private hotels and tourism institutions. This is in order for them to make a follow up and give good training instead of focusing on money as private institutions. They are crowding children around all the time in order to get a lot of money. They do not give them proper training. 

This Bill is also going to help Government and private institutions come up with a proper curriculum of confidence building and also give our children real moral standards whereby they do not look or run after money. They should get proper training which can help us as a country in order to attract people in the hotel industry. 

Otherwise, we are not doing well. It will also help our students know that they are joining the hotel industry with hospitality. They have to work very hard to compare with our neighbouring countries - (Member timed out.)

6.20
MS KEVINAH TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for a wonderful job and a good report presented. The tourism sector is a very pregnant horse in the economy of Uganda. It contributes $1.7 billion annually, which is equivalent to 9 per cent of the GDP of Uganda. However, it is only given a peanut of about $300,000 dollars. I urge my fellow members that next time when we are going for budgeting, we should put in some more effort in the tourism sector so that it is well financed.

The Hotel and Tourism Training Institute (HTTI) is underfunded because the whole tourism sector is underfunded. Therefore, the HTTI in Jinja cannot even afford to train enough graduates to meet the market in Uganda. It does not have the qualified people to run it. Therefore, I suggest that we get this legal status, which the Bill is seeking, so that the HTTI gets the legal status. We should also get a loan from the World Bank to support our training centre. We want it to be a regional and internationally recognised institution of good excellence so that we can compete favourably everywhere. 

It is going to employ people so that we get competitiveness in jobs in Ugandans. Most of the people we are getting in the tourism sector, which is a service industry –(Member timed out.)

6.22
MS CHRISTINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the Bill and the committee for the report. I would like to share my experience. In 1993/95, I served as a pioneer member of the board of governors for the Jinja Hotel and Tourism Training Institute that we are talking about. Hon. Moses Ali by then was the Minister of Tourism and Wildlife. We have come a long way. 

When we started, it was basically the curriculum. We spent time working with the National Curriculum Development Centre. We related with Utalii in as far as examination was concerned. When we started, people were talking of Uganda hotels; we had to be taken for induction in Utalii, Kenya. 

The Uganda Jinja Training Institute had exchange programmes with Austria, South Africa and Utalii College because we had to design programmes for housekeeping and tour guides. Due to the rich wildlife that we had, the government had to also invest in the tour guide training. There was also the aspect of confectionery. These are people who make cakes, bread and so many others. It was part of the training. 

I really want to commend the ministry for having brought this before the House. Tourism is the way to go but we need to invest more and have a modern infrastructure, a hotel and tourism training institute that takes us to the level of other countries in the region. 

I would like to also say that if we do not invest in the infrastructure and in the type of instructors we have, we shall be lamenting. If we invest in this institute, we shall match the rest of the countries. We are actually catching up now. We are now about to come down. It is no longer the ratio of 1:4 to Kenya, or 1:3 to Tanzania but we are almost now at the ratio of 1:2.

6.25
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the Bill. I would like to thank the committee and the minister for tabling this Bill. Honourable members, you will agree with me that the rate of unemployment in the country is on the increase. This Bill is timely, if not late. 

The number of graduates coming out of the university every year is now about 15,000 from one university. I think this institute is going to address some of the issues of unemployment among the youth. 

I would also like to express my disappointment with the government as far as the budget allocations to the tourism sector are concerned. I think the budget will increase now that the Bill is being tabled. When you look at the amount of money being provided to the tourism sector, Uganda is at the lowest. We are providing $300,000 yet the lowest that our neighbours are providing is $3 million to support their tourism sector.

Mr Speaker, when you look at the income of this country from 2011 to 2014, the tourism sector was contributing between 9 to 11 per cent. However, when reinvesting, they give 0.11 per cent of the budget. It is like milking a cow without giving it the necessary food -(Member timed out.)

6.28
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, National female Youth Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me the opportunity to present some of these issues.  I would like to support the committee report and to thank this committee particularly for the impetus that they have put in this sector. I think they have worked very hard enormously on these issues and we want to commend them and thank them. The Bill is welcome. 

The issue of hospitality is a very important one. It is like when you come into a home and you are welcomed; that home will give you good memories and you will always want to go back. Hospitality in this nation should be at the centre. Truth be told, our labour in that sector is a little wanting. You will agree with me that when we travel out of this nation, the way we are received in terms of hotel service is highly professional and when you return home, it is very disappointing.

The way people are receive and attend to you makes you cry for our hospitality sector. Therefore, I would like to support the committee for this move to establish this institution knowing the fact that the sector that I represent - the youth sector - is one which has a lot of challenges and needs in this area.
This training is very welcome and we need to support Government in this to ensure that more money is given in that direction and also, the second issue of competitiveness will be addressed.

Uganda is one of the countries in the region where the workers in that sector particularly come from outside. We have severally complained but they always tell us the truth that look at your people, look at the services they render in that sector. We have no reasons to justify why people are coming in from other countries, although it is very painful. When you visit hotels around town, you will see a common trait, the Eritreans are serving, the Ethiopians and the Kenyans are in the high profile positions.

6.30
EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the report of the committee. A recent study indicated that the rate of employability of the Ugandan graduates was the lowest in the whole region in East Africa. It means that our graduates who come out of universities and institutions, probably a range of 10 to 30 per cent can be employed. Therefore, if Government is coming in to enhance the skills – the required skills that can enhance our tourism, that is a reason we should support the Bill, as the institution will provide and impact the required skills.

However, is it the institution that is necessary or the resources or Government policy? We are going to have an institution and then we will find that the cost of training in that institute will be higher to the extent that people will not go there. It will be as if we have privatised. Therefore, as we pass this law, I suggest to Government that make it a priority and not a just a formality. 

When you look at the way the Government of Uganda appoints boards, there is no particular criteria - maybe if you are a relative or personally known to a minister; that is another business which has killed Ugandan institutions. The way boards are appointed; there is no qualification to the extent that technical boards are manned by non-professional people. The capacity of management to report to the board and the board challenging the management becomes a problem. That is why most of our boards have problems.

If we pass this law the way it is, it will create a very big problem because we are only looking at statutory representations on the board –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, would you like to summarise in one minute -(Laughter)– okay, two minutes.

6.31
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Your interpretation of the Leader of the Opposition is very interesting. I would like to thank the ministry and the committee for this Bill.  This is a very important Bill for our country, at this moment.

One of the greatest challenges that we are having as a country is youth unemployment. I believe that if we can have an institution that can train hoteliers, train people that can promote self-employment, I think that can go a long way in solving the problem of unemployment.

Secondly, we are not only talking about improving academic excellence for competitiveness to get jobs in the East African region or in the AU; it is important that we focus more on job creation and more also on the identification of areas that attract people to Uganda. That is where we are missing out. This Bill should not only be training people just to improve on the capacity of managing hotels and so on but we should be able to train professional people in the management of the tourism sector. That has been neglected and yet we are being told that tourism is one of the key factors driving our economy. 10 per cent contribution to GDP is not a matter that we can ignore.

Therefore, it is a matter of responsibility to this institution to increase the budget of the tourism and trade sector because that is the sector that is productive and brings resources. However, we are spending more in areas that are taking money away instead of investing more in sectors that bring in money and revenue to our pockets.

I therefore stand here to thank the committee for the good report and I want to support the Bill and I hope that if we put our resources there, it will not be like the one we discussed recently - the research institute, which abused the resources we are giving them for other things. We would like the money to go to the targeted areas.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, very much. Honourable members, hon. Minister, madam chairperson, the Bill has received at this stage tremendous support from both sides of the House. I propose that I put a question and we move to the next level when we come back tomorrow.

I put the question that the Bill entitled “The Hotel and Tourism Training Institute Bill, 2013” be read the second time.” 
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. Tomorrow when we come, we will go to the committee stage of this Bill and see if we can conclude it. House is adjourned to tomorrow, 2O’clock.  

(The House rose at 6.36 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 26 March 2015 at 2.00 p.m.)
  

 
