Tuesday, 24 March 2015

Parliament met at 2.10 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. There is one announcement and then I will make some communications. The members of the Appointments Committee are required to meet on Thursday, 10.00 O’clock to complete the processes of handling the appointments that have been given by His Excellency the President, particularly related to that of the Attorney-General, the Deputy Attorney-General and that of the Minister of State for Higher Education. Those will be taking place on Thursday, 26th March at 10.00 O’clock. Official communication will be coming to you, but I thought I should give you advance notice, as members of the Appointments Committee.

Honourable members, I wish to communicate to you, as you may already be aware; the Commonwealth fraternity has registered the passing on of an elderly statesman, Li Kwan Yu, the first Prime Minister of the City State of Singapore. He is recognised as the founding father of modern Singapore and the only leader known to bring an entire country from third world to first world status in a single generation.

He has been described by President Obama as a giant of history and by the Chinese foreign ministry as a uniquely influential statesman in Asia.

On behalf of Parliament and on my own behalf, I wish to convey our deep felt condolences to the Government and the people of Singapore upon the passing of Li Kwan Yu. Honourable members, I ask us at this moment to rise and observe a moment of silence in his memory. 

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we also received a letter from Madam Allen C. Kagina, thanking Parliament. I will read it for the record.

It is addressed to the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament: 

“I write to express my profound gratitude to you and, through you, to the honourable members of Parliament, for the resolution on the motion to pay tribute to me for my service to the Uganda Revenue Authority and the nation. 

I was truly overwhelmed by the response to the motion and very humbled just to hear every person who spoke. I could not have imagined the significance of such a resolution and I have become encouraged even harder for my country and the people where God has called me to serve.

I am very grateful for the investment that Government made in me for the 22 years I spent in URA. I am grateful that I had the chance to be a chief tax collector and play my part. The growth and experience I received during this time confers on me a responsibility to pass on what I have received. I owe much to the government; I will always be ready to serve. 

I must also acknowledge that had I not had the kind of support I got from the honourable members of Parliament and the Executive and the management and staff of URA, but above all, had I not trusted in the Almighty God, I would not have had anything to celebrate. Therefore, credit is shared all around and I take pride in what we, together, have achieved. 

There is yet much to be done to put our country on a sustainable development path. I am firmly convinced that URA will continue to play its part and achieve even greater milestones with the support that Parliament gives it. 

Sincerely, Allen C. Kagina.”

I thought members should receive this, thank you.

2.16
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in relation to Kasubi Market, located in my constituency in Kampala City. This market currently accommodates about 10,000 market vendors and serves the most populated parish in Uganda and that is Kasubi. I have just received information that a notice of eviction by UNRA has been given to these vendors without any known plans of relocating them. 

This very Parliament, in 2009, approved a loan of about $14 million under a project called MATIP and part of this money, about $2.6 million was specifically for construction of Kasubi Market. The other markets under the same project were Wandegeya, Ntinda, Nakulabye, Kasubi, Busega and Kansanga.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is the urgent matter?

MR KASIBANTE: Mr Speaker, that was the basis of the issue but this project of Kasubi in particular was supposed to have been completed last year 2014 and up to now, nothing has taken off as far as construction of the same is concerned. The latest is an eviction notice and the vendors must vacate these premises by June this year. 

As the area MP, I testify that because of the pending eviction, there is looming chaos and one cannot guarantee security in the area. My request to the Minister in charge of Kampala is to explain the fate of the market vendors and that of the market itself vis-à-vis the eviction notice. Thank you very much.

2.19
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I take note and I will accordingly report to the sector minister responsible and he will come to this Parliament to explain what is going on. Thank you.

2.19
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. On Saturday, 21st March, a number of villages in Iganga, specifically Kigulu South Constituency, were hit by hailstorms and heavy winds. So many houses and crops were severely destroyed. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to request your Office to help me prevail on the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness to come to our rescue. The reason I cite your Office is that on several occasions, my place has been hit but we have never got any assistance. As we talk, a round 120 homes have taken refuge in churches and schools. During day, they have to exit to allow children to study and then at night, they take refuge in these classrooms. 

Mr Speaker, I request you to ask Government, specifically the ministry responsible, to help us with some logistics in terms of food and sheets to help those people have something to get them going. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think there was a similar matter from Igara.

2.20
MR MICHEAL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. On 20th March, one of my sub counties called Ibaale was hit by a hailstorm. Churches and a primary school were destroyed. As I speak, in one of the primary schools, pupils are studying under trees. Some homes were also destroyed and people have no shelter. 

I am also urging Government, through the Minister for Disaster Preparedness, to come to the rescue of my people mostly the primary school where the pupils were preparing to sit for mid-term mock exams, which have been interrupted. Therefore, the earlier Government comes to our rescue, the better. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, with the return of the rains, we might need to have a standby brigade for disaster responses.

2.22
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, first of all, on behalf of Government, I want to convey the sympathies of Government to the people who have been affected. I am also a victim in my own constituency. I have a sub county with 35 people now sleeping under trees. However, the issue is that the minister responsible for disaster preparedness is working to secure funds and do whatever is necessary to alleviate the sufferings of our people. I am praying that the colleagues that have been affected do approach him because he told me that he wants to make a totality of the position. 

It is not only these areas which have been affected; we had similar experiences even in my own place in Buyanja County. Therefore, let us see how we can amalgamate these difficulties and see how to fund them and help out our people in this difficult situation.

2.23
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When the road joining Mbarara and bypassing Masaka District was constructed, an omission was made. The three districts of Kalungu, Ssembabule and Bukomansimbi join Masaka at a junction called Kabigogo, which has become a major death trap. Accidents happen at that spot and many lives have been lost. The most recent one was last week when we lost about five people at that spot. 

On a weekly basis, at least three people die from that spot. When that road was designed, there was supposed to be a flyover which was omitted. I do not know whether the Minister of Works and Transport will come and explain or do something as urgent as possible to save the lives of pedestrians as well as motorists a long those roads. When I speak about this spot, most of the people who take that route will know what I am talking about. If nothing is done urgently, the residents are threatening to close the road so that all vehicles pass in Masaka. So, I call upon Government to come out urgently and save Ugandans -(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I want to thank hon. Namayanja. This is the road going to my constituency and it is so pathetic that there is no road sign at all. Even when UNRA was positioning road signs, the road Katigondo, which leads to my constituency, was given another name. What hon. Namayanja is saying is that we need to give it urgent attention.  Recently, a gentleman in Masaka called Kalumba lost his son at the same spot. Even yesterday when I was coming from Kalungu, still the same problem was happening. 

Mr Speaker, as you come from Kalungu to join the main road, there is sort of a hill like this - (Laughter)- and it is so terrible!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How will the Hansard record that one? (Laughter)

MR SSEWUNGU: There is a slope. I request anybody concerned to give it urgent attention. I am happy that the honourable member has raised this matter because we were going to take another direction. However, since it has come to Parliament, we shall give Government time.

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Thank you, for that information. Mr Speaker, I know that you have the capacity to compel the Minister of Works and Transport to do something or to report urgently. Thank you very much.

2.26
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Colleagues, thank you very much, for bringing that matter. I am very much aware. That is the road which comes from Katigondo to join the Masaka-Mbarara Road. It is a very dangerous spot; I know that very well, I lost a dear friend on that very spot. 

We shall carry this message to the minister in charge of the sector to do something to at least put a small hump. It was meant to be a highway but it is no longer a highway because of the traffic that has increased. Therefore, there is need to control the speed of vehicles as they join the Masaka-Mbarara Road or as they move from Kampala to Masaka and vice versa. We shall inform the Minister of Works and Transport to do something about it so that we can really reduce the carnage of our people at that spot.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MR BIGIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure regarding the way our dear ministers respond to issues relating to matters raised by colleagues, especially those to do with national importance. Last year in December, I raised a very serious issue regarding the eviction which had taken place in Rukinda Parish, Kyangwali Sub County and when I raised those issues, you guided very well that these issues should go to the committee. 

Mr Speaker, you recall that as we wait for the committee which has up to now not come to Kyangwali, there was an immediate request to do with relief supplies especially food and shelter for these people that were displaced, who up to now are being held at the church. You directed the minister responsible for disaster preparedness to immediately come in and provide some relief supplies, more especially food as an immediate measure for those people to be helped. Up to now, nothing has happened and our people are still suffering. The rainy season is here and a lot of diseases are coming in. I am afraid that sooner or later, cholera, typhoid and many other diseases that come as a result of poor hygiene will come in. 

The procedural point I am raising is whether it is procedurally right to give timeframe every time a matter of this nature is being responded to. Otherwise, just saying, “We shall look into the issue” leaves us, as Members of Parliament, more troubled because right now, I have no answer to those people up to day.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what happened? Chief Whip, what happened?

2.30
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Every ministry is supposed to have an assistant here in Parliament to take note of all the issues that have been forwarded to their ministry.

Secondly, we are supposed to follow up with you, Mr Speaker, to make sure that whatever resolution, request or directive that has been put to our ministries is implemented. However, sometimes we lose out on time especially where timeframes have not been assigned. I am standing here to pledge that we shall intensify our coordination between the ministry assistants that we send here and the members of Parliament. I pledge that I will always be available. In case you look for a minister and you cannot find him or her, please contact the Office of the Government Chief Whip. I will do that work.

From today, I will make sure that I use the chairpersons of the committees and the regional whips who work with me together with the Opposition to make sure that we write down all the issues that have not been handled so that we can expeditiously handle them. I so pledge, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. You will need to start with this one, honourable minister, because even a timeframe was given and the minister himself – not an assistant – was in the House that day when this matter was brought. Please, follow that up.

DESIGNATION OF A MEMBER TO A SECTORAL COMMITTEE IN ACCORDANCE 
WITH RULE 176(4) AND (7) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Achile Manoah Mila, Independent, has been serving on two standing committees: Rules, Privileges and Discipline and the Committee on Science and Technology. This is now to designate hon. Achile Manoah Mila to a sectoral committee on Foreign Affairs which he will serve alongside the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS

    I) ON THE SPORTS POLICY FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Education? Next item -

MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of procedure. On 1st April last year, we passed a resolution requiring the Minister of Education and Sports to come and report on matters relating to sports education and disability. The minister was supposed to report by October 2014. 

When the matter was raised last Thursday, the Speaker directed the minister to come and report today. However, as I speak, the Minister of Education and Sports is not here which means the directive we issued on 1st April was defied. The directive we issued last Thursday was also defied. I beg you to advise me on whether we are proceeding appropriately and the way forward.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, you have heard the concern of the member. Could you please take it up and follow it up and give us a response tomorrow on that particular issue of sports for people with disabilities.

    II) STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT ON CONCERNS OVER FAILURE OF GOVERNMENT TO REMIT MONEY TO WOMEN COUNCILS IN DISTRICTS

2.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mr Sulaiman Madada): Mr Speaker, this is in relation to the concerns of members on failure of Government to remit money for women councils. I wish to proceed as follows:

The National Women’s Council is an autonomous body established by an Act of Parliament – Cap 318 – with the objective to organise the women of Uganda in a unified body and to engage them in activities for development of themselves and the nation. The law provides for the sources of funds to the Council as follows:

    a) From the Consolidated Fund.
    b) Grants, gifts and donations.
    c) Monies accruing to the council in the discharge of its duties.
    d) The council can also borrow funds provided the minister approves such borrowing.

Mr Speaker, Government has ever since the establishment of the council provided funds from the Consolidated Fund to the secretariat for payment of staff and smooth running of the activities of the council. These funds are dispatched through the votes of the ministry as a subvention. The size of the subvention depends on MTEF ceiling and quarterly allocation to the ministry.

Conditional grants to the district women council structures for their mandatory activities such as meetings 

These funds are dispatched directly from the Ministry of Finance. For the financial year 2014/15, the indicative planning figure for the Women Council’s conditional grant to all districts and municipalities is Shs 574.77 million. Out of the subvention from the ministry, the Women Council’s secretariat in 2009/10 established an income-generating grant which supports women in different districts of Uganda to start and improve on their income-generating activities. 

On average, four women groups per district of not less than 10 members are supported. The beneficiaries are selected by the District Women Council under the technical guidance of the chief administrative officer. Since the fund is very small, not all districts receive funding in each financial year. Thus, those that do not receive funding in a particular financial year are given priority in the next year.

Priority is also given to districts without any outstanding accountability. On average, each district receives about Shs 3.5 million. For the first three financial years, a total of about 800 women groups have been supported in 110 districts. The number of district women councils supported each year is determined by the sum of money available. 

As you heard, on the International Women’s Day celebrations in Kabale on 8 March 2015, the outstanding challenge of the National Women’s Council is elections for the executive committees, which we have not conducted since 2003. As the President pledged, these elections will be conducted as soon as the funds are secured. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, let me start with the Member from Lwemiyaga and then I will come to you.

2.40
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement to the House. Mr Speaker, I beg your pardon and the indulgence of members of Parliament. I heard the minister say, of course that all districts cannot get funds because of the scarcity of funds but most importantly that each district gets Shs 3.5 million. You come to Parliament to report that Shs 3.5 million has been sent to the districts to cater for women activities?

This is just too small and it cannot reach any point; not even one single sub-county. Therefore, to see the minister proudly present a statement and acknowledge the indulgence of the House, I thought that was an insult. This is because the pain of the women is very evident. Let us be honest; if indeed we intend to help the women who are bearing the burdens of this country, we ought to be serious about it. The minister is stating the MTEF ceiling -(Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Thank you, hon. Ssekikubo for giving way. The money that the minister has reported to this House is meant for facilitation in terms of transport and fuel for the chairperson and her executive to do mobilisation. At least this is what is happening in my district. However, there are other programmes and projects, for example, Luwero-Rwenzori, where we have specifically given guidelines to involve women by making a kind of affirmative action by taking on their association so that they benefit from those other programmes. 

Therefore, I thought I should give this clarification because obviously, Shs 5 million cannot cater for the projects of women save for mobilisation and calling meetings. This is the information I was giving.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information that I actually wanted to give to my minister is, she is talking of the Luwero-Rwenzori region where women would be benefiting from such programmes but you very well know that not all districts actually fall under Luwero-Rwenzori. By the way, the Shs 3.5 million is just for the executive and yet when they are reporting, it is supposed to be helping women development activities in the district. Therefore, I want to say that it is just peanuts and we need to do something to ensure that we support our women in the districts because they are doing credible work.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Lwemiyaga, you are holding the Floor.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If you look at the entire district and you pick only four women groups - even what the minister said that this is only for facilitation. What is the facilitation for? Do you mean this is some kind of fuel for the district chairperson and the executive to move around? Even if they were to give it to any of us here, we cannot depend on Shs 3.5 million and say you are doing a meaningful job.

Mr Speaker, I propose that let Government be honest. Fortunately, the Minister for Finance is here; let the reality be taken as a reality. This money cannot do much really. It cannot do anything substantial to the women. Can we here receive an undertaking that from hence ward, the ceiling for the women groups’ activity is going to be increased? It is because you cannot have all these under that small amount of money. You are either doing nothing or you seem to be there and you are not there. 

Lastly, why are you pegging this to the election of the women council? The women council election is an elaborate process which cannot be pegged on this amount that you have talked about. Therefore, I propose that let us be honest to the women and we undertake as country to support them with all our efforts and the available resources. Let us support the women’s cause because by supporting a woman, you are supporting the country. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the budget framework papers are coming in. The committee responsible for this paper should pick it up and then move from there.

2.44
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I begin outright by setting the record straight. What the Government Chief Whip was reporting was not what the Minister of State for Elderly and Disability Affairs said. What he said was that the Shs 574 million is what was budgeted for the meetings and the Shs 3.5 million is what was budgeted for the four groups per district and not every district receives the fund every financial year. It is given depending on the availability of the resources. That is what the minister said and if I got it wrong, then I beg to be pardoned.

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is the second least funded following the Ministry of Information Technology. This is a ministry with five sitting ministers of Labour, Disability, Youth and Gender. All of them are in this ministry and it is the second least underfunded. Therefore, when we are talking here and the Government Chief is giving credence to the Shs 3.5 million given to each district - I think let us be honest and fair to the women of this country. Moreover, we are the majority as far as the population is concerned and whatever comes to the district, by the way, these women do not have a say. 

At the end of the day, something should better be done about the funding of the Ministry of Gender. It better be given priority. Otherwise, if you are choosing only four women groups in the whole district - I go to parishes in Kaberamaido; one parish will bombard me with over 120 groups, then what is Shs 3.5 million to a whole district? Therefore, something should really be planned and I think - (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Leader of the Opposition. Mr Speaker, we are talking about Shs 3.5 million and there are about 112 districts, which is Shs 42 million, which the Government is failing to release. What is happening? I can even lend Shs 42 million to you -(Laughter)- that is what we are failing to release for women. Should we look for a loan again?

MS IBI EKWAU: Therefore, all these show you how appalling the situation on the ground is. If the Shs 3.5 million is for mobilisation, then give a minimum of Shs 20 million per district at least for the groups to begin with and thereafter, we can discuss from that point.

Secondly, the minister is saying this money is given depending on the availability of funds. We are in the budgeting process. In fact, we are ending the budgeting process. What do you do? This means there is no planning for this ministry. You wake up, close the eyes and say okay, this year, this is what we are giving. I think this is not proper. 

The function of the Women’s Day; this has been virtually left to the members of Parliament in this House. You will agree with me - each district, for example, Kaberamaido this time was given Shs 400,000 for the entire function and the rest was left for the politicians to fund. I think the Ministry of Gender should really set the record straight and plan for this ministry, if you care about the women as you hype outside there. 

The funding of this ministry should be a priority. You should even allow us help you so that the funding of this ministry is elevated other than coming here to tell us that you are giving Shs 3.5 million for the function and the whole process.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is one of those debates that do not attract a decision because the housing of it cannot call for a decision. We are in the budget process. I have just stated earlier that the committee responsible for this sector should pick this up. I hope the budget framework papers are coming in soon so that this matter can have a more productive debate and a decision taken formally by the House on how much funding - honourable minister, the figures being mentioned are quite small. I would have asked hon. Ssewungu to lay his contribution on Table so that we could start from there. (Laughter)

I think this will just be a debate but there will be no decision. It might be better if this issue is captured and brought up properly along those lines that hon. Ssekikubo raised so that it can be carried forward by the House and a decision formally taken to assist the institution to implement those activities. 

2. 50
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, PWD Representative): Mr Speaker, I just wanted to widen the debate because you know it is just -(Interjection)- no, not to deepen it.(Laughter) The statement was about allocation to the women councils only. I just wanted to inform this House -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that was the matter that was before -

MS NALULE: Yes, that is what I wanted to comment on. As a strategy for this Government to operationalise the affirmative action within the Constitution, they created councils not only for women but also for persons with disabilities and the youth. This kind of allocation we are talking about which is very small is not only to the women councils but it also affects other councils like the councils for persons with disability. 

My colleague said that even the usage of this funding is confused at operational level. I would like to inform the Parliament that Article 9, part 6 of the Finance and Management Act, which we have just passed calls upon gender and equity sensitive budgeting. Therefore, it is upon Parliament to ensure that when the budget framework paper comes, as the Speaker said, we look at all these budgets not only for women but to persons with disability and the rest. We need to ensure that there is equitable distribution of resources. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, that would be the proper processing of this debate because we will be debating but we will not come to any conclusion on this particular issue. The information is given but it does not seem fair to the people that this fund is supposed to serve. However, there is an avenue where we can resolve this issue properly. When the budget framework paper comes, the committee responsible will pick it up and come back to the House with a formal recommendation of what the House should do and then we can take a decision on the matter. I think that would be a good way to proceed. 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER ON THE WORLD TUBERCULOSIS DAY, 24 MARCH 2015

2.53
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Jeremiah Twa-Twa): Mr Speaker, I am making a statement on behalf of the Committee on Health on the subject matter of the World Tuberculosis Day, which is being marked today worldwide.  In Uganda, we are also marking it. The national event is taking place in Gulu. The statement is as follows:

On behalf of the Committee on Health, I wish to make the statement on the World Tuberculosis Day observed today, 24 March 2015. The theme of this year’s commemoration in Uganda is, “To reach all the 60,000 TB patients in Uganda” and using the slogan, “Find, test, treat, and cure all.”

The current situation

Tuberculosis (TB) is the second most common cause of death among the infectious diseases in Uganda, after HIV/AIDS. It is a contagious disease caused by bacteria called micro-bacterium Tuberculosis that often affects the lungs. It is mainly spread through air by a person inhaling germs from an infected person which are released through breathing, sneezing, coughing and spitting. I must add that it is also spread through raw milk and boiled meat. 

According to the World Health Organisation Global TB Report 2014, Uganda is ranked 20th in TB incidence among the 22 high burdened countries with an estimated 166 new TB infections per every 100,000 people annually. 

Tuberculosis is more common among male than female, with one female case for every eight male cases reported. This discrepancy is mainly attributed to unreported cases among women due to reluctance of women to seek medical treatment because of their household duties and childcare responsibilities among other issues. 

Tuberculosis affects mostly adults in the economically productive age group of 20-50 years with 98.5 per cent new cases detected in this age group, thus significantly affecting the economy and social fibre of society. High TB prevalence rates are also common among HIV/AIDS patients where over 50 per cent of them develop the disease. 

The World Health Organisation further indicates that in 2013, out of the nine million people affected worldwide, 25 per cent were in Africa, which also had the highest deaths relative to the population. It is also estimated that every year in Uganda, 60,000 cases are not diagnosed, treated and not registered by the National TB Programme. 

The setbacks	

Although TB control in Uganda has registered achievements such as increase in case detection from 13 per cent in 1990 to 69 per cent in 2011 through the National Tuberculosis and Leprosy Control Programme, control of the disease still faces a number of challenges that include the following:
1) The limited financial and human resource allocation to TB infection control. For quite long, TB is a forgotten disease that has received little attention. It is not prioritised for financial and human resource allocation leading to shortage of healthcare workers trained in diagnosis and management of the disease. 

For instance, the National TB Control Programme has an estimated budget for its activities from 2014/15 amounting to $39 million. Of this, only 19 per cent is available, with five per cent being domestically funded while 14 per cent is donor funded leaving 81 per cent unfunded. 

2) Limited advocacy and mass education about the disease. There is very little going on. 

3) Stigma and discrimination which lead to unreported cases hence fuelling the transmission and poor management of TB patients.

4) Absence of short time regime treatment. Treatment of TB takes 6-8 months and usually results in defaulting by the patients. Defaulting of treatment is common and leads to development of more resistant TB strains, commonly known as multi-drug resistant tuberculosis. 

5) Weak mechanism for tracing defaulters and new cases, lack of mechanism to trace those who default or fall out of treatment, which results in continued spread and increased death rate.

Lastly, weak management and delays in procurement of drugs

What is the way forward?

In view of the above highlighted setbacks and in line with the requirement to achieve the 2015 Millennium Development Goal of reducing prevalence of and death due to tuberculosis by 50 per cent compared to the baseline of 1990, Uganda should undertake the following key actions:

    • Embrace the Barcelona Declaration, which calls for full political commitment, to fight TB and declare it as an emergency that requires urgent action.

    • Parliament should debate TB or tuberculosis related issues and call for practical action from all stakeholders, including the public and private sector.

    • Effectively implement the Stop TB Strategy - that is, provide adequate resources, adequate resource allocation for TB medicines, research, advocacy and social mobilisation and also strengthen tuberculosis detection, through improved laboratory services.

    • Conduct monthly sensitisation and education about TB transmission, prevention and management to address the needs, stigmatization and discrimination of tuberculosis patients.

    • Establish an effective system to trace defaulters and ensure compliance to treatment.

    • Scale up collaborative TB – HIV activities and strengthen the prevention and management of multi-drug resistance tuberculosis.

    • Engage the general public, voluntary, corporate and private providers, through public and private partnership.

In conclusion, the committee is fully convinced that with full political and civic commitment, we can kick TB out of Uganda. I pray Government takes note and action to the above observation of Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson, for this statement in commemoration of the World TB Day. Honourable members, this kind of statement attracts a limited debate of about 15 minutes.

3.03
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for being robust and coming up with this statement. You know that this is a bit of a deviation from the normal practice that has been done, where international recognised days that have been designated by international agencies like the UN, are commemorated. Usually the lead ministry comes here and makes a presentation.

Right now, the innovativeness of the committee and the committee leadership has come up even to enable Parliament to realise and remember that after all, we are commemorating the World TB Day.

I would like to seek clarification from the Leader of Government Business; does this mean that this is something that has been downgraded in the work of Government that TB is not as important and does not require a statement from Government, to show commitment, seriousness and what we ought to do as a country to ensure that we address one of the leading killers? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of Government Business. 

MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, it is very important because traditionally, we Members of Parliament raise issues and then refute our responsibility to answer these questions. So, I wonder if I had a question relating to this subject and the role of the two issues, who would answer this question? The Minister of Health seems is not here. 

I also wonder if it would be possible for the statement from the committee to be supplemented by another statement from the Minister of Health so that we are sure of the responsibility and accountability of our Government. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does the Minister of Information have any information?

3.05
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Maj. Gen. Jim Muhwezi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Not at the moment. (Laughter)

3.06
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am concerned that even when we commemorate the World TB Day today, very little coverage, concern and awareness has been done. I therefore would like to know from Government whether it is committed in fighting and controlling the trend of TB as it is stated in the Millennium Development Goals. Very little coverage has been done in the media. At the district level, not much awareness and concern and activities are going on. Even as we sit here, very few people are aware that today is the International TB Day. 

I therefore would like to ask Government to pull up and then take seriously the issue of combating TB in the country. It is very unfair that we want TB to reach an alarming state and then we will run and look for funding and yet we could mitigate and control it at this level.

May I know why Government is not taking this issue seriously and what they will do from today on because there is still room for Government to come and do when very little has been done on this day. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of Government Business, those issues keep coming up. From hon. Dombo - the Minister of Health should have come to Parliament with a formal statement for this day. Is it now the idea of Government that it should be the back bench members and committees of Parliament that should come with statements to commemorate days like these or is it the responsibility of Government?

3.07
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not know; things are happening here without planning and I cannot say for sure that this is now the trend. However, if it becomes necessary, we shall ask the Minister of Health to come up with a statement in addition to what the chairperson has given. Thank you.

3.08
MR AHMED AWONGO (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are two things I would like to pick from the chairperson of this committee. He said that of the eight men infected, at least there must be one woman. Then for prevention, he seems not to have given very clear information about the prevention of TB. At least with HIV/AIDS, there is abstinence and use of condoms. What about the case of tuberculosis? What are those methods that can be applied to ensure that TB does not spread anyhow in a family and community? That is all I wanted to seek from the chairperson. 

3.10
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Mr Speaker, in order to clearly fight Tuberculosis, it is important that we realise that unless we involve the young generation through mass mobilisation by use of mass media about the dangers of TB and how it is spread or how it continues to spread and also involvement of the people in awareness of how TB spreads from one person to another, then Government shall have abdicated its responsibility of enhancing a society of healthy people. 

It is widely spread in prisons because of lack of adequate health facilities, lack of adequate drugs and very many people spread it from one person to another because of the congestion and lack of ability to train the prisoners and what they carry in form of TB.

Unless Government steps up its effort in tracing the TB patients and encouraging them to continue with the medication coupled with sanitisation of the young society, our society is destined for doom. Therefore, I would like to implore Government to take up responsibility. I can see the Minister of Finance here frowning; please, take up your responsibility and make sure you allocate enough resources to the health sector as scourges are continuing to increase and epidemics are continuing to grow. Therefore, take up your responsibility like the Rt Hon. Speaker has insinuated in order to save our countrymen from these avoidable deaths.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Speakers do not insinuate. They rule. (Laughter)

MR NSEREKO: The Speaker has directed. (Laughter) Thank you very much.

3.12
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true we demand a detailed statement concerning TB in this country. We would like the honourable minister to come up very clearly and tell us the statistics of people who are infected with TB and if possible, we need to go district by district in terms of percentage. 

I would like also to know the relationship between TB and HIV because most patients with HIV have TB. It is true TB is one of the forgotten diseases in this country. Nowadays, you do not hear about TB. In schools, we used to be sensitised and medical personnel used to move from school to school both primary and secondary to sensitise people about the causes, prevention and symptoms of the disease. 

Today, they country has forgotten about it. People no longer talk about TB. The sensitisation has shifted to HIV and other disease. Therefore, we need a detailed report concerning TB in this country, the statistics and the percentage per district so that a committee is set up to keep on sensitising our people. If possible, the medical personnel should continue moving from school to school as they used to do. 

I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.14
MR VICENT KYAMADIDI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the presentation. The clarification I would like to seek is, is the committee aware that in some health centres, some TB patients sleep in the same ward with other patients who do not have TB?

Like hon. Nsereko has said, this is very dangerous especially when it comes to the spread. I agree with my colleague, hon. Olanya. I think the Ministry of Health should take up an integrated approach to HIV/AIDS. I am now talking as a social psychologist. It reduces the immunity and once the immunity has reduced, every patient is prone to opportunistic infections and TB could be one of them. 

The fact that the Ministry of Health took HIV /AIDS campaign, it forgot about other diseases that were rampant. I would like to thank the committee for taking up this -(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Kyamadidi for giving way. The information I would like to give is that it is a common knowledge and practice in all hospitals and health centres that if there is identification of a TB patient, that patient is isolated. This policy is implemented not only in Government health centres but in all health centres.

I thank you.

MR KYAMADIDI: I thank you very much, Minister of Information, for that information. However, it is not the latest. The latest information is that, that should be the practice but it is not being practiced. The practice would be that an identified patient is isolated but that is not happening. I would like to give information to the Minister of Information that in some wards, if you are not aware –(Interruption)

MS ONDORU: Thank you very much. We should know that TB is one of the highly infectious diseases. That is why it is one of the opportunistic diseases to come in when HIV has lowered your immunity. Therefore, if a TB patient is put together with the ordinary patients in a ward, I think it is before research has been done or the patient has been tested for TB. I do not think it is practised. 

In Uganda, you should take it that everybody is suffering from TB until proven otherwise. Therefore, it is only in the ward when the patient is tested and proved that it is TB case that they are quickly separated. I do not think it is deliberate that they are put in the same ward with other patients. 

Thank you very much.

MR KYAMADIDI: Finally, Mr Speaker, no one would encourage this. Honestly, I agree with you, honourable colleague. Like she has said, it is an opportunistic infection and it is very infectious, by the time the patient is identified, may be more others are already infected.

In most health centres, I do not know what happens in your place, they do not have even isolation centres. Therefore, by the time the patient is referred to the referral hospital of a certain level, the spread is already done. Like the hon. Nsereko was saying, we need to put serious sensitisation programmes and media campaigns such that we keep our people aware that TB is still an infectious disease and it kills. Thank you.

3.19
MRS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would have expected the chairperson to mention the most common way of spreading this disease. We were told that sharing glasses and straws for taking alcohol especially the “malwa” group who share the straws as they suck is one of the commonest ways of spreading this disease. When we are giving information, I think we need to look at our local situations. Many of us share glasses, drinking centres and straws especially when we are talking alcohol. 

We should use the local situation, alert people and make them know that we are sitting on a time bomb as we enjoy alcohol.
It is not true that doctors allow patients to share rooms when they know that you are a TB case. In fact, the most modern way of treating TB patients is to allow them to go back home so that they do not keep them in hospitals.

Once you can move, you are quickly given your drugs and you carry them home, so that you do not infect other people in the hospital. Even your family is invited to the hospital and they are educated on how to live with you while at home.

The doctors here will confirm to us, once a TB patient has started on medication the TB ceases to be infectious. Once you are on drugs, you cease to infect other people.

Therefore, I would like to thank the ministry for the little you are doing; I call it little because there is so much more you need to do -(Interruption)

MR BADDA: Mr Speaker, given the fact that members are raising very pertinent concerns and the fact that TB is a big threat to the lives of Ugandans, and also given the fact that we do not have the Minister of Health with us today and the Leader of Government Business has promised to bring a comprehensive report about the matter, wouldn’t it be right for us to defer this important debate to a time when the minister comes with a statement and we direct our concerns directly to the government other than directing them to the chairperson of the committee?

Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have used the latitude of the Speaker’s authority to allow these comments. The rules say can be commented upon when a statement of this nature is made, for a limited period of 15 minutes. However, because of the importance of the matter, I have enlarged it to accommodate - but it is supposed to take comments only, not debate.

We expect a formal statement from the Minister of Health so that that one can be properly debated and we move on from there. That would be a proper way to proceed.

I used my latitude to extend it for a much longer time than I had expected because it was supposed to be 15 minutes but we have gone way beyond 30 minutes.

Therefore, I would like hon. Boona to close and hon. Ababiku use two minutes. I will close until this matter comes back to the Floor.

MS BOONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was interested in the theme of reaching out to the 60,000 TB patients in Uganda whom we need to find, test, treat and cure.

This makes the theme, the debate or information very relevant; that we are living with 60,000 people who are infected and who do not know that they are infected and are spreading the disease.

Therefore, for this matter, I would like to say that indeed we need to find them, let them have the test and be treated. Otherwise the 60,000 will create a spiral for another 60,000 patients in the country.

Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.24
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. My first concern is about the statistics reflected here about the ratio of male vis-à-vis the female.

I propose that when the minister comes, we need the source of this information because I know, which to me is a fact, is that when you get to the health centres, women are the majority.
The justification given here is that because women are preoccupied with other activities, they do not go to the health centres and are therefore not tested. This is not a true reflection of what is on the ground. Could we have more information on this?

Secondly, my colleagues have already talked about the linkage of HIV/AIDS and TB. If we do not put more resources on this, and yet it is more contagious - Instead of it remaining as the second killer, it will turn out to be the first killer because even in the hospitals and health centres those patients are admitted based on the report here. In a short term, they have to take six to eight months and that is a long period of time. With the congestion in the hospitals, this is a risky venture.

I propose that the minister comes with clear strategies in order to minimise the high rate of the spread. Thank you, very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Ababiku. I understand the proportional standing of the chairperson who made the statement but he would not be the right person to deal with these questions as they are being raised. We will wait for the minister to make a statement and then we can discuss it with the minister.

In the public gallery, this afternoon, we have students and teachers of Serwanga Lwanga Memorial Secondary School, represented by hon. Fred Badda and hon. Caroline Nanyondo Birungi, Woman Representative for Kalangala District. (Applause)

We also have pupils of Namugongo Girls Primary School represented by hon. Ssemujju Nganda and hon. Rosemary Seninde. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

LAYING OF PAPERS

        I) TAX EXPENDITURES FOR QUARTER TWO FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

3.27
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the Tax Expenditures for Quarter Two Financial Year 2014/2015.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee on finance.

II) REQUEST TO PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW A LOAN 
OF $325 Million FROM THE EXPORT IMPORT BANK OF CHINA FOR THE UPGRADE 
AND EXPANSION OF ENTEBBE INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT (EIA)

3.28
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the proposed loan of $325 million from the Export Import Bank of China, for the upgrade and expansion of Entebbe International Airport. 
I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what is the exact thing you are laying? My records say it is a request to Parliament to authorise.

MR KASAIJA: Thank you, very much for that correction. I beg to lay on the Table of Parliament the proposed loan-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: A request to Parliament to authorise- 

MR KASAIJA: A request to Parliament to authorise a loan of $325 million from the Export Import Bank -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, these matters are constitutional and they have to be by the wording of the Constitution. This is “A request to Parliament to authorise Government to borrow.” (Laughter)

It is not anything else if this is what you would like to do. You can take the text, which is on the Order Paper; it will guide you so that you can lay that document.

MR KASAIJA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I wish to lay on Table a request to Parliament to authorise Government to borrow a loan of $325 million from the Export Import Bank of China for the upgrade and expansion of the Entebbe International Airport. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on National Economy to handle within the framework of the rules and advise the House on how to proceed. 

(III) REQUEST TO PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO SPECIAL DRAWING RIGHTS 34 MILLION (EQUIVALENT TO $50.2M) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT (IFAD) 
TO FINANCE THE PROGRAMME FOR THE RESTORATION OF LIVELIHOODS 
IN THE NORTHERN REGION (PRELNOR)

3.31
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table a request to Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to Special Drawing Rights 34 million equivalent to $50.2 million from the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) to finance the Programme for the Restoration of Livelihoods in the Northern Region (PRELNOR). I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the appropriate Committee on National Economy to handle within the framework of the rules and advise the House on how to proceed. 

3.32
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, the House has always allowed the government to request for borrowing and these requests we get every other day. The country gets indebted when we borrow. Not only that, when we delay to utilise the money borrowed, we spend a lot of money on interest and all sorts of expenditure.

To exercise some responsibility on our part as Parliament, it is very important that when the government comes requesting for borrowing, that they should update us on what has happened to loans that we have authorised them to borrow for many years. I know that there are some loans, which we approved in 2008/09 which were supposed to be for farmers to borrow but up to now, nobody has told us which farmer has borrowed that money and how those lines of credit are being utilised.

Mr Speaker, it is not just a question of authorising the government to borrow. It is important as Parliament for us to know how we are performing. In case we are not performing, how much are we losing by “sitting” on the loans that we authorised the government to borrow? 

I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to guide the House on whether there is any item on payment on non-disbursed loans that we have authorised in this House? Is there any expenditure we are meeting on loans that are not disbursed?

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, the issue of low absorption of loans is an issue we are handling very squarely. I am submitting a statement to Cabinet to show the performance of each loan and once Cabinet has looked at it, I intend to come here through the Committee on National Economy to show you precisely how each loan that Parliament has authorised is moving. I beg to promise.

3.34
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I know the Minister of Finance is required at the time of presentation of the budget to lay a statement to this House, showing the state of indebtedness of the country. Every time the Minister of Finance has presented the budget, she has also laid this statement to the House. Unfortunately, we have not received ample time to debate that statement by the minister.

I know very soon, he will be coming; this is a requirement under the Constitution. Whether the Cabinet looked at it or not, it is a must that you bring that statement to the House and as Parliament, we must have ample time to debate the indebtedness of the country and find out whether we are absorbing the loans, whether we has capacity to pay in future or whether we are getting indebted beyond our ability to pay.

This is something that we must abide by. Should you present it next time you are reading the budget, it would be prudent for us to get ample time to discuss this area; because unlike many countries, Uganda is one of the few countries that has this procedure; where Members of Parliament, on behalf of the people they represent, must evaluate and sanction the ability of Government to pay and whether Government is putting to proper use, the loans that they have previously borrowed -(Interruption)

MS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, hon. Dombo. The information I would like to give, is that only this morning, the group from National Planning Authority were here presenting and it came out that among the loans that we have approved, only 30 per cent has been utilised. Seventy per cent is not utilised yet committed and we are paying interest on the unutilised loans.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much for the information. Really, that information strengthen my request, that as soon as it is practically possible, we could, as a House, have an opportunity to debate in detail this statement from the Minister of Finance so that it can give us an informed decision next time we approve loans, whether to approve or not to.

 I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The issue I posed to the minister is critical because these loans are not in respect of one sector; they are different. What we would like to know, honourable minister, are there loans that are committed but not disbursed, on which the country is paying interest? How much are we paying for free? Separate this issue from all the other issues when you are reporting and first address the House on this.

If what the National Planning Authority is saying is true, that out of the loans we have accumulated, only 30 per cent is performing, the rest is committed not disbursed, yet we are paying interest in millions of dollars every year, on something we are not using, you need to advise the House on this honourable minister.

MR MWIRU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am only wondering whether it is not procedurally right, that at this juncture, you direct the Committee on National Economy to process the book as laid on the status of loans, so that debate can ensue arising on the report of the Committee on National Economy.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. If you read the report that was given to us last year at the reading of the budget on loans, the report shows that we had borrowed to the tune of $6 billion, only $4 billion had been released, about $2.4 billion not committed, available, but not utilised. 

In the same report - I can understand the Minister is now the new Minister for Finance but he has been in the same ministry - last year, we paid $4 million interests on loans that are unutilised. I am surprised the minister who is in the same ministry does not remember the report they brought to Parliament. 

The further procedural issue I am raising, Mr Speaker, is whether this Parliament should not now demand that before our Committee on National Economy processes a request they should be the ones to update us using the report - that information is readily available.

Their enthusiasm to handle requests has blinded the members never to consider that report because the committee is supposed to process a report, come here and we debate and take a decision because as of now, you cannot borrow more than half of your GDP. With these loans you are processing every day, we have now hit half of our GDP and the minister knows it but because we do not process the reports they give us, so they celebrate and bring more.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, like I said, these loans do not relate to one issue. That is the difficulty we have. You cannot use the general non-performance of other loans to block others which are vital. That is the crisis we are facing, that is why we need guidance. Why are those ones not performing so that we know? We do not want to use this non-performance status to begin affecting other loan requests for sectors that are actually critical.
 
This debate has been happening every time there is debate on loans. We want to avoid this so that when we come to a particular request, we deal with that one separate from the backlog issues that seem to affect our debate in this House.

I am saying this because I have sat here and presided over this debate and seen the concerns of the members.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I think hon. Dombo put the position very clearly. Every time we come to present a budget to Parliament, we lay on Table the status of our borrowing and the Committee on National Economy analyses those borrowings and it is supposed to give us a report. 

To answer your question straight, Mr Speaker, there are loans, which are doing extremely well but there are also loans, which are not doing so well. That is why I said, at an appropriate time I will come back to this House with a statement and show you what is performing and what is not performing and why. It is a promise. I will come back before this House and bring that information so that you can look at it and debate it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please, conclude.

MR KASAIJA: I want to make one position very clear; our debt sustainability is spot on. We are not borrowing beyond our means to pay back. (Interjections) I can make that statement with no hesitation. I will prove it statistically, at an appropriate time, when I bring the statement.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. From what the minister has said, he has actually told us that some loans are not performing. Now, is it procedurally right to go ahead and approve this loan since you have now got to know that some loans are not well performing?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Under what item are raising this procedure? (Laughter)

MR TAYEBWA: Mr Speaker, the most important thing that we are -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, under what item of the debate are you raising that issue?

MR TAYEBWA: From what he has said -(Mr Ssekikubo rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Member for Lwemiyaga -

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have heard the minister clearly stating that each time they make a loan request, it is passed by the committee of this House.

I take exception to the insinuation that after all, whether worthy or otherwise, it is this House that passes the loan because I have heard him saying that each time a loan request is made, it is brought to this House and it is passed. Now to that extent let us not play a blame game here, why do you bring those –(Interruption)

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I think we are all honourable members of Parliament and we should not put words in the mouths of colleagues when they have not said so. I have not said and not putting blame on either the committee or Parliament. I have not said that. 

Is the honourable Member of Parliament from Lwemiyaga, my good son, in order to insinuate that I am trying to put blame on people of Parliament when I have not done so? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, if he is your good son then you could find another avenue of solving this matter -(Laughter)- but now that the issue is raised on the record of this House, honourable members, these processes are constitutional; no borrowing can happen without the approval of Parliament. Therefore, the minister is stating the obvious. If it is not approved by this Parliament, it cannot work. That is the Constitution.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I raised this matter with very good intention. I think some Members probably misunderstood me. It would be very irresponsible of this Parliament, particularly, this side of Parliament to appear to be putting a ban on borrowing. We cannot do that because we know this country runs on loans that we borrow from different donors or lenders.

However, Mr Speaker, now that you have given me an opportunity, I am just seeking clarification. I want the minister to clarify that we are not only focusing on the external loans. You are aware that domestic borrowing is triangulating the economy because when Government borrows domestically, the government borrows at very high rate of 16 per cent. I am sure you are aware of that.

The country is losing by allowing the government to borrow domestically because you also deny the private sector the space to borrow. Therefore, there are very many dimensions of borrowing. When you come on the Floor of Parliament, do not only tell us the loans you borrowed from Exim bank and so on. We also want to know why you are borrowing domestically and how much you are paying for those loans.

What is now the debt equity ratio Uganda has? If you want me to tell or maybe to advise you, based on the sketch that I have in my head, Uganda is insolvent because the amount of indebtedness we have - because you do not tell us the truth - vis-à-vis our asset value is more. I think you really need to come to us and convince us that we are safe. Otherwise, Uganda could be declared bankrupt.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am just beginning to wonder under what law you would declare a government –

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I am raising a point of order. We are on item No.6, “Laying of Papers”. Under our Rules of Procedure, that item is provided for under Rule 31 and the procedure is clearly laid down.

Under Rule 31, Mode of Laying Papers, Sub Rule (2) says: “As soon as the Clerk announces ‘Papers for Laying’ - which has been done – “the paper shall be laid on the Table without a question put.” Mr Speaker, 31 (5) says, “A paper laid on Table may be referred to the relevant committee,” which, Mr Speaker, you have done. 

This debate that has taken about 30 minutes, the substantive questions being raised are questions that will be raised at the committee stage or when the committee makes a report to this House and we are responding. 

Is it in order to continue debating this matter as if the matter has gone to the committee and the committee has made a report? Aren’t we infringing upon our Rules of Procedure? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the honourable member who has just left the Floor has been appointed Deputy Attorney-General and we are due to approve him to take his post. I think that he is beginning to show his resilience. (Laughter)  I think he is putting the Appointments Committee on notice that he is able. 

However, I think that on this occasion, honourable minister, you did not do very well in the sense that after the paper was laid and referred to the committee, the acting Leader of the Opposition rose on the substantive matter of procedure and raised those issues; that is why we have reached where we are.

But also in the wisdom of the Speaker, because there are substantive issues that maybe following and that this debate could help clear, we sometimes need to rely on the guidance of processes by the Speaker because the Speaker looks at the whole picture and not just one item. (Laughter) So, the honourable minister is not in order. (Applause)

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF 
THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND (NSSF)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this report was presented and I now propose the motion for the adoption of the report of the Select Committee on the National Social Security Fund for your debate. Debate starts now and we will take three minutes each. The debate will take a limited time of one hour; then, we will take a decision. 

Procedure?

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure in regards to this report that was read to us last week and it pertains to Rule 64 on sub judice.

On pages 46 to 53 of the report about recruitment of top manager of National Social Security Fund, reference section 4.1, this matter is in the High Court of Uganda vide Vincent Kibanja v. Attorney-General in the High Court Civil Application HCCA No. 175 of 2014 and therefore, sub judice.

Then, on pages 54-55 under section 4.22 on summary dismissals of staff, the matter is also in court and, therefore, I seek your guidance on whether this would not be sub judice to refer to them in the debate. The cases are:

    1) Mpata Edmond v. National Social Security Fund Labour Claims No. 243/2014 filed in the Industrial Court on 13 November 2014.
    2) Mabale Ajuna v. National Social Security Fund Labour Dispute Reference 030/2015 filed in the Industrial Court on 11 March 2015.
    3) Atuwera Israel v. National Social Security Fund Labour Dispute 241/2014 filed in the Industrial Court on 3 November 2014.
    4) Rutaremwa Mark v. National Social Security Fund Labour Dispute No. 251/2014 filed in the Industrial Court on 20 October 2014.

That is the issue of procedure. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you. Honourable members, the procedural issue that is raised relates to our Rule 64 on sub judice. The matters being referred to relate to specific subjects of recruitment of top managers, irregular recruitment of staff and summary dismissal of staff.

There is evidence that in the first case of the recruitment of top managers, there is a High Court civil case against the Attorney-General and the number and reference is given. The rules say that, “(2) A matter shall be considered sub judice if it refers to active criminal or civil proceedings and in the opinion of the Speaker, the discus­sion of such matter is likely to prejudice its fair determination.” 

The above is the text that I am now being required to apply to see if these matters would affect the rights and lead to an “infection” on the fair adjudication of the matters that are before the court.

Honourable members, the court cases are cited, the disputes and the references to those court cases are cited. I think we have a limitation on the issue of recruitment of top managers at NSSF, irregular recruitment of staff and allegations of nepotism in the recruitment at NSSF and summary dismissal of staff. Those three items we will not be going into any debate on them but we will debate the entire report with the exception of making statements that could affect the right of the parties in the courts. However, we can debate the rest of the report. 

Please let us not touch on these particular matters since they can affect those rights. They can debate the rest of the report and it is bulky, acquisition of shares and others. Let us try to limit our debate on those matters, please.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am having difficulty accessing the report on this ipad. The thing is not loading any files in my corner here; so, I cannot proceed. I am curtailed and I hear from a number of my neighbours, they also have a similar problem. So, how do we proceed without a copy of the report, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is that the same situation for all of you? Some Members have, I see the Member for Jinja Municipality East is displaying his on his ipad. For me, I have a hard copy so I cannot crosscheck what you are saying. - Is it there? - So, can we proceed with the debate members?

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If the debate is limited and among the areas not to be debated include management, when we are talking about NSSF -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Please, honourable members, we are talking about recruitment of top managers not management. The recruitment process is what is in court but you can talk about management even for five days but the issue of recruitment of top managers is what is in court. 

MR TAYEBWA: Clarification - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Bushenyi Municipality, you do not seek clarification from the Speaker.  You do not even seek guidance from the Speaker. (Laughter) I do not deal with facts; I deal with the issues of the rules and procedures, orders and related matters. So, try and channel your matter along those lines to them easily.

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true some parts of the reports have issues in court. Is it procedurally right to discuss half of the report and then, how shall we conclude on it? Is it procedurally right to discuss a half way report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is the wish of the House to do so. If it is the wish of the House not to debate, I do not force you to debate. The issue is the report and the terms of reference for this committee are so broad that the issue of recruitment of senior staff, dismissal of staff does not even constitute one tenth of the report. Even it is the desire of the Members that we cannot debate it, we wait until the court process has been determined, then we come back to it; so be it.

MRSOGWAL: Mr Speaker, the proposal given by the minister is very interesting. However, we do not want to engage the minister on matters that may tear us apart. We do not want to polarise the House on this very good report. But the minister should have told us at what point he discovered that it was sub judice; because you could have guided the committee earlier. This decision was taken in Parliament but now that it has happened, we do not want to polarise the House as I have suggested.

I think, procedurally, it would be right but you can guide the House that we allow the committee - this is a very good report, and I have stated it and I want to repeat it over and over. It would be good to allow the committee to go and have a look at it, look at the proposal given by the minister, cite the cases which the minister has made reference to and see how it would impact the entire report so that they come up with a revised document and a revised recommendation because now, what arewe discussing; what are the observations and recommendations they have made? What will the House come up with? My proposal is that the committee should be given an opportunity to respond to this new element, which has been brought to this debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, under the rules, no other institution is required to determine whether a matter is sub judice or not except the Speaker and I have just guided that on the issue of the recruitment of top managers at NSSF, which is reported on pages 46 to 53, the irregular recruitment of staff, allegation of nepotism, which is on pages 53 to 55 and also summary dismissal of staff, which is in part on pages 55 to 58, only those areas have problems because the parties are in court on the same issues. They are raising these same concerns of nepotism in court; court has to determine it and they have challenged the process of recruitment in court. It is the question of rights that has arisen subject to adjudication by the courts. The sub judice rule kicks in, in the sense that you do not want to unfairly affect the final determination of the case by taking a Parliamentary decision on the matter. (Ms Anywar rose_)

I hope the honourable member for Kitgum understands what I am saying. That is why we need to separate these issues but the rest of the issues are very many; such as acquisition of Umeme shares and there is a long list of issues, investment in real estate - this is only one part of human resource management which is affected in only those three aspects. The rest of it is free for discussion. That is all I am guiding. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much Mr Speaker. In light of the fact that you have legally guided us well, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we pick that part that is untouchable for the report by a way of motion, so that it is not part of the committee report, which we are going to debate and conclude and we leave it at that? Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that that particular part is pulled out of the report so that as we are concluding on the report itself, it is not left pending?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are not going to debate those aspects of the report. We will not take decisions on those aspects of the report. We will take decisions on the rest of the report that is before us. Because if we do take decisions on those three aspects, we will have already decided for the court what they should do and that will not be fair to the judicial process. That is what the process is about. Extracting it is in the process of taking the decision but in your debate, exclude it when we come to taking decisions on the items. - Debate starts now.

4.10
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to debate the report of the committee. Whereas, I thank the committee for the report in other aspects, I differ from the committee in as far as failure to seek and secure approval of the Board and the Solicitor General is concerned.

I invite you to look at the reading of section 30 of the NSSF Act, which reads; “All monies in the Fund, including the reserve accounts, which are not for the time being required to be applied for the purpose of the Fund, shall be invested in such investments as may be determined by the Board in consultation with the Minister.”

What is the issue Mr Speaker? That NSSF invested funds without the approval of the Board. When you look at the committee report, they seem to have taken solace in the fact that they were informed by NSSF that the policy had authorised the Board to invest. The reading of section 30 is very clear; that the law vests the powers in the Board and this can only be done with the consultation of the minister. In no way can the powers of the Board be delegated to any individual other than the Board.

Therefore, for the committee to tell this House - because when you look at the observations of the committee, they proceed to say that there was no requirement at the time to subject the IPO investment to the approval of NSSF Board hence, there was no error committed when Mr Ivan Kyayonka and Mr Richard Byarugaba purchased Umeme IPO without the approval or involvement of NSSF Board members. 

Mr Speaker, the powers conferred by a statute of Parliament cannot be delegated to any other organ. I am of the same opinion that this was an illegality, which was committed by whoever was involved. Even if the Board was to take a decision on this matter, it had to do that in consultation with the minister. 

I am fortified by the Electoral Commission Act. When it comes to equating academic documents, it says that “National Council in consultation with UNEB shall issue a certificate of equivalence.” In that regard, Mr Speaker, there is no way National Council on its own can proceed to issue a certificate of equivalence. There must be proof -(Member timed out.)

4.13
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (NRM, Ndoora County East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a well done job. My issues will be only related to only two items and I will speak generally: One, in respect of investment in shares and two, in respect of real property.

Having gone through the report, I tend to agree with the committee’s observation, particularly, on page 16 in respect of investment in the equity market because the nature of equity market, volatile as they are, require quick decision-making and I believe when we are enacting the law on liberalisation of the pension sector, may be as Parliament, we need now to give specific guidelines in the law in which areas and which percentages as other jurisdictions’ pension funds can be invested including our own pension here.

Secondly, having looked at the report on the investment of shares, there are some two areas, which I think the committee failed to properly guide on when making their report. One is the interpretation of Section 30 of the NSSF Act vis-a-vis the interpretation of Section 91 of the URBRA Act read together with Statutory Instrument No. 44 of 2014.

When you look at the combination of all that, Mr Speaker, it tends to suggest that in making an investment decision for a pension sector, there is no requirement for consent or approval of either the Minister or the Solicitor-General. Whereas, the NSSF Act provides for the consent of the minister, the URBRA Act, which now is superior to the NSSF Act in matters of the pension sector deals away with that consent. 

Therefore,  I believe the committee should have come out clearly to state the position of the law as it is and I tend to believe that the position of the law is as reflected in the URBRA Act and Statutory Instruments No. 44 of 2014. Once that is done, then most of the recommendations of the committee in that respect would have to be amended to tally with the present position of the law.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you suggesting that the URBA law came after?

MR NIWAGABA: Yes

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, by its coming after all related matters can -

MR NIWAGABA: Yes and that particular section says it is superior to all matters to do with the pension sector. In respect of the real property, I am convinced with the narration of the committee on chapter 3, on investment on real estate. However, when you look at their conclusion, it tends to disagree with their earlier observations and narrations, particularly, when it comes to determination of the price.

I believe determination of the price cannot be imaginative. It can only be the Chief Government Valuer or private valuers. So, where valuers have determined that the price is this and the committee,  you come and say, no, you have sold below the price when the valuation has been determined; I think that will be speculative. The whole problem I can see especially in respect of Plot 434 Namirembe Road came at the time of purchase of that plot. I wonder how a plot could be purchased or a certificate of title was issued without an access road.

The other problem the committee failed to address us on was the provision of Access to Roads Act. One of the reprints of the numerous amendments to the Land Act seems to suggest that the Access to Roads Act was repealed. If an Access to Roads Act was repealed even if it is in existence and your piece of land is circled by some other person’s land, you can only get access by either negotiating with that person or going to court and the effect of negotiating with a person who already circles you and wants your land, thinking you can get a fair deal, to me, is to think beyond the market forces. 

So, I believe the committee did a good job, but by not addressing itself to the fact that matters of price are determined by the Chief Government Valuer or the private valuers; and two, the effect of the Access to Roads Act and how an access road can be obtained - I believe their recommendations will also need to be amended in light of those concerns I have raised.

4.19
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for coming up with this good report. However, I have issues on investments in real estates. I seem not to agree with the committee’s observation about how the final value of property was arrived at. 

Mr Speaker, the cost of acquisition is always taken as a book value. That is the cost you base on to determine whether the value of the property has gone up or down. However, the committee went ahead to add the costs that were incurred in the process of transferring the title from leasehold to freehold - in accounting, this cost does not form part of acquisition cost;  it is expensed in the period when it is incurred. It is not carried onto the balance sheet. This is where I have an issue with them.

The second issue is on determination of losses or gains on disposal. There was an asset with an acquisition value of Shs 650 million. It was disposed of at Shs 650 million with a valuation cost of Shs 620 million and as a committee, you recommend that there was loss at disposal yet the revalued amount was Shs 620 million though it was sold at Shs 650 million?

Mr Speaker, the issue which the committee would have concentrated on is inflation in price at the point of acquisition whereupon land, which was supposed to cost an approximation of Shs 234 million, was acquired at Shs 650 million. I would have expected the committee to make recommendations and conclusions in regard to that aspect. As I conclude, I would like to propose that at an appropriate time you allow me move an amendment on the recommendation that was made by the committee. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.22
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. Since we are to limit ourselves on the interest of our sub judice rule - we basically have the issue of investment in terms of real estate in regard to Umeme.

Mr Speaker, in our recommendation as Parliament, we said the concession between Umeme and Government was dangerous and a report was passed here to the effect that there should be no dealings with them anymore. In addition, the technocrats advised our friends from NSSF - see on pages 29 and 30 - not to proceed with Umeme because they under-declared by the time of filing their returns on taxes and so forth. 

However, NSSF still went ahead to do business with Umeme – a company that had said they were not making profits; NSSF still went on to enter into business with them. This was gross violation of the law and the rights of workers.

If we look at that plot of land at Namirembe – Plot 434, where we had three firms – Bageine and Company and the East African Valuers and the other giving different prices for the same piece of land – but you know they proceeded to buy this land at Shs 650 million. The first firm said that the value was at Shs 720 million. The second firm talked of Shs 550 million and the third one talked of Shs 300 million or something. They proceeded to buy the land at Shs 650 million plus converting it from lease to freehold – Shs 65 million went in there.

I would think that by the time they were selling it, the price, after about a year went back to Shs 650 million. The Shs 650 million was actually the reserve price. How did this purchaser – the people who constructed the house actually deliberately to deny access to the same plot – know the reserve price and on the same day they were given the –(Interruption)

MR LWANGA: Thank you, member, for giving way. I would like to give you information in regard to how profits of a company are worked out. The fact that, for tax purposes, Umeme seems to be making a loss because they are not paying taxes, it does not mean they are not making money. This is because they have a lot of capital allowances. Capital allowances are those allowances, which are allowable to be deducted from your profit in advance for what you have invested. Therefore, in actual fact, the company is making profits. However, for tax purposes, the papers show negative. Thank you very much.

MR ANYWARACH: If they are not making profits, then which money are they entering into business with? I think mine is a simple mind. I am looking at the product part of it. I did not know it was going to be that hostile point of information, but thank you.

Mr Speaker, I think the recommendation of the committee is a little bit weak. The committee should have recommended, under that investment, that there must be an investment committee of NSSF separate from the MD and the board; at least an investment committee of NSSF.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, at the right time before we adopt this recommendation, I am putting the House on notice that I will move an amendment onto this recommendation on the real estate dealing. Thank you very much.

4.27
DR SAMUEL LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the report. It has several good recommendations. Of course some issues have been overtaken by time because by the time this motion came in, we in the workers’ community were very much worried with a lot of anxiety, especially on the issue of top managers, which has been resolved.

I have few issues –(Interjection)- no we have no problem with them and we support all of them. I would like to associate myself with the comments by hon. Henry Musasizi and hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, concerning the issue of the real estate. 

I will not go into the details, but I would think that the recommendations could have brought on board the original managers who inflated this price from about Shs 230 million to about Shs 650 million. They should make good that amount. I think at the level of recommendations, we shall be able to pursue that line.

The second point, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, honourable for giving way. Actually, when you look at page 44 of the report, it clearly captures that aspect of inflated budget price. 

However, the report mentioning that the committee did not interview the person who purchased - that is the former Managing Director, Mr Chandi Jamwa - and it would be contrary to our rule and rule of natural justice to condemn him because he wasn’t heard.  That is the aspect which the committee failed to really zero on.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much for that information. I would think that the current managers did their best to sell that plot at Shs 650 million because at that time it could have been bought at Shs 200 million. Therefore, according to our analysis, the other manager should be brought on board. 

The other important recommendation, Mr Speaker, which never surfaced was on the issue of the minister. I know that God worked out a way because we were insisting that the minister be censored, but by the time the report came, I think something had happened. That has really assisted me because I was going to pursue that line. 

However, I would think -(Interjection)- we are very happy about that – that the new minister should note that he should not tamper with workers’ money because we have had a lot of troubles between the former minister and NSSF and all these - and every time we have had that situation, it is because of interference by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you did not request for additional time.

4.30
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. Other factors being constant - I would deal with what we are left to handle. Mr Speaker, the issue of the plot at Namirembe Road - I think colleagues have really alluded to that. However, to just add on to that, my question and concerns are that to the best of my knowledge, land in Uganda does not depreciate, at least, it only appreciates. When you look at the value for the period of four years between when the land was bought and when it was sold and at the same price; it leaves a lot to be answered. It does not need rocket scientists to know that something fishy went around during the sale of this plot.

Therefore, I would also want to know, in details, the beneficiaries of this land. We should lift the veil and go beyond what we know and really get into the details of this. Is it too late to return this prime land back to NSSF? 
It is true this land was bought for a good reason using workers’ money; it is really well located. In light of that, the cost does not benefit the workers because the deal was fishy. Therefore, can we develop a mechanism of ensuring that this piece of land benefits the workers of this country?
	
Secondly, Mr Speaker, I was looking at Umeme with its deal - what came into my mind is that we make laws in this House but more often, we tend to give a lot of power to the ministers. In the report, you find that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was everywhere using the powers that be, which actions have messed us up as a country. This should be an eye-opener to this House. 

However, going to the details of this deal with Umeme, where they got a generously good concession and hon. Gerald Sendawula also got the pay, my concern is that, as a House, we have met Umeme in different fora. I sit on the Committee on Natural Resources and we have had our disgust with the way Umeme -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude in one minute.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much. We have had disgusting moments with this Umeme business in this country. If Umeme is not paying taxes as it should have done and it is masquerading or declaring itself as a broke investor, why should we retain an investor who is no longer viable in this country; an investor that is too broke to pay our taxes? I think it is time we showed this investor an exit. We need viable investors only, who are able to pay taxes for our country to operate. I want to amend this recommendation to say that Umeme should be taken on. However, if they are broke and no longer viable, then they should pack up as we had earlier proposed. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.35
MR YONAH MUSINGUZI (NRM, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I stand to add my voice to the voice of the Members of the Select Committee who made a detailed report. 

However, before I proceed, Mr Speaker, I would like to point out that I am not comfortable because this is an investigating committee, which has made serious recommendations. We are not discussing a budget neither are we talking about the normal progress of a Government body or a ministry where we would need technical advice. We are going to make serious recommendations - NSSF had a fair hearing when it appeared before the committee. So, I do not think it is to the interest of this Parliament for NSSF staff to be here with us again. Why are they here? We do not need any technical advice from them anymore. They shouldn’t be here because we want to make serious recommendations; I feel I am not comfortable to do so. Thank you.

4.36
COL. FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I stand to join my colleagues to thank the committee for a job well done. Mr Speaker, the report states, in parts, that the aim of NSSF is to provide social security to the contributing members.

Mr Speaker, I have been approached by several contributors. I have also been thinking about why this fund cannot also be accessed by contributing members through borrowing and invest in some income related activities when they are still strong and able to manage some of these ventures. This will enable the workers to benefit from the fund when they are still strong instead of giving them the money when they are already old and unable to utilise it. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to propose that a window should be opened to allow contributing members borrow from this fund or at least use it as a security to borrow from a bank, if it is possible.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, the NSSF Act provides that in order to guarantee a return on the contribution, the NSSF leadership is obligated to invest in profit ventures.  I have been wondering why Government cannot borrow from these trillions of shillings to carry out investment in infrastructure; to build houses for the army and the police instead of borrowing from China and whatever or -(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving me way. Some countries, for instance, when you see that airport in Kenya - that infrastructure development is being constructed using money from the pension fund of the people of the Republic of Kenya. So, if we continue thinking that the Ministers of Finance will take it upon themselves to amend the law - these people who are interested in doing short-term investments like bond security from which they get more profits - the law should be amended to allow NSSF invest in security bonds. 

For infrastructure development, when I have trillions and I know I can invest and get a lot more money, and the pensioners get profits - I do not see the reason why this NSSF fund can be limited to that. Other countries have done it. For instance, Kenya has done it and you see how the airport has been expanded. Nigeria has also done it. It saves the capital flight by investors who come in to borrow money.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you now debating honourable member? 

MR KAKOOZA: No, I am giving information. 

COL MWESIGYE: Thank you, my colleague for that information. On the Order Paper of today, I see we are being requested to authorise Government to borrow money for Karuma. Why can’t we allow NSSF funds, if possible to invest in Karuma so that they can get returns on -(Member timed out.)

4.40
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to salute the committee for this comprehensive report. I would like to emphatically state it clearly that the journey for the National Social Security Fund from the time of the hon. Bakoko Bakoru, who is still languishing in exile, to the time of Managing Director Chandi Jamwa, who is undergoing prosecution, to the current management and board, has been a bumpy ride full of pits and valleys. From the committee report, I pick out four aspects. There is conflict of interest, influence peddling, fraud in procedures, and some connivance between the board and the Ministry of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development. 

In chapter three, specifically on investment in land, NSSF had a very good vision of buying plots of land throughout the country to develop and build their branch offices. But this good decision was reversed by the board. 

In my view, this is an ideal that this Parliament cherishes for all Government departments to be housed in their respective homes. The National Social Security Fund has capacity to build branch offices in Gulu, Lira, Mbarara, Entebbe, Masaka, and keep on rolling it out. Why was this good vision changed by the board? 

I will, at an appropriate time, move that this decision be reversed. I would love to move to Lira and see this good organisation housed in its own home and not renting from a private businessman. I would also like to see it in Gulu as well and elsewhere in Uganda. 

The committee recommends that the Minister of Finance should be reprimanded. That appears a bit ambiguous. There has been a change of command in that ministry. As we debate this report, there is a new Minister of Finance. When you say that the Minister of Finance should be reprimanded, I will go for the current Minister of Finance, not so? 

Therefore, for clarity and for purposes of being specific, we must name this Minister of Finance who should be reprimanded. Probably he or she is a former minister. I do not think we are talking about the new minister. In my culture, they say, “Hope is a poor man’s income; it is only sustainable during the day.” A poor man will live on hope during the day, but at night he will be hungry -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, one minute to conclude. 

MR DENNIS OBUA: I think all is not lost. Despite all these challenges, Ugandans who are taking charge, in terms of the management of this fund of the workers of Uganda, deserve to also be appreciated in a way. When you carry out a google search on the National Social Security Fund, from the results in terms of successes registered, you are able to know that although this fund has gone through challenges, the current management has at least tried its best. Look at the interest rate; it has risen from 7 per cent in 2010 to 11.5 per cent, as I speak. What about the monthly contribution from the workers of Uganda? It has grown from Shs 24 billion in 2010 to Shs 57 billion at the moment. 

And let us look at the benefits processing time. It has reduced to one or five days in 2010 from 12 days, among others. 

Yes, there have been challenges to grapple with, but the successes registered must also not be forgotten.  We should take into consideration where the National Social Security Fund is coming from and where it is, at the moment -(Member timed out.)

4.45
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (DP, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sometime back, a senior Government official, in trying to justify the existence of valley dams, claimed that they were there. They could not be seen by ordinary Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) and ordinary man, when in reality, they were not there. Why am I saying this? I believe the committee fell short of interesting itself in identifying the boundaries of the land in question; the land at Namirembe-Bakuli. I happen to be the area Member of Parliament where this land is located. As a Member of Parliament, I took interest in identifying the location of the land in question. This piece of land is in triangular form. There is a road from Bakuli to Mengo. Then there is an access road, and on the other side is Butikiro Road. To say that none of these roads could point to the land in question, leaves a lot of questions. What type of land title, for example, could be issued on land which is not accessible? I have not seen it before.

The other main culprit in the report is Umeme. This Parliament, not long ago, convicted it of gross irregularities. I do not intend to repeat them here but the hardest recommendation was to terminate Umeme’s contract.  By that conviction, Umeme appears like a convicted criminal who is still at large. It becomes more problematic than it was before the conviction. The longer it appears like a convicted criminal, the longer it takes before the termination recommendation is implemented. The longer the same culprit would appear with the similar problems in the report. I rest my case. 

4.48
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As far as this Parliament is concerned, we would not be lamenting about Umeme right now if the recommendation this august House made, and which had been agreed upon by the Executive, had been implemented. Parliament and the Executive agreed that the Umeme concession should stop. By now if they had implemented it, we would not be lamenting about this.

Therefore, I would like to know how far the Executive has gone, as far as implementing this recommendation is concerned. Maybe in the next submission, we may have a report attached about how far they have gone in seeing that this is done.

According to the Umeme agreement between the Government of Uganda and the agreement between Umeme and the regulator, it was stated that they should not go below 49 percent of their shareholding. However, what I am seeing now is that they are way far below 49 percent. In fact, they are not the majority shareholders; they are now number three in shareholding. Therefore, I wonder how we could keep moving in the same direction with Umeme, when they are no longer even the majority shareholders; when other companies have come up as the majority shareholders.

As far as NSSF is concerned in buying shares, the minister approved the first shares they bought; they bought twice. The minister approved the buying of the first batch of shares but she did not approve the buying of the second batch of shares.

The second IPO, which NSSF bought, was not approved by the minister yet according to the laws - the NSSF Act, the minister would have approved all the shareholdings that they were getting – (Interruption)

MR LWANGA: Thank you very, much for giving way. Assuming that you are reading this from the same thing; I have read the law as well. I think it provides that NSSF, whatever it does, as far as investment is concerned, it consults. It does not require an approval, but a consultation. At least, that is what I read.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, I got information in my pigeon hole - a Report of IGG referenced: NSSF/HUTC5/2013. This arm of Government, the IGG, got interested in the matter and investigated and its opinion, it said thus: “NSSF to buy shares in Umeme was justified” and in the conclusion it said thus: “…in future, NSSF shall not buy more that 30 percent of any single IPO except where NSSF is the under-writer. In such cases, the under-writing is being supplied…”What does this mean? It means that it was not a bad deal for NSSF to invest in Umeme. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up

MR BARYAYANGA: Thank you very much for the information. I take the information, but the law has it that the minister must be consulted. They did not consult her in the second instance when they were buying. They only consulted her in the first instance of buying, which was wrong. Number two, Umeme should not sell above 49 per cent of its shares, but it did –(Member timed out.)

4.54
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to make a few comments about this report. I thank the committee for having made a good report. So, what do we see in the report that we are debating as Parliament? Is there any law? Is there any performance? Good managers of a fund must allow it to grow though if it is to grow, it must be in accordance with the law. Did the committee find out if there was growth of the fund? That should have been answered. That is, did the fund managers make it grow?

Another issue is that Umeme and NSSF, in their transaction, required either authorization or approval. I have documents, which I have seen in that course, where the board – if the board, in its wisdom, says that we are going to buy shares, and the Solicitor-General also gives an opinion, it becomes very difficult for us to say that this one did not do the work.

The other issue to comment on is where Umeme – actually Members who are saying that Umeme should not go on operating here - buying shares from Umeme is one way of keeping it out of Uganda. This Umeme had 60 per cent and if you talk about capital price and balance of payment in our economy - when they reduce from 60 to 18 percent, we would encourage other Ugandans or the fund managers to even buy the 18 percent and we see Umeme packing.

As such, Umeme would be owned solely by Ugandans or by Uganda agencies, but not our money to be taken away by active or other agencies. We should therefore be looking at how much money was going away before Umeme sold shares and how much money is being retained. That should be the subject.

Another issue is: Where did the fund go? Any way it went. But what is the problem? What we would be looking at is also the issue of conflict of interest. It is unfortunate that the Chairman of Uganda Revenue Authority is also a member of the Umeme board, where there are some tax disputes, which is a clear conflict of interest.

The hon. Gerald Ssendawula would be advised to step down because when Umeme is having challenges of taxes, they will go to URA  but they will still find him there as the Chairman of the URA Board. It is actually unethical conduct although it is not written. Otherwise for someone to think that to chair a board of a different financial agency would not bred implied conflict of interest in the decisions made is not correct.

Let me also comment on the issue of the fund and the plot that was either sold or something. If they used the proper methods of disposing it off and the valuations were made - the committee should tell us if they lost money; whether there are any funds lost; Instead of Shs 600 million, they got 650 million - the committee should tell us what it was supposed to be. I thank you very much.

4.56
MR BANARBAS TINKASIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I tried to read the report and addressed myself to the recommendations which were made by the committee. I think the committee tried to do a thorough job, but when you read the recommendations, either the person who worded them chose to use soft words or something went wrong somewhere. 

Look at page 21 - the chairperson of the board choose to conduct board meetings out of the legal framework, and you just say that he should be reprimanded? I find it unacceptable. And when you also read page 23, you will discover that both the acting MD and the Chairperson, never received any approval from the minister, as required by the law. The committee then went on to say that they should be reprimanded? For God’s sake, I find that too lenient. We can say that may be we did not have a loss by chance, because a technical person choosing to manage by personal desecration is only putting the entire organisation and the entire workers’ fund at chance but should this be the order of managing affairs at NSSF? 

I will ask that Parliament adjusts this recommendation to say that they should find another place where to work where they can exercise their discretion not following what is prescribed in the legal frame work. Thank you.

4.58
MR BENSON OBUA-OGWAL (UPC, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you. As I rise to contribute to this debate on the report, I do it with a heavy heart. It appears to me that NSSF has turned into a place where some people just come to pick whatever they need. We have had scandals after scandals. 

In my view, NSSF should be one of the biggest investment bodies in this country. I lived in Ghana for five years. They have an equivalent of NSSF called SSNIT – the Social Security and National Insurance Trust. But when you compare what SSNIT has over the years been able to do to the ordinary Ghanaians, you wonder why we pretend to have a social security body in Uganda. 

Let me just cite a few examples. SSNIT has a bank called SSB - Social Security Bank - which has the biggest network after the Ghana Commercial Bank  and it is doing lot of things in that country. There is also what they call the SSNIT Estate. They have big estates all over the country. Every major town in Ghana has an estate of different categories housing workers and one has the leeway of paying it over 30 years without feeling the pinch. One retires while knowing they have a house. Almost every worker has access to this credit facility.

They also have SSNIT Students’ Loan. The loan scheme that we joke around with here; in Ghana it is the SSNIT, which gives it out to students. More or so, they also have SSNIT Guest Houses, which competes with hotels in Ghana. They have SSNIT hospitals, which compare with the likes of our Nakasero Hospital in Uganda. Finally, they have halls of residence in universities and tertiary institutions built by SSNIT. If you put all this together and compare with what NSSF is doing in Uganda, one feels like crying. While I was there, there was an MD from NSSF who came to study what SSNIT was doing. I met him and he was so excited. I took him to some of the estates in Greater Accra. He came back excited to try to implement that idea. However, when he tried it, he was sacked because I think somebody wanted that money to sit there for them to deep their hands into it. This makes me want to cry for our beloved country.

As we debate this report, we should consider restructuring our NSSF to conform to some of this good practices and international standards so that our workers can begin to benefit from what belongs to them; which they have saved and sweated for over the years. Thank you.

5.03
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. I salute the committee for presenting this report. In my view the concept of this fund is not being upheld as it should be. The concept of social security itself and the security of the money are two different things. 

At the time when a person retires, the energy is gone and they need the money to help themselves yet they get difficulties in accessing it. Picking from what my colleague who has just left the microphone said, you find somebody deep down in Obongi travelling all the distance and when they come to Arua to process their money, it take days.

It is has been stated that it now takes 12 days. But this timeframe is not correct. In most cases, after people going there and failing, they come to us as Members of Parliament for help. They tell us how they are getting difficulties in accessing their NSSF money. This is a suffering person. Where is the social security concept in this case? It does not exist at all.   We must go back to basic principle that this money is meant to help people who have been worn off either by age or sickness and so they need to be socially protected; that money should be easily accessed. 

Secondly is the concept of investments - for example, my brother has given us experience from another country. Uganda should try to satisfy the needs of the rural people some of whom have also contributed to this fund. The investment should not only be made in Kampala or urban areas. 

A company like Umeme - we have discussed over and over again here bitterly about Umeme. Why do we always invest in Umeme when it has a lot of questions even without reading the details of the problem? When you hear the name of a company called Umeme, one only sees problems. My request is – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, parliamentarians do not engage in bickering. They debate. You can proceed.

MR FUNGAROO: Mr Speaker, what I was trying to say is that we have many other options of investment. If we find a problem with investing in Umeme, we can invest in other ventures. I support the idea of investment but the cardinal principle is that we should make it easy for people to feel safe and to access their funds easily. This is my submission. Thank you.

5.06
MR TIMOTHY LWANGA (NRM, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have listened to the report. I have a few problems with the report some of whose parts are technical. I did not understand the description of the security exchange and how the brokers work. It looks like it is a crime for a broker to sell and also buy on behalf of another person yet in stock exchanges all over the world that is a very common practice. The only complaint, which we should have had, is whether NSSF bought shares at a price that was higher than the market price. Did the NSSF lose money resulting from the transaction? The answer is no.

As we speak, I think the shares are trading at Shs 500 per share. There were about 270. A few months later they got a dividend of Shs 1.6 billion. What a wonderful investment decision by the management! They invested in the right place. 

The report says that the value of the company is going down but a company that is losing value cannot have shares being yearned for by everybody. In the stock exchange market, share prices are as a result of demand and supply. The more people want the shares, the higher the prices and the more money you make. Those who bought shares - I think IFC and World Bank bought shares as well. May be IFC also has a problem. 

Let me comment on the issue of employment. I am surprised that the committee is blaming NSSF for employing a relative of the IGG. The question I would like to ask is: is it a crime to be a public servant? Is it true that when you are a public servant any of your relatives cannot get a job in Government? When you look at the –(Interruption)

MS TAAKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to find out whether my colleague is in order to talk about the recruitment of staff and yet we had already expunged that bit from this report because of the rule on sub judice? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member is not in order. We have had this ruling and guidance from the Speaker. Please, desist. (Laughter)

MR LWANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not have a chance to clarify what I was trying to say - I was not talking about the matter in court. I was talking about those who are not in court. However, since the Speaker has ruled, thank you very much.

5.09
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me thank the committee for demonstrating competence in generating this report.  I would like to thank them indeed for the methodology they applied, the scope of their investigation, the detail and the quite informative report produced. This report will bring NSSF to order with the view of making it probably more efficient and effective in delivering their mandate.

I have had the opportunity to look at the NSSF investment portfolio in this report. I have scanned through the fixed income, real estate and equities, as captured. The actual investment does not align with the planned investments. I think this is a clear sign of misguided investments and a demonstration of a weakness on the part of the fund. This is probably one area to be observed keenly in the future. The decision to invest is very key and once you are about to make it, it is very important that you involve key stakeholders in the decision making process.

I find delegation of powers of the board to the managing director and chairman of the board quite disturbing; individuals usually act on their personal interests and sometimes gain from it. 

The action of the board chairman, Mr Ivan Kyayonka, to hurriedly purchase the Umeme Ltd shares confirms my fears. And given this experience, there is therefore need to amend the NSSF investment Policy of 2011, which delegates the powers of the board to the managing director and the chairman, as far as initial public offer investments are concerned.

That way, I believe we shall have checks and balances because rather than having two people decide the fate of a huge fund like this, you will be having quite a number of people and decisions being checked. And we are bound to come up with a better product -(Member timed out.)

5.13
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I add my voice to the voice of the members in thanking the committee for the job well done. However, I have a few observations. One is that I do not know whether members of the committee looked at the report of the IGG because most of the recommendations made were put in the recommendations of the IGG’s Report of 2013.

Two, they said that Ivan Kyayonka be forced to vacate the board of NSSF for what they call irregular conduct. When you read the Constitution, Article 119 (5), you realise that it reads thus: “Subject to the provision of this constitution, no agreement contract, treaty, convention or document by whatever name called, to which Government is a party or in respect of which the Government has an interest, shall be concluded without legal advice from the Attorney-General, except in such cases and subject to such conditions as Parliament may by law prescribe.”

Mr Speaker, a public officer investing by listing a company on a stock exchange market - whatever shares they put on market -If I am a businessman and an investor, I float shares, where I can feel I have made a very good investment analysis to invest my money, I do it. Looking at the NSSF portfolio, the financial statements and the audited books of accounts - they have got money which lies on account and which becomes a cost. Any money which is not committed to an objective is a cost.

By NSSF investing in Umeme Ltd to get whatever they got was not a bad deal; it could not wait for more. If a company is listed on the stocks exchange market - because this is competition. If we do it this way and we wait for all these processes to take place, it means we won’t complete any deal.

Another observation is: We should amend the law. I agree with the committee on the fact that Mr Ivan Kyayonka, being a board member of another body made decisions to influence NSSF to buy shares, was wrong. Though the Act does not stipulate that; I think that is where the minister should take keen interest. Any board member who is an NSSF board member should not take part in decision making. For example, NSSF bought shares in Uganda Clays; one board member made a decision in Uganda Clays, but came back to NSSF to influence a similar decision being taken here, which is conflict of interest. The NSSF Act should be amended not to allow the board members of NSSF make decisions in regard to investing NSSF money. Thank you.

5.17
MS ANNET	NYAKECHO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise to debate this matter because of the few statements and the kind of language the committee used in this report in making recommendations. You will agree with me - if you read the report there seems to have been a lot of mismanagement at the NSSF. For instance, the sale of the plot on Namirembe Road, the dismissal of staff without following the proper guidelines and all the committee is saying is reprimand. 

But when you look through the dictionary the word “reprimand” means to rebuke someone. For instance if it were a child, and it does something wrong, you would say, “stop it, do not do it again.” (Interjection) I have been reading through google.

MR OBUA DENNIS: Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give is that in my opinion, by using the words, ‘so and so should be reprimanded’, that is the best because we are recommending. The word ‘reprimand’ is a package; somebody can be cautioned, suspended or dismissed. Therefore, the word ‘reprimand’ was the best suited word to be used by the select committee. You look through the manual and see which one is appropriate for Mr X or this one is appropriate for Y. It is a caution, a warning, suspension or dismissal. 

In fact, we must integrate that wording into the entire committee’s recommendations instead of saying, so and so should be suspended or dismissed. That is passing a verdict.

MS NYAKECHO: Thank you, hon. Obua for the information. However, the way we understand issues differ. The way you understand something might be different from how I understand it. I feel that there has been gross mismanagement of a public institution in the name of National Social Security Fund and to me, just using a word like reprimand is very lenient. If we are going to make people responsible - I do not have anything against anybody but if we are going to make people become responsible, especially when handling public resources, you know you have to set an example once in a while.

National Social Security Fund is becoming an institution that people take for granted; that you can do something, for example, there is easy money, you put your hands in the taxpayers’ money and nobody will bother you. You create losses and yet your mandate is to make sure that you create a lot of profit by investing public resources so that the owners of this money will be able to get money during their retirement -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now give a chance to the minister to respond to the issues and then we see how to proceed -(Interjection)- No, it is your report so let the minister respond. You are the final person since it is your report.

5.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. I wish to thank the committee for this report and also members for raising a number of issues during this debate. 

First and foremost, I would like to agree with the committee report in regard to the recommendation of having to look at amendments of some of the laws to make things a bit tighter. If you look at what is referred to under section 24 pages 10-16 of the report where they are talking about irregular acquisition of shares in the Umeme IPO, the fund actually sought the advice of the Solicitor-General on the IPO in accordance with Article 119(5) of the Constitution on the 12 November, 2012 before the allotment date of 16 November, 2012.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the investment decision in allotment of these shares and buying is very volatile and if there is a delay, you end up unable to invest. Therefore, when you look at the new law, which is under the URBA Act section 95 (1) and (3) of the Uganda Retirement Benefits Authority, it says that the Act provides for supremacy of the URBA Act over all other laws in matters of retirement benefit schemes and section 91(1) and (2) of the Act also limits the involvement of the minister in issuing of statutory instruments for policy guidance.

Therefore, once we make these amendments, we would be in a position to strengthen the investment of the fund. Otherwise, the fund did its best to ensure that they complied with the laws. 

Also under regulation 33 of the Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority Investment of Scheme Fund, Regulation 2014, it provides that, “The investment policy statement of a scheme shall not require that a decision to make an investment shall be subject to the consent of the sponsor.” I do remember that hon. Niwagaba did elucidate this in his contribution.

There was also the issue of possible conflict of interest between National Social Security Fund, Shell and Umeme. Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the investment went through the process of analysis and approval in line with Section 30 of the National Social Security Fund Act and the National Social Security Investment Policy Statement and appraisals by the investment department, evaluation by the investment management committee and managing director and approval of the chairperson.

There was also the possible conflict of interest in the African Alliance. We accept that the letter of the Solicitor-General came late, which letter should have given authority to the Board to do the investment. However, as members have clearly articulated, the investment was good and as of now, the fund, which invested Shs 70.2 billion in Umeme has the value of this investment standing at Shs 116.3 billion, having gone up by about 60 per cent.

The National Social Security Fund earned dividends of Shs 9.1 billion and this has been already transferred to the account of the Social Security Fund. I beg to submit and I thank Members for their contribution and the committee for this report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the Members for their contributions on the report. However, I have the following remarks and clarifications.

One is on the terms of reference that were given to the committee. The terms given to the committee were to investigate irregularities in the acquiring of shares. The honourable members are also bringing in a case as to whether there was a loss or not. However, first of all, whether there was a profit or not, the committee had to establish the procedures.

Mr Speaker, the investment we are talking about is between National Social Security Fund acquiring shares with Umeme. The committee had to look into whether there were any legal issues in acquiring the shares. I need to remind the House that the supply and distribution licence between the Electricity Regulatory Authority and Umeme, specifically in section 10.1, is very clear. It allows Umeme as a company to go on the stock exchange but it limits Umeme to sell any shares above 49 per cent for purposes of retaining the controlling effect in the company. This is because Umeme was a special purpose vehicle brought on to manage the supply and distribution of electricity.

Right honourable minister, the question today is: What is the status quo of the concession agreement between the Government of Uganda and Umeme? If the terms in the licence have been breached, does the licence still hold? If it does not, what is the situation today? 

The same was referred to in section 10 of the agreement between the Government of Uganda and Umeme. It is very clear that at any one time, if Umeme was to go on the stock exchange, they were limited in regard to the number of shares that they could float on the sharing of the stock exchange. That alone is a question for the status of NSSF investment today and tomorrow and that is one of the issues that the committee looked at; that the process was disregarded. 

What is the mandate of the minister, save for the URBA Act as it states? The minister was required to guide and we are sure that the minister did this. In the letter, which I have and a copy of which we have laid on Table, the minister guided and she brought to the attention of the Board specific issues that if NSSF was to proceed to invest in the second purchase of shares, she wanted them to take note of the specific issues that NSSF noted but they proceeded.

Mr Speaker, regarding the timing on page 24 of the report, the committee made an observation that whereas NSSF had already started the process of acquiring shares, they only went to the minister a few days to the closure. What were they doing from the time they acquired the letter of no objection from the minister? That is why the minister was very cautious in her reply, which drew attention to why they always seek for her approval at a later stage. 

Mr Speaker, in the case of Nsimbe versus NSSF, the judge was very clear that NSSF cannot proceed to transact any business above $ 50,000 without the approval of the Solicitor-General. In this case therefore, that is why we faulted the management of NSSF in the way they proceeded to ignore the advice of the Solicitor-General. That is to do with acquiring shares.

In regard to disposal of assets, I also want to clarify that by the time NSSF acquired that plot, there was an access road but for about two years, NSSF was landlocked and it did not –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, I am happy that my chairperson of the committee has come in. By the time NSSF acquired the plot at Namirembe Road, there was an access road and the concern of the committee was that they did not explore options of getting an access road, after realising that the plots nearby had now been bought off and they did not an access.

Another thing that I also need to clear is that the price of the plot was Shs 715 million but the sale of the plot was Shs 650 million. That is why the committee says that they made a loss. We consulted the owners of the nearby plot and they were selling at the time but NSSF did not make any attempts to get an access road. Why we recommended so was because of the weaknesses as a Board. The investment manager testified and a report was also laid on Table that he advised the Board, before disposal, of a reserve price, which was higher than what was considered.

Members of the Board came to the committee and testified that after getting the advice of the investment manager, they declined and halted the sale of the plot but the managing director and chairman of the Board told them that they had already undertaken the sale.

There is only one issue remaining; the issue of brokers. I want to state that the brokering company, who is a member of the stock exchange, was the one acting as a consultant for the NSSF deal and he was the same person selling the shares for Umeme. To the committee, that was a case that qualified as a conflict of interest. I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members for debating the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members and Madam Chairperson for stepping in to bring out this report, which is quite bulky. Honourable minister, thank you for your response. Honourable members, it is decision time. I will put the question and we will determine how we will proceed with this matter.

5.35
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the chairperson. I studied the report but also with my understanding of the issues that the report discussed in terms of the stock exchange and how it operates, how pensions are operating and how the private sector operates and makes profits, I think that this issue may require that Members of Parliament be given more capacity because it is a very big issue. As we speak, NSSF -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, where are you taking the House on this?

MR EKANYA: When it comes to voting for the future.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a matter before us now. The one in the future is not before us now. Honourable members, we will not be -

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Right from the beginning, you guided us and part of the report was not debated because it is sub judice. Therefore, how are we going to proceed to conclude on this report? Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we pull out that part, which we have not debated; the recruitment part, which is before court so that we know exactly what we are pronouncing ourselves on and so that in future, should the court conclude its procedures on that, it is not part of what we are concluding? Wouldn’t that be procedurally right, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was going to put the question and then outline the procedure for decision. Honourable members, the question is for adoption of the report. I now put the question for the adoption of the report of the Select Committee on National Social Security Fund. This is how we are going to proceed. There are matters that we have excluded and that cannot form part of our decision.

Honourable members, I always insist that each time a committee makes a report, they should extract the summary of the recommendations so that it is easy to process in terms of decisions. The recommendations are on all the pages of this document and it is extremely difficult to process amendments because you do not know on which page the first and last recommendations are. This is not a fair way of presenting recommendations to the House because now, I do not know where to start from or where to end. I do not know what to exclude because I would have said, exclude one, two, three and let us deal with these ones. 

The way it is presented now, I have asked the clerk to try and get us the technical issues with the laptop that they have. It is therefore going to be difficult to process the recommendations, especially when I hear Members saying that they want to make amendments to the recommendations. We will not be able to do this but I have put the question for a decision, which decision we will be able to take tomorrow.  By that time, I expect the technical team; the clerk-at-Table to extract a summary of the recommendations and circulate them so that we are all on the same page with what decisions we are going to take. It is so directed.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE  
COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE PETITION BY 
THE RESIDENTS OF KASOKOSO, KIGANDA AND BANDA BI
OVER LAND EVICTIONS AND DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This matter of Kasokoso has persisted on the Order Paper for a while now. I think we had reached a time where we should have taken a decision on this matter and we were beaten by some other technical issues. Can we conclude this matter in five minutes and proceed with other business? This is because we have debated this matter comprehensively and it is now decision time. Should I put the question? What were the outstanding issues?

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, the minister needed to make a very robust statement so that we would vote on this matter because the Kasokoso issue is one of policy and it has short term, medium term and long term policies. Therefore, we wanted the minister to come with a position that is time bound so that when we take a decision, we take it aware of the short term, medium term and long term actions. That is what we are waiting for.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, when I consulted with the minister, he said that he had responded to these issues. That is what I was informed by the minister himself. Honourable minister, have you already responded to the issues on this Motion?

5.41
THE MINISTER FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, the ministry officials and myself appeared before the committee and when I come onto the Floor, I decided to read out our responses that appear on page 17, which responses were well captured by the committee that the ministry has the duty to ensure that there are improved living conditions for our people, that people stay in a well-planned place and this is what we want to do in Kasokoso.

I also assured the House that there would be no eviction of people who are currently staying or have been staying in the Kasokoso area. All this is captured in this report on page 17 when we talk about the Kireka Slum Redevelopment Project. I read out these things and I am prepared to read out everything again so that the government position can be clearly and fully understood.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You cannot read out what is already in the Hansard.

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. I remember the time that the committee presented its report. The House debated it and as the chairperson was trying to respond to some of the concerns of the Members, it was mentioned by the committee chairperson that there was a memorandum of understanding and in your ruling, Mr Speaker, you clearly instructed the chairperson of the committee to lay the memorandum of understanding on Table.  Thereafter, we waited for what was going to happen next because after laying the memorandum on Table, we wanted to make some amendments to the recommendations and that is where we stopped.    

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So we do not have any outstanding issue with the minister?

MS SENINDE: There is no outstanding issue with the minister and it is not true that he has other issues to present because he had already indicated to this House that he had completed his presentations. The issue was now with the chairperson and our amendments. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, is there a memorandum of understanding or not? 

5.44
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Ephraim Biraaro): Mr Speaker, while you were presiding, I mentioned something to the effect that there was a memorandum of understanding and I said that it was a draft. Subsequently when you were away and the Rt Hon. Speaker Kadaga was here, I came here and said that it was a slip of the tongue – (Interjections)- I mentioned it and it is in the Hansard. [HON. MEMBERS: “Order.”] I said it was not there, it was a draft and we withdrew it as a committee. Therefore, it is not part of the proceedings and recommendations of this report.

While Rt hon. Kadaga was in the Chair, I said it was a one-sided draft and so would not count towards this report. It is not referred to anywhere in the report, so it is not part of the recommendations. (Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these are issues that were brought before the House and I remember that I asked very specifically about this specific matter of a memorandum of understanding. It later developed and the chairperson is now reporting that he came and withdrew his earlier statement because what he had was actually a draft memorandum of understanding. 

A draft memorandum of understanding is not a memorandum of understanding. In other words, there is no memorandum of understanding between anybody, which can be laid on the Table. The chairperson has sought the forgiveness of this House because it was a slip of the tongue. What we know now is that there is no memorandum of understanding between anybody and the residents of this place. There is nothing and so let us not go into that.

5.47
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This matter is important because this Parliament had to stand over that very report in order to enable the chairperson go and obtain that memorandum of understanding.

Mr Speaker, you are very keen on these matters and I doubt whether, if the chairperson had indicated that it was a draft, we would have stood over it and waited for the necessary papers from the Clerk.

I am rising because this goes to the root of the matter; the conduct of the chairperson. How do we believe the report and his findings? It touches on the credibility of the chairperson of the committee. How do you expect this serious House to proceed and waste its time and yet all of a sudden, the chairperson comes out to say that he is sorry and that it was a slip of the tongue and yet it was at the crux of the subject that we are discussing?

To that extent, I find it unfathomable that this House can proceed on such a matter when the chairperson is no longer a person of integrity. By you telling this House that indeed there was an agreement and it was binding on the parties and now you turn around to say that it was a slip of the tongue, this speaks volumes about the authenticity and the way you want this Parliament to proceed to handle this matter.

That is why I would say that in view of this, let us not overlook this matter and sweep it under the carpet. It is serious and it tells you where the chairperson stands on this matter. It is incumbent on this House to take a strong position on this and disregard all the points he has given because the – (Interruption) 

MS OGWAL: Thank you, hon. Ssekikubo. Mr Speaker, I think it would be prudent for the chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to offer an apology to the House because we had to stand over this issue. I happen to be a member of this committee, so I am pained that my chairman’s tongue could slip over an issue that would tarnish my image. To clean face and for damage control purposes, it would be prudent for the chairperson to stand before the House and apologise. I think that would be the best way of proceeding.

Secondly, I think the minister needs to accept that it is not true that people are not being evicted or will not be evicted. There is no policy guideline or any kind of agreement that would stop people from being evicted when they are actually already being evicted. This matter has come to the House for Parliament to take a position to protect vulnerable people. They are being evicted and some people have been there for a long time. I agree -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I thought we are going to come to that when we are discussing the recommendations to adopt. Let us process this in an orderly way. I heard the chairperson apologise; but for emphasis, Mr Chairman, in very clear terms, state what you want to state to the House in relation to this matter.

MR BIRAARO: Mr Speaker, in the Hansard of 5th March, during the heat of the moment when I was being asked so many questions, I stated that it is in draft form. Later on, when I came here, I said that what I stated as a memorandum of understanding was in a one-sided draft form and I am sorry it is not part of the report that we are presenting here. Mr Speaker and Members, there is no memorandum of understanding worth presenting to the House. We are sorry for that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: To err is human. He has sought forgiveness of the House; let us grant it to him. Let us not over emphasise these matters.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I requested that the minister needs to take care of this issue because we have a very bad history in some of these cases. Ministers come on the Floor and make commitments and we respect these ministers because they are our colleagues and some of them are our mentors, but there are policy changes that are sometimes beyond them.

I can cite cases like Shimoni TTC, which was moved because we were going to have investments and everybody knows what happened. Recently, regarding the Naguru-Nakawa estate, Government made a commitment that people were not going to be thrown out but that they were going to build houses for people. It was in the same way the minister has said it here, that nobody is going to be evicted, we need orderly development. When time came, the Police was deployed and for years now, there is no development.

As MPs, what we requested from the minister was to give us names of those people of Kasokoso with the agreement that Government has with each one of them. That is why we needed a legal document so that in case tomorrow there is a policy shift beyond your control, my voters and your voters who are in Kasokoso can go to court and claim their rights.

Normally, it is during the election period that the Police are deployed and our voters are thrown away when there is no voice for them. We are the voice of the helpless and I want to beg you, Mr Speaker, to defer this matter while the minister goes down to Kasokoso, signs agreements with each resident and tables the agreements here so that the interests of our people are protected instead of just making statements –(Interruption)

MS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, I find it very difficult to rise up on a point of order. I respect my brother and I do appreciate the spirit in which he is raising this matter. However, I am very uncomfortable. 

We appreciate the fact that this petition has been before Parliament for quite a long time and these people are looking at us to take a decision so that they can know their fate. When my brother says that we defer this again and wait for the minister to determine the people there and so on - We have given the ministry all that time -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

MS SENINDE: Honestly, I find this very unfair. Is my brother in order to drive us back? We want to progress and we want to complete this. The committee has presented a report and if we think there are loopholes in the report, let us find those loopholes and come up with amendments to the recommendations and we conclude this issue. Is he in order, therefore, to keep on pushing us back and forth?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you for a very spirited debate on that issue. (Laughter)

5.56
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama South County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising while risking the possibility of being put to order. I believe that hon. Ekanya has a point. 

My concern on the Floor of this House has been that the people of Kasokoso, who are living in that place, need assurance from Government. As we process the recommendations of the committee, this Parliament can actually amend and suggest a way forward whereby we have a relationship reduced in writing. That is what hon. Ekanya, I or anybody would take as an assurance. 

I am not going to seek that we come and vet the agreement but the Government cannot just wish away these people from Kasokoso. If the minister is here, and I want to hear from him, do they have any trouble having an understanding reduced in writing other than him telling us that they will not evict them? Can they have this in writing and it is called, by lawyers, a memorandum of understanding and by the layman as an agreement? 

Can we have this reduced into an assurance so that this becomes part of our resolutions, that our recommendation is to the effect that a memorandum of understanding is reached with the occupants within a timeframe, and that sample could be given to this House as an assurance? That is the best this House can do.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, do you need the minister’s position in order to make a recommendation or a decision of this House? Do you need it? I thought that once a matter is before the House, the House can take a decision on its own. To put the minister on the spot to make commitments, which we are going to pass in a resolution would be another procedure, which I have not been able to follow in the last few years I have been sitting here. 

If it is the interest of the House that certain recommendations be passed, the House will do so. It is up to the implementing agencies to implement or later on, if they fail, to come back and tell us.

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to say something about what hon. Oboth has raised and what –(Mr Ssemujju rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, it is in your interest, hon. Ssemujju; let us process this thing.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, the fact of the matter is that the issues, which are being raised, are the ones that are supposed to be captured in the resettlement action plan. I have no problem, as the minister, if a recommendation comes up from the House that the guarantees, which we need to give to the people in the area in regard to the development that is supposed to take place, and which must address their interests also, be captured in an agreement. We really have no problem with that. 

I have worked with hon. Ekanya in Tororo and I think that is why he is insisting that I give an undertaking because I have always lived up to my word. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you still have a procedural issue?

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We had reached the point of taking a decision on this matter but those of us who represent the people of Kasokoso are also engaging National Housing and Construction Company.

Mr Speaker, National Housing and Construction Company wrote to us in COSASE and made a proposal, which we can improve and take a decision on. I want to read the proposal to the House: “The Board and management are exploring the possibility of recovering value from encroachers by selling land to the encroachers who are willing to take up this opportunity, compensate those who are willing to sell their interests, develop any free land to incorporate those who are willing to get better houses and decide with Government any other scheme that shall benefit both parties in this conflict. The company is open to exploring a win-win solution to stakeholders.” 

The reason I am raising this matter is because we are dealing with two problems. Hon. Migereko knows that he has written to the President, telling him that he has identified a Chinese investor to come and take up that land and you know it. National Housing and Construction Company, who have money in that area and have an interest, are looking for a win-win solution. Hon. Migereko is looking for land for a Chinese investor. 

Mr Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising is whether this Parliament should not take a decision on this matter and rely on the undertaking of someone who has vested interests in this matter. National Housing and Construction Company, who have interests in the land, have told you that they are willing to sell their interests to people they call encroachers. I do not agree with them, but they are willing and this is in writing. The minister is talking about resettlement packages - of which project?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the chairperson had said there were recommendations that were made. We could process those recommendations and make the changes that are necessary to make it fair to the residents and everybody. That is what we had said. However, the honourable members started raising issues of the memorandum and that is how we got into this. By now, possibly, we would have already taken the decisions. We are the ones who are having our cake and eating it at the same time.

6.03
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Mr Speaker, we are trying to throw our people to a very hungry lion while thinking that the miracle that happened in the times of Daniel will happen again.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what we are saying is, let us make those recommendations now and take decisions on them so that the people are not thrown to the hungry lions. Please, you are spending more time.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion that the recommendation, which suggests that people should be evicted from this place -(Interjections)- Because if you are going to give the land to the developer -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable members, the committee made recommendations and it is those recommendations that we should process and see if we can improve on them. They made recommendations that have been circulated and we have all read them. Can we take decisions on those recommendations? 

MR CHEMASWET: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the members of the committee. Would it be procedurally right to proceed with the Minister of Lands who will never be trusted in terms of land matters? What I am saying is that in Kween, land is being surveyed right, left and centre - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are not debating the minister’s recommendations; we are debating the recommendations of the committee and that is what we are taking decisions on. Honourable members, the recommendations from the committee are clear; are there any amendments to those recommendations?

MS SENINDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move an amendment to the recommendations of this report. The amendment I would like to move is based on the following -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which is the recommendation?

MS SENINDE: Should I cite it first?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes.

MS SENINDE: My amendment is that we drop the recommendations in the report and we move with one recommendation, which reads, “The Government, using the Land Fund, pays the National Housing and Construction Company the book value for that land and let people settle on that land.” 

The justification is based on the conclusion of this report. (Interjections) Mr Speaker, I beg colleagues to listen to me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we have some order, please? Let us listen and then we can respond. 

MS SENINDE: They can amend but this is my proposal and I am basing it on the conclusion of this report. The committee, being guided by Section 29(1) and (2) of the Land Act, concluded that there are neither lawful nor bona fide occupants on the land under dispute. 

Mr Speaker, the same committee went ahead on page 12, paragraph 5 to indicate that it was evident that there were some settlements on the land under dispute, which had existed for a long time. However, at the same time, they were contradicting themselves in the same report by saying that there were no people initially on that land.

Mr Speaker, I beg to justify my evidence using this book that I beg to lay on the Table. This document has got agreements and busuulu, which I would call receipts, of as far as 1966 and 1971. I am surprised that the committee did not capture this –(Interruption)

MR ALEPER: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I recall very well that you had guided that if need be, we go recommendation by recommendation and where necessary, we amend so that this House concludes on this matter and the House was moving in that direction. However, I see my sister is taking us back to the very start where we came from. I thought we would allow the chairman to read those recommendations one by one and then the House resolves as per those recommendations. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we proceed this way: Clerk, read the first recommendation.

Recommendation No.1

The committee recommends that the National Housing and Construction Company Limited, together with the local authorities, should implement its Resettlement Action Plan for the land to be used for the Kireka Slum Redevelopment Project as pledged above in section 7.5, sub-sections 1.7 of this report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the heat of all these discussions, I have not been able to put the question. Therefore, I am going to put the question for decision. I now put the question that the report of the Committee of Physical Infrastructure on the petition by the residents of Kasokoso, Kiganda and Banda I over land evictions and destruction of property be adopted. That is the motion I have put for your debate. We will now start processing the recommendations one by one. Can you read it again, please?

Recommendation No.1

The committee recommends that National Housing and Construction Company Limited, together with the local authorities, should implement its Resettlement Action Plan for the land to be used for the Kireka Slum Redevelopment Project as pledged above in section 7.5, sub-sections 1.7 of this report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that recommendation. Do you want to amend this?

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, the words “local authorities” is vague. We should say, “together with Government” or be more specific. However, if we say “local authorities”, it does not make sense. Which local authorities? In this case, we would rather say, “the Ministry of Lands”. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the amendment for clarity. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the recommendation as it is.

(Question put and negatived.)

Recommendation No.2

Government through the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and local leaders should ensure that a verification exercise is undertaken within two months after the adoption of this report with a view to identifying the exact number of occupants on this land and the developments thereon and report back to the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the recommendation.

MR AYOO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to make an amendment on this recommendation that Government, through the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the local leaders, should compile a list of the occupants and their names within two months for the purpose of their compensation or benefit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the recommendation.

(Question put and negatived.)

Recommendation No.3

Government, through the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and National Housing Company Limited, should continue to sensitise the public through the mass media about this project to enable them appreciate the benefits and have them feel that they are part and parcel of the project. The engagement of the public on issues of utilisation of private and institutional land and physical planning and other land use aspects will prevent occurrence of similar happenings in the future. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that recommendation.

(Question put and negatived.)

Recommendation No.4

Government, through the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and local authorities, should ensure that no new developments are done by either party on the land in issue until the verification exercise and due compensations are done.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that recommendation. (Mr Ekanya rose_) On what matter do you rise, honourable Member for Tororo County?

(Question put and negatived.)

Recommendation No.5
Government, through the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, should ensure that National Housing and Construction Company undertakes the opening of boundaries of the land in issue and carries out valuation processes upon completion of the verification exercise.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that recommendation.

(Question put and negatived.)

Recommendation No.6

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should table before Parliament a comprehensive plan, including financial resources, that are required to fully operationalise the provisions of Physical Planning Act, 2010 within a period of one month after adoption of this report and report to the House. 

In addition, the ministry should provide both the short, medium and long-term plans that Government has to ensure that all Ugandans have decent housing facilities.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That is the end of the recommendations. Honourable members, I now put the question for the adoption of the whole report with those amendments that we have approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO US$ 1,435,158,862.48 FROM THE EXPORT-IMPORT BANK OF CHINA TO FINANCE THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE 600MW KARUMA HYDROPOWER PROJECT 
AND THE ASSOCIATED INTERCONNECTION WORK AND PROJECTS

6.19
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, as you well know, one of the priorities of this Government is increasing infrastructure. In this particular case, we are talking about increasing power generation basically for the industrialisation programme -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, first move the motion.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I would like to move a motion for a resolution of this Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to US$ 1,435,158,862.48 from the Export-Import Bank of China to finance the construction of the 600MW Karuma Hydropower Project and the associated interconnection works and projects. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Minister for Energy, Minister of State for Investment, the honourable member for Mitooma, Minister for ICT, honourable Member for Kazo, honourable member for Bungokho, honourable member for Dokolo, honourable member for Ajuri, Workers’ representative, honourable member for Kyankwanzi and all Members. Would you briefly like to justify your motion - very briefly? 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I will be very brief. According to the National Development Plan, one of the binding constraints of moving this economy forward is lack of adequate power for industrialisation and other activities. This loan is meant to help us construct the Karuma Electric Power Dam to generate 600MW as well as put in place the lines that will evacuate that power and take it to the various sub stations in order to ensure that this country has got sufficient power. 

As you may recollect, about two or three years ago, we had very sad stories when we suffered blackouts, including in this House. Therefore, I am appealing to my colleagues that we pass this loan request so that the construction work that is going on is completed within two to two and a half years so that we can be able to have sufficient power in order to run the economy and even expand it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when this request was presented to Parliament, it was referred to our Committee on National Economy. I am advised the committee is ready to report. Mr Chairperson, would you like to read the report?

6.24
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Xavier Kyooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. I would like to lay on the Table the original report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to US$ 1,435,158,862.48 from the Export-Import Bank of China to finance the construction of the 600MW Karuma Hydro Power Project and the associated interconnection works and projects. I beg to lay it on the Table, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee relating to this loan request.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes.

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the following documents: a brief to Parliament with two resolutions attached and the agreed minutes of the negotiations between Government of Uganda and the Government of China. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those supporting documents.

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Buyer Credit Loan Agreement relating to this loan request. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay on the Table the commercial contract for engineering procurement and construction relating to this loan request. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that contract.

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay on the Table the feasibility study report for this loan request and the project. They are three and I beg to lay on the Table the first one, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Which is the first one?

MR KYOOMA: All these are feasibility studies. There are three reports and this is the first report, Mr Speaker. This is the second one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are they different reports or three volumes?

MR KYOOMA: All these are feasibility study reports but in three volumes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table the Preferential Buyer-Credit Loan Agreement relating to this loan request.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, the Committee on National Economy considered the proposal by Government to borrow up to US$ 1,435,158,862.48 from the Export-Import Bank of China to finance the construction of the 600MW Karuma Hydropower Project and the associated interconnection works and projects including Karuma-Kawanda, Karuma-Olwiyo and Karuma-Lira Electricity Interconnection Lines Project.

This request entailed Government’s borrowing of US$ 645,821,407.12 from the Export Buyers’ Credit Window and another US$ 789,337,275.36 from the Preferential Buyers’ Credit Window of the Export- Import Bank of China. 

In accordance with rule 166 (2) (b) of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure, the request was presented to this august House by the Minister of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development on 19 December 2014 and accordingly referred to the committee for consideration. Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee considered and scrutinised the request and we now beg to report. 

The methodology is clear including the documents that were studied. 

Background

Government is undertaking the construction of the Karuma Hydropower Project to mitigate future energy supply shortages due to the increased demand for energy especially for industrial development. 

In the case of Uganda, the country is currently faced with an acute electricity supply shortage, despite the existing substantial power resources. As a result - This has already been echoed by the minister, Mr Speaker. With your permission, can I proceed? The project linkage to the country strategy is also presented- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are the committee’s observations and recommendations? 

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and much obliged.  I request that we go to page 12 where the observations and recommendations begin from.

Mode of Financing

The committee noted that the Government of Uganda’s policy is to borrow at the lowest cost of financing, preferably using International Development Association concessional terms, or equivalent to a 40-year repayment period, 10 years of which is the grace period, and at an interest rate of 0.02 per cent. 

However, such financing is becoming rare with increasing demand for infrastructure projects, and the amount that can be lent out is limited. In view of this, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda requested for financial assistance to implement various hydropower projects to His Excellency Xi Jing Ping, the President of the People’s Republic of China, during the BRICS Summit Meeting in South Africa in March 2013.

Observations

The committee notes that if Government borrowed an amount of up to US$ 1 billion, the interest rate would be 2 per cent. However, the amount involved went above the US$ 1 billion threshold thereby attracting commercial terms. The Export Buyers’ Credit Window, which is at commercial terms, attracts an interest rate of about 4 per cent with a repayment period of 15 years.

The committee further noted that borrowing from the same source of funding under different financing terms for one project is not usual. The Government should have exhausted the provided US$ 1 billion under the Preferential Buyers’ Credit since its terms are more favourable and financed the balance of US$ 435.16 million from other cheaper multilateral sources like ADB, IDB among others.

Recommendation

Government should always seek to exhaust cheaper multilateral and bilateral sources available to the country so as to attain the intended economic objectives. 

Concessionality of the loan

The committee observed that this loan for financing of Karuma Hydropower Project is non–concessional, since its grant element combined (29 per cent) is lower than the threshold of 35 per cent recommended by the International Monetary Fund and World Bank.

However, the Preferential Buyers’ Credit mode is within the threshold of 25 per cent of non-concessional financing under the Public Debt Management Framework, 2013 unlike the Export Buyers’ Credit, which is market-based. 

The committee recommends that Government should explore options for concessional terms when financing power projects. Government should also ensure the timely implementation of these projects to be able to achieve returns on investment in the medium term to repay the loan without eroding the ability of the end users to consume electric power. 

Debt Sustainability

The committee notes that increasing investments in the infrastructure and energy sectors will continue to exert a significant increase in Uganda’s debt portfolio which may escalate. However, the ratio of export revenues to debt is projected to decline in the medium term as a result of servicing existing debt, although this will improve in the long run. 

Recommendation

Government should revise its export strategy to deliberately target high value exports, and increase value addition to international standards to increase the level of exports in a short medium term. 

Procurement of the contractor for the 600 Megawatts Karuma Hydropower Project

The committee noted that this is the kind of procurement envisaged under Section 4 of the PPDA Act. This means that the provisions of the agreement prevail over the provisions of the PPDA Act.

The committee also noted that this is an Engineering Procurement and Construction (EPC) contract, where the contractor is obliged to deliver a complete facility to the Government of Uganda ready for generation of power.  The EPC contracts are sometimes called turnkey construction contracts. 

In accordance with the contract, the work consists of engineering, procurement, construction of civil and associated infrastructure works, supply, transportation storage, installation, testing, and commissioning of the hydro-mechanical, and electro-mechanical plant and machinery. All this leads to successful operation and performance of all the generating units as per the statements of requirement including the cost of all construction equipment, personnel, and materials to complete and commissioning of a 6 by 100 megawatts Karuma Hydropower Project, Uganda and its associated transmission line works. After successful completion, testing and commissioning of the project, it is to be handed over to the employer who is Government. 

The contract is a lump-sum contract which will be executed on EPC plus financing turnkey basis. Under this arrangement, the Government of Uganda has agreed to pay Sinohydro Corporation Limited to execute the work without a cost breakdown. 

Recommendation 

Government should always seek to attract favourable terms and conditions while negotiating bi-lateral agreements. Government should desist from engaging in contacts and agreements that are costly to the Ugandan economy. 

The Settlement Action Plan

Government acquired 356 hectares of land for the development of the Karuma 600 megawatts Hydropower Project. This included 123.23 hectares which was acquired by NORPAK, 192.75 hectares from private owners, and 40 hectares from the Uganda Wildlife Authority. This land had to be available, free of encumbrances. The approach used for the Resettlement Action Plan included sensitisation, discourse and verification. 

The committee noted that the total number of claims or beneficiaries where 621, out of which 617 have been compensated, equivalent to 99.4 per cent. 

The committee further notes that along the inter-connection project, out of 3822 beneficiaries, 35 per cent have been compensated.

Recommendation 

The committee commends Government for the compensation so far made and recommends that the remaining beneficiaries also be compensated expeditiously.

End-User Tariff 

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the committee observed that the power generation tariff will be US$ 5 cents per kilowatt hour after the grace period and will decrease to US$ 4.1 cents during the loan repayment and further down to 2.4 cents per kilowatt hour after the loan has been fully repaid in 15 years. As a result, the end user tariff will drop from the current Shs 520 to Shs 400 after debt repayment for both Isimba and Karuma hydro power plants repayment.

The rate at which the tariff is to decline within the 20-year period is very low, demonstrating a high cost of finance in the power projects

Recommendation 

Government should target cheaper sources of finance for future energy projects in order to maintain a relatively affordable tariff for the end user, thus scaling up private consumption and investment.

Manpower Provision for the Karuma Hydropower Project

The committee noted that to date, there are 1,718 persons working on the Karuma Hydropower Project, including 542 Chinese and 1,176 Ugandans. According to the project construction requirements, the manpower needed will be about 3,350 persons during the peak construction period. Preference will be given to the local residents in the local area with the requisite skills, and training shall be provided.

We recommend that whereas it is commendable that many Ugandans have been employed through this project, gender concerns and remuneration should be put into consideration. 

Utilisation of local Resources

The project will utilise local sub-contracting facilities to construct residential houses, office blocks, access roads and ordinary manufacturing. Local procurement of materials will include steel, cement, timber and other forms of hardware.

We recommend that the contractor should as much as possible endeavour to use locally available materials while implementing the project in order to boost our indigenous industries.

Environment, Health and safety:

The committee noted that the project exists in a complex ecosystem and environment. Further, the environment impact assessment certificate has been issued for the project and the implementation of conditions of approval is on-going. Five environment impact assessment and project briefs have been completed and 13 are being finalised by 31stMarch for additional facilities. The pending licences include waste disposal permits, which are awaiting approval of the environment impact assessment; ground water abstraction permit; and storage of hazardous wastes.

We recommend that the necessary requirements to ensure that the project meets internationally accepted environmental and health standards should be put in place throughout the implementation process and thereafter.

Corporate Social Responsibility

The committee noted that as part of corporate social responsibility, the contractor shall donate the following: 

    • two hospitals;
    • one primary school at the project site for the local community;
    • camps and offices; and 
    • establish a study fund for orphans within the project area.

We recommend that the local communities should be involved at all stages of the implementation of the corporate social responsibility so that they can own it. 

Conclusion

The committee recommends that:

1. The request by Government to borrow US$789,337, 275.36 from the Preferential Buyers’ Credit Window of the Export-Import Bank of China to finance the construction of the 600 megawatt Karuma Hydropower Project and the Karuma-Kawanda, Karuma–Olwiyo and Karuma–Lira interconnection projects be approved.

2. Considering the pressing need for power supply for the country and the combination mix of the Preferential Buyers Credit and the Export Buyers Credit in this loan proposal, the request by Government to borrow US$645,821,407.12 from the Export Buyers’ Credit Window of the Export-Import Bank of China to finance the construction of the 600 megawatts Karuma Hydropower Project and the Karuma-Kawanda, Karuma-Olwiyo and Karuma-Lira interconnection projects should be approved subject to the recommendations in the report. The committee also strongly cautions Government to desist from committing the country to unfavourable loan terms and conditions.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Chairperson. Honourable members, the question I now propose for your debate is that, Parliament passes a resolution to authorise Government to borrow up to US$1,435,158,862.8 from the Export-Import Bank of China, to finance the construction of the 600 megawatts Karuma Hydro-Power Project and the associated interconnection work and projects.

That is the motion I propose for your debate and the debate starts now. Each member will be taking three minutes.

6.45
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much. I would like to seek for your indulgence that as the alternative Government, we be given more time just to note the very critical issues.

I have studied the mood in the House, but I would like the members to note that we need to be aware of where we are going, and I borrow that word from the Speaker, as used this morning. We need the power and we needed it yesterday but we do not have the money. 

However, we need to be very careful. Why am I saying so? Our debt as we stand now, which Government has not declared - Bank of Uganda in terms of treasury bills and bonds - is more than Shs 7 trillion. That is domestic alone - Bank of Uganda treasury bills. The foreign debt alone is Shs 6.8 trillion. All this, adds up to about Shs 13 trillion. If you convert this money into Uganda shillings, it is about Shs 5 trillion. So, the debt comes to about Shs 20 trillion.

Our growth of GDP in terms of revenue annually, is not more than Shs 1.5 trillion. This loan has a period of 20 years; this is the highest borrowing ever in the history of this country, and in Africa.

I have gone to China at the invitation of the Government of China and on a China-Africa programme. We have had meetings with so many people around the world. The argument has been that you get what you negotiate for. The Chinese have been able to bail out the US and the European governments at much lower interest rates, and the information is there. Borrowing at four percent, at two percent of a dollar is a crime against our future children.

If you calculate the revenue we are going to have – if you look at the budget for next year, we are going to pay interest rates on debts of up to Shs 1.7 trillion and yet our revenue is growing at that rate - look at the growth curve. We are going to approve this money today, but there is a big problem and I say so for the sake of our children.

We are mortgaging our country because we want power and yet people do not look beyond certain facts; we may be worse than Greece in the short run. At this rate of borrowing and interest rate - Today I wanted to meet the Minister of Finance to give him the information, but he has been very busy. 

Hon. Omach and colleagues, other countries around the world like Ethiopia have borrowed money from China but not at this rate of interest. 

Export buyer credit is an old form of borrowing; it is tied aid that the international community and the world have condemned. It was a requirement for Uganda to qualify for HIPC I, HIPC II and multilateral debt relief that caused this country to receive a debt write-off. This kind of tied borrowing is colonial and is not part of the agreement that the Government of Uganda has with the international community. Very soon we are going to other borrowing from the Chinese Government for the standard gauge railway and other projects. 

Mr Speaker, for the sake of the record, we need the standard gauge railway and we need all these projects to be front loaded. However, if you look at our deficit trade balance, we shall not be able - If the Government is unable to service this debt, the infrastructure will be of no value because our people will not have money to invest and raise the taxes and we shall all pay.

Moving forward, this country needs to take a firm resolution that we need the money but we should not engage in borrowing which is export buyer credit because it is against the international agreements that we have signed. Two, export buyer credit of four per cent is not acceptable. Even for the Chinese to transfer this money to our local people - the labour force - I was in Karuma and our people are being paid peanuts. They are being buried on the grounds. At least if they were getting something. The Ugandan workers are about 20 per cent of the entire labour force. We went there as a committee. 

This money, therefore, needs to be deferred but the mood in the House shows that we want to approve this money because the President has struggled. However, I have warned you, take a decision knowing that you are mortgaging not only yourselves but your children and grandchildren. Thank you very much.

6.52
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, today we are debating a very important motion to borrow funds to construct Karuma Dam. 

I have heard the argument from my brother, hon. Ekanya. I have read several books and one of the books I read recently was about America. In 1731, one President borrowed to construct roads in America. People condemned the President that he was mortgaging the country. I would like to tell you that when the President opened the roads in America, it spurred development and America right now is one of the developed countries in the world. (Applause)

Today, we are going to borrow for electricity. The honourable Member of Parliament knows clearly that Uganda is producing the lowest power in the region - 800MW – and yet South Africa has 40,000MW. With the construction of Karuma Dam, we are going to offload onto our grid 600MW. I think we must be proud of our country; 600MW after Karuma is constructed.

When it is done, it is going to reduce the tariffs. Right now, we are paying 12 cents per kilowatt. With the construction of Karuma and other dams, we are going to reduce it to 4.8 cents. That is going to lower the tariffs of electricity, spur development and reduce the cost of production. We cannot wait any longer; I think this is the best that we are going to do for our country. 

When it comes to repayment, I would like to inform my brother that with once we spur development in the country, it will increase our GDP and it will transform our country; therefore, our revenue will increase, development will occur and we will be able to repay our loans. We must borrow today and we shall be able to repay that loan. (Applause)

I would like to inform my brother, hon. Ekanya, - I think he studied economics and I too studied economics – that it is only today that we can do this. If we do not reduce the cost of power, our country will never develop. If we do not produce more electricity in our country, we are bound to degenerate. Therefore, I support that Karuma should be constructed and we should borrow money for the construction of Karuma. (Applause) Thank you very much Mr Speaker.

6.55
MR FOX-ODOI OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama North County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will start with the negatives - what we should not do. The first thing we should not do as a country and as legislators is to oppose any investment in the electricity sector. The second thing we should not do is to oppose any investment in infrastructure. We should not even be seen to be doing that. 

Investment in the electricity sector is investment in employment. If you invest in the electricity sector, you invest in industrialization and you employ more of your citizens. You give them the capacity to invest on their own. Therefore, every right-thinking citizen must, as a duty, support an investment in the electricity sector.

It is also an investment in our environment. If we generate electricity and we supply electricity to rural areas like West Budama North, you will save on our consumption of firewood. Therefore, we must all support this borrowing.

Honourable Ekanya raised fundamental issues; at what rate are we borrowing? The committee also noted that we should engage in discussion of the rates as a country. These are legitimate questions that we should not run away from. I strongly believe that if we negotiate better, we shall get better rates. We should not throw away any penny. We should not pay any penny over and above what we can find in the market.

For those very few reasons, I support the motion to authorise Government to borrow this amount of money.

6.58
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion and I would like to thank the committee for the good report. However, the committee notes and observes a number of issues which we should put on record for the future. 

One of the issues the committee observes is about negotiation for a loan. I would like Government to clarify to this House what they understand by negotiation for a loan. I believe you negotiate to get better terms. However, it seems the loan requests we pass here have got dictated terms. This is an area where Government needs to improve.

Secondly, we are talking about the cost of finance, that is, the interest rate. It is common knowledge that higher interest rates have got a negative impact on the loans and on the purpose of borrowing. I would like to state that much as much as is practical, Government should always negotiate for lower interest rates especially on big loans like this one.

Lastly, borrowing to finance infrastructure and energy is very good. However, as we move forward, we need to think about how best we can finance our budget without eroding ourselves into borrowing all the time. Other sources of financing the budget should also be pursued in order not to have more commitment than what we can afford. Thank you.

7.01
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion to borrow this money for financing the Karuma Dam.

In economics, we know that there is demand and supply. Right now, there is tremendous demand for electricity but the supply is not there. The Karuma project will give us 600MW to bridge that gap between the demand and supply. That is why I strongly support the motion; let us allow the Government to borrow this money so that the current demand is met.

Where I come from, there are very many government institutions which need electricity. The local people also need electricity, but they cannot afford it. I believe that such demands will be met with this project.

Secondly, the issue of employment is very crucial. Right now, we have so many people, both educated and uneducated, who will benefit from this project. There are people trading in the informal sector; this project will help them get employment. It will even cater for the women who will do small businesses there. On this note, I support the motion. 

We want to move to the level of a high income economy as a country, but without electricity how are we going to develop? (Member timed out.)

7.03
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion to borrow US$1,435,158,862.48 billion for the Karuma Hydro-Power Project. 

Mr Speaker, we are in a delicate situation requiring desperate measures. I was considering the cost of not having Karuma now and I felt that it would be a very disastrous situation. As it is always, a poor man will always have very few options. The situation we are facing demands that we take the available option.

However, I thought that we should address ourselves to the effects of borrowing this money and how we may ameliorate those negative effects of borrowing. This is where I would like to borrow the view of the committee; there is the export revenue to debt ratio, which reduces overtime with the borrowing and which in a long term, they say, is likely to improve.

I think this situation is in our hands - first, on how we direct our resources in the budget to make sure that this country becomes an export driven country. As it is today, if we do not address that problem, we are going to continue in a situation of negative trade balance, suggesting that the capacity of the country to meet our debts as they fall due becomes a serious problem. Therefore, it is imperative on us, as we debate the budget for 2015/16, to consider addressing the supply side constraints of the economy, particularly financing the productive sectors, especially those that will lead to value added output and more exports for this country.

Mr Speaker, I support this motion, but I conclude by suggesting that we should address the negative effects of this expensive borrowing. Thank you.

7.06
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and honourable members. I think we should form consensus. The consensus is not that we should not borrow; we all need infrastructure and power and we need Karuma and all other investments. However, at what cost? 

We all want this; we wanted it yesterday but if you consider this at four per cent, – this is in dollars, not even shillings - that means that for US$10,000 we shall have to pay US$40. For US$100,000,000 we shall have to pay back US$4 million. For one billion dollars, we shall have to pay back US$40 million. Colleagues, these are big sums of money!

Indeed, we are not the first to complain about it. We all read recently that when the President was meeting his Cabinet, he decried that he is being frustrated. I appeal to members of the Executive -Can’t you find a better deal? We would all like to join hands, and that is why I urge my colleagues. We are not the first; even the appointing authority of these members of the Executive was equally frustrated by the way they were handling things.

We would like to borrow, but can’t you find better terms so that tomorrow, in the Tenth or Eleventh Parliament, although some may not be in this House, they may look back and say, “When I was there, I made my contribution”. The country is not ending with us, Mr Speaker. That is why if there was room, we would say, “Yes, in principle Parliament agrees, but the amount in interest that we are going to pay is too much”. Can’t we take part of that money, honourable minister? Say, out of that US$ 1.43 billion, can’t we take half - at least where there is a concession of two per cent and we leave that part of four per cent?

I would propose that we take that portion where we are going to pay two per cent and for some time, we look elsewhere. It is not that we must take the entire amount at ago. I propose that we agree to borrow but take the portion bearing two per cent interest rate. For the four per cent, we task Government to continue engaging our development partners so that we can get an agreeable interest rate. For the four per cent, I am worried, we are committing this and the coming generations and it is not sustainable; Members of Parliament are aware of this. 

I support the motion to the extent of the two per cent. For the four per cent, my conscience tells me something different; I do not support it.

7.10
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the committee for bringing this report. This is something that has been long overdue as we seek to transform this country. We need electricity to reach everywhere for social-economic transformation.

Mr Speaker and Members, for this country to move forward in terms of development, we need this project. I think we fear to take risks sometimes as Members of Parliament. However, if we are to think business, this is the direction to take as a country. We take risks and we say that we are going for this investment because it is very crucial for our country.

Like Members have said, I would like to challenge hon. Ekanya. He says that the country is over borrowing and spending money on infrastructure. Yes, we need infrastructure because we are not going to generate taxes for this country without developing the infrastructure. We cannot develop as a country without this; we will remain stagnant. Developed countries invested heavily in infrastructure such as roads.

I would like to give you a scenario of the roads where I come from. Before that road was worked on - you know we export a lot of matooke and milk to Kampala - vehicles would take a long time to come here. They would spend hours and days on the road. These days, it takes a very short time to reach Kampala for people to bring their matooke and go back. Therefore, we need investment in infrastructure if we are going to develop as a country.

Mr Speaker, as members have pointed out, especially the committee, in terms of negotiation I believe that if the sectors concerned do not have the best negotiators, we can do what other countries do. Some countries invest in lobbyists and negotiators, why don’t we take that direction so that we get people who can negotiate the best rates for our country, especially when we are negotiating for loans? We can then get the best deals, rather than coming here to say that Government did not do very well in negotiations. Let invest in lobbyists and negotiators for better deals. 

Otherwise, for this country to grow, we needed this loan yesterday, especially for Karuma to get electricity because that will propel development in this country. I thank you.

7.12
MR TANNA SANJAY (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity and thank the committee for the report presented to us.

On the justification for Karuma, I could speak for hours. Just to remind honourable colleagues, when Bujagali delayed to come on, the amount of inverters, batteries and generators that we invested in as Ugandans and businessmen, even at household level, is well documented. The amount of money wasted to generate fuel using these generators which Government subsidized is also well documented. I would not want to dwell on that.

However, what I would like to place into perspective is the interest rate issue that has been raised. Today, if I walked into a commercial bank in Kampala and wanted to borrow in US$100,200,000 or US$ 1 million, the interest rate would oscillate between 11.5 to 12 per cent in US dollars. If you are a good negotiator, you can walk away with 11.5 per cent. However, when you go to the government corporate level, it is libor plus four or libor plus five. Libor is a rate that is generated due to economic functions and it is normally oscillating between 5.8 and 6 per cent currently. So, this comes back to 11 per cent. That is the global financial system. 

However, when you look at a loan of this magnitude, US$ 1.5 billion, and you look at the payment period, the grace period given -Most importantly, as a businessman or somebody who understands banking, if I am lending to somebody I would be less hesitant to lend to a young man than an older person because the old man may die quicker than the young man. Therefore, when you look at nations, you look at the credit rating. Uganda’s credit rating actually rose up recently. Last month, we were upgraded and got a better credit rating because we meet our obligations.

What am I trying to drive at? I am trying to emphasise what my colleagues have said, that considering the economic stability and security situation in this country - we have been stable for close to 30 years now - we should be able to get a better interest rate. Those interest rates may be sufficient for those countries that are unstable and are graded as a high risk lending country. However, if at all our negotiators –

The global market understands that Uganda is desperate for power. If we delay this today, then we are doomed and the lender is aware that we are desperate. There needs to be some skill engaged in lowering that interest rate. I support the motion in its entirety but caution on the rate of borrowing. I thank you.

7.17
MS DOROTHY NSHAIJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the committee on a very wonderful report and especially when it comes to infrastructural development. 

In the first instance, I would like to inform honourable members that as we discuss this, we have to bear in mind that the Government had already committed itself 15 per cent on the project. We should decide now maybe to support this and not lose the 15 per cent the Government had already placed on the project and at the same time, when we compare the interest rates of two per cent and four per cent, members have said that the two per cent is more manageable. However, if we get only that money, it will not do any good for this project. I therefore say that it is very paramount that we support this loan request at two and four per cent respectively to make sure that we benefit from the programme.

Secondly, if you consider the demand for electricity in this country compared to our neighbouring countries in East Africa- you can see the rate at which Kenya and Rwanda are utilising their electricity - it is paramount that if we are to benefit as a country, we have to increase on our power generation. If we increase it using this dam and we produce 600 Megawatts, I think it will be for the benefit of Ugandans.

You say that if we commit ourselves to this loan, we shall be committing the generations to come. However, if you look at the current situation where we have a high level of unemployment in this country, we need to have investors to come to our country and the investors cannot come when the power tariffs are still very high. We have to compete; we are in a competitive world. Therefore, if we pass this loan request and generate power, we shall be creating employment for our youths, which means we shall be fighting for the betterment of the generation to come and that is not committing the next generation wrongly.

With those few points, Mr Speaker and honourable members, it is my prayer that we pass this motion and things will come. I thank you. 

7.20
MR GEORGE EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion to borrow US$1.5 billion to construct the Karuma Dam. 

We needed this dam yesterday. If we are to realise balanced economic growth in this country, we must have this dam so that we can see industries in the northern part of this country, in West Nile and in the eastern part of this country. Currently, we have investors making huge losses, even those who are based in Kampala and Jinja, because of low power supply. Today, young people are losing jobs because if investors are making losses, they cannot be able to sustain employing our boys and girls.

If this country is to move forward economically, we must have a lot of electricity, we must generate more electricity. Therefore, we must have more dams that will generate electricity for this country. If we are looking at household incomes that we keep talking about and yet people are not employed, people are not able to earn - Incomes can only improve when we have industries in place. Our sons and daughters flood municipalities and cities because these are the only areas where they find job opportunities. Therefore, spearheading this dam to supply power countrywide will allow industries to be spread.

I only want to call upon the Government to promote these areas now when we are attracting these investors. The investors should be taken to the north, not only concentrating them in urban areas like Kampala, Jinja and Entebbe. I want to see an industry in Teso and Bukedea. So, this electricity should be rolled out. 

I stand to support this motion. I want to thank the committee for the work they have done. I want to urge this House to support and pass this motion. Thank you very much.

7.22
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the motion. 

Hon. Ekanya did mention that the local debt of Uganda stands at Shs 7 trillion. I want to compare notes with him and I would also like to know the source of his information. According to the Auditor-General’s report of 2014, the local debt of Uganda stands at Shs 1.7 trillion. In fact, it increased from Shs 1.5 trillion to Shs 1.7 trillion. I am wondering where hon. Ekanya got the Shs 7 trillion.

Secondly, the other week, the Minister of Finance made a statement on the Floor of Parliament on the status of our economy. It showed us the indicators and I hope hon. Ekanya was around; he did not rise to challenge the current indicators.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, just debate.

MR MAWANDA: Mr Speaker, according to our Public Debts Management and Sustainability Framework 2013, our ratios in respect to external borrowing still show that we are doing very well and we can be able to borrow and pay our debts. This loan we are trying to borrow is still within our benchmarks; we can pay it back. We have been recently upgraded as the Ugandan economy, an indication that the economy is doing very well; it can be able to borrow and pay its loan. 

However, the Ministry of Finance did pledge to us that it would soon set up a debt monitoring unit. This unit will be specifically monitoring and supervising the performance of loans. We have, on several times, requested the ministry to give us the performance of the loans we borrow and they have taken time to get back to us, but if they put this unit in place, they will be able to be giving us information as quickly as possible.

Lastly, I also want to request Government not to suffocate borrowing from the local markets. When it does that, banks are more interested in lending to Government than the private sector and yet Government is promoting a private sector led economy. I beg to summit and support that Government borrows money to construct the Karuma Dam. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, most of the speeches are in support; can I ask if there is somebody who is opposing the motion so that they speak now? Is there somebody who has a different opinion?

7.25
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (Buyaga Count West, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. All of us agree that Government should go ahead and borrow, but we have an issue which is not resolved - the cost of borrowing. There are two costs, the two per cent and the four per cent. We are saying, let us approve for Government to borrow that aspect of two per cent and then they go back to negotiate the four per cent. In any case, even if you approve the entire loan, you are not going to use the money in one day. Let us ask them to approve the two per cent and they go and use that money as they negotiate to reduce this interest rate. 

Since I will not be given another opportunity, Mr Speaker - I come from Bunyoro -  I want to support the borrowing at two per cent, but I would want an assurance from the honourable minister: when is he bringing a motion on the Floor of the House to borrow for infrastructure development in my area, Bunyoro Region -(Laughter)- that is condition one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you know there is a rule on relevance. You have to be relevant to the subject that is being debated. Now, when you start singing roads in Bunyoro, it might shift away from the matter before the House and you might face a point of order.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, to co-exist, you must exist. My argument is only tenable here when I exist as a person from Bunyoro. This is why my submission and appendage of approval -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you had already made the point, but when you are put to order –(Laughter)-

7.28
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Mr Speaker, maybe I have to remind the House that I am not talking as the Member from Dokolo.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are the Leader of the Opposition.

MS OGWAL:  Yes, as the Leader of the Opposition.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My apologies.

MS OGWAL:  I thank you. I would like to thank the committee for the report and I would like to say that in principle, there is no way that anybody would oppose this request.

For almost 50 years, Northern Uganda has been left behind in terms of development and more specifically, in the last 23 to 25 years during the insurgency by the Lord’s Resistance Army. Therefore, if you are talking about pulling Northern Uganda to catch up with the rest of the region, I think that we need to first think about power. (Applause) The Karuma Dam, therefore, is very dear to our hearts. I believe that some of us who are looking forward to develop Uganda for the future and not only for today – when we talk about Uganda, it includes Northern Uganda – let us support anything that will promote industrial development in Northern Uganda.

One of the things that I would like to remind this House about is that the North, and I do not want to speak about Lango specifically, but the North is the granary of Uganda. It grows sim-sim, maize, sorghum and any food that you can talk about and I am very proud to come from that region.  We, Africans, have not realised that we tend to export and trade in primary products instead of trading in secondary products, which have been semi-processed or processed as they would fetch more value which is good for the economy. One of the reasons as to why I am supporting this loan request is that we must consciously develop Northern Uganda not only as the basket for production of grain but also for agro-based industrial processing. (Applause)

However, Mr Speaker, I am aware just as you are that 15 per cent has already been advanced to the contractor from the Government as our contribution. You know that this money was diverted from the Capital Gains Tax of the oil revenue and that 15 per cent has not come to this House for approval. We need to find out from the minister, who happens to be a Munyoro and very anxious about this loan, how we happened to have spent that money without Parliamentary approval. It is a matter of principle and it is our responsibility as Parliament and much as we are so anxious about this project, we must do things properly and that is my concern.

The second is that I am not only concerned about the interest rate of either four or two per cent – that shows that in our country, there are people who are not truly Ugandan. I hope that the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development is listening because those who negotiate for us are very skilled in their area and know what they are doing. They know where they can negotiate and succeed. I happen to have dealt with the World Bank for quite a while when I was chairperson of the Uganda Development Bank. The World Bank tells you that they give you what they feel that you deserve and this is a fact. So, if you are strong in negotiating the terms, then you will get it. 

There is need for true Ugandans to negotiate for us and this is just a cry from my heart. You cannot go for four per cent when you know that you could actually press for two per cent. I do not have to train you to be a Ugandan because it should come from your heart. It is an aspect that needs to be corrected because we are going to approve this loan.

I also would like to plead with Parliament to give the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development the responsibility to re-negotiate the rates of interest. One of the conditions that I have cited, and I need to be corrected in case I am wrong, is that the revenue from this power generated from Karuma will be pegged to debt repayment and so Uganda’s economy and the government’s hands will be tied. We need to seriously look at that and not just be excited about approving things. Those are hard facts and let our team on the frontbench go back and think about it.

Mr Speaker, I am not condemning anybody but the bureaucrats have taken our politicians for a ride. They make us look stupid because we allow them to make us look stupid. They bring documents and yet the ministers do not have time to think because they believe that their experts and other technical people have already done everything, and yet they actually know what they want and the team that they are negotiating with. They know what they are going to get from that deal and so they just come and tell the ministers what they choose. 

I would like to plead with these ministers to be sharper and smarter than what they are because they are letting the country down. Mr Speaker, I beg to support the borrowing. I thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will put the question that Parliament passes the resolution to authorise Government to borrow up to US$1,435,158,862.48 from the Export-Import Bank of China to finance the construction of the 600MW Karuma Hydropower Project and the associated interconnection works and projects.  I now put the question to this motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you very much and congratulations to honourable members and the ministers. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 7.37 p.m. and was adjourned until Wednesday, 25 March 2015 at 2.00 p.m.)


