

Tuesday, 12 March 2019

Parliament met at 11.14 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. We had to adjust the programme to sit this morning because I was made to understand that a number of honourable members are scattering to different places; particularly a good number of members are going for a trip today. 

I would like to say that when we issued the parliamentary calendar, I was hoping that the Government could use the recess periods under that calendar so as not to disrupt our work but it seems they continue to operate the way they want. In the circumstances, our work will have to be disrupted. That is why I called you and I thank you so much for coming. 

Secondly, honourable members, we have had a bad weekend. Particularly, a number of people lost their lives on an Ethiopian Airlines flight from Addis Ababa to Nairobi. We also lost one of our members who was coming from service in AMISON; one of the commissioners of police. 

We have also suffered another death; the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives, Ambassador Julius Onen, who died yesterday. 

As we were contemplating that, yesterday our colleague, hon. Charles Engola lost his son, Joshua Engola. Hon. Engola is the Minister of State for Defence and Veteran Affairs (Defence). 

On behalf of Parliament, I would like us to register our condolences and ask that we observe a moment of silence for all of these. 

(Members observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House has not been spared. During the same weekend, hon. Micheal Kabaziguruka was involved in a motor car accident together with hon. Norah Nyendwoha. As you know, hon. Kabaziguruka is recovering from an accident but now he has had another one. I think the poor man has never settled in this House. He is in Kampala Hospital.

Honourable members, yesterday was Commonwealth Day. We expected to receive a message from the Queen so I would like to read the message from the Queen, who is the head of the Commonwealth, of which we are a part. This is her message: “Commonwealth Day has a special significance this year as we mark the 70th anniversary of the London Declaration. When nations of the Commonwealth agreed to move forward together as free and equal members, the visual and sense of connection that inspired the signatories has stood the test of time and the Commonwealth continues to grow, adapting to address contemporary needs. 

Today, many millions of people around the world are drawn together because of the collective value shared by the Commonwealth. In April last year, I welcomed the leaders of our 53 nations to Buckingham Palace and Windsor Castle for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting and we all witnessed how the Commonwealth vision offers hope and inspires us to find ways of protecting our planet and our people. 

We are able to look to the future with greater confidence and optimism as a result of the link that we share and thanks to the networks of co-operation and mutual support, which we contribute and on which we draw. With enduring commitment through times of great change, successful generations have demonstrated that the good will for which the Commonwealth is renown may be intangible but its impact is very real. We experience this as people of all backgrounds. 

We continue to find new ways of expressing, through action, the value of belonging in a connected Commonwealth. I hope and trust that many more will commit during this Commonwealth Day.” It is signed by Elizabeth, Regina. That is the message from the Queen of England.

There were just two matters of national concern by hon. Luttamaguzi and hon. Tinkasiimire. You will each take two minutes. 

11.20
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Yesterday, while I was watching the news, I was disturbed when I saw a headline that thousands of families in Gulu Central Forest Reserve are going to be evicted. These people have been staying there for many years and their livelihood has been dependant on that area. However, all of a sudden, National Forestry Authority (NFA) came out with a court order to evict these Ugandans from the areas where they have been living.

Madam Speaker, there is massive eviction of people across the country and we wonder why it is so at the moment. We are not ready to see fellow Ugandans sleeping on the streets and being mistreated by Ugandans, especially the Government. 

Since the Rt Hon. Prime Minister discussed that matter and assured the House that no one will be evicted until Government comes up with a comprehensive report, my prayer is that the Government continues to engage the stakeholders of Gulu Central Forest Reserve so that we can find a way of ensuring the stay of our people and countrymen in their homeland. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

11.22
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the honourable member for raising the matter. We are all governed by the law, even when we are ministers or members of Parliament. It is good that the honourable member stated that those people were being removed from a central forest reserve. A central forest reserve is gazetted, not by the minister, but by this Parliament and we are enjoined to respect gazetted areas. 

For the last one year or so, the Ministry of Water and Environment has sent out notices to all occupants of forest reserves to vacate. Most of them have been given time to relocate and for the case of Gulu Central Forest Reserve, this is not the first time. The matter has been there for over one year and they were given notice to vacate the forest reserve. 

As a country, Parliament or individually, if we do not protect forests and wetlands, very soon we are going to face the ultimate problem of climate change, which has manifested itself through the heat that we are experiencing in this country as a result of depletion of forests and wetlands. 

Therefore, I would like to request my honourable colleague to join Government in protecting forests and to ensure that we all send a strong message throughout the country that we must protect the forests and wetlands. 

Where the court has made an order, our hands are tied; myself and you. We are a Legislature and the Executive. The Judiciary also has their role to play. Once they have made a decision on the matter, they have evaluated evidence and come to a conclusion. 

I beg to request the colleague to maybe join us in sensitising the people in that respect. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, if the matter has been adjudicated by the court, we cannot intervene. Also, if those people are illegally in the forest, they are not trees and therefore, they should leave.

11.25
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga West County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on matters of national importance. 

One, on Sunday in my constituency, there was heavy rainfall in a place called Rugashari where you were hosted last year on Women’s Day. It blew off very many houses, destroyed very many banana plantations and caused a lot of destruction. 

Currently, those affected are sleeping outside. I know that this Parliament allocated some funds to the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. I have come to this House to make an appeal so that this ministry can respond to this disaster.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the Minister for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees had agreed to pick up –

11.26
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to pass on my sympathies to the people who suffered the storm. I would like to request you, through the Speaker, to task the chairman of the district disaster committee, who is the chief administrative officer, to quickly do the assessment and bring the report forward to the Prime Minister’s Office. Without that assessment, we cannot know where we can really come in to help the people. (Mr Tinkasiimire rose_)

THE SPEAKER: No, it was only one.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: There were two issues, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: It was one and that is what I have here. Do not smuggle.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The second matter of national importance I would like to raise is that in my constituency, we have a road from Muhooro to Ndaiga. It has a section of an escarpment. It belongs to the national roads –(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: I have allowed him. Please, raise your issue.

MR TINKASIMIIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This road has a section of an escarpment. When Uganda National Roads Authority chooses to do force-on-account, sometimes they do not do this area. It was until I raised this matter on the Floor of the House that they tried to construct the above mentioned road up to the lake. This time round, they contracted a contractor called Techno Three Uganda Ltd, which was given the contract sum of Shs 2 billion to do this road. He has chosen to construct 25 kilometres instead of 30.5 kilometres, leaving this particular section of the escarpment.

To my people, this is the most important section of the road because it gives us access to the lake and also to other places like Congo, Bundibugyo and Ntoroko. Without this section, we literally have no road.

Madam Speaker, that is why I was asked to come and raise it as a matter of national importance so that we can have a word from the minister as to why he contracted 30 kilometres and he is allowing only 25 kilometres to be done.

Secondly, I would like to ask why this section is left undone perennially yet it is part of Muhooro-Ndaiga road. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a national road and we would like the Minister of Works and Transport to come and explain to us how the road will be completed. It is one of our really important roads. Therefore, we need an answer at the next convenient sitting when we return from the short recess. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATE OF THE HEALTH SECTOR IN UGANDA

11.31
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (MS JANE ACENG): Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it available to the members?

MS ACENG: Yes, it was uploaded.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, proceed.

MS ACENG: Madam Speaker, I am presenting a statement on the state of the health sector but I modified that and made it the state of health service delivery because the state of the health sector includes the other services that are received from other ministries. 

Madam Speaker, the health sector is mandated to provide the highest possible level of health services to all people in Uganda through delivery of promotive, preventive, curative, palliative and rehabilitative health services at all levels.

The vision of the National Health Policy II is, “A healthy and productive population that contributes to the socio-economic growth and national development”. The Goal of the Health Sector Development Plan 2015/2016 to 2019/2020 is, “To accelerate movement towards Universal Health Coverage with essential health and related services needed for promotion of a healthy and productive life.”

The Uganda Demographic Health Survey report of 2016 - note that we carry this out every five years - shows positive trends with a progressive reduction of most of the mortality indicators over the previous 10 to 15 years. In particular, the under-five mortality rate showed significant decline from 90 per 1,000 live births in 2011 to 64 per 1,000 live births in 2016. 

The Infant Mortality Rate (IMR) stands at 43 per 1,000 live births as per the 2016 Uganda Demographic Health Survey, which is a significant improvement from IMR of 54 per 1,000 live births as per the Demographic Health Survey of 2011. The Maternal Mortality Ratio declined from 438 per 100,000 live births in 2011 to 336 per 100,000 live births in 2016. According to the National Population Census Report, life expectancy has also improved from 45 years in 2003 to 63 years by 2015.

Madam Speaker, the National Health Policy emphasises delivery of the Uganda National Minimum Health Care Package, which consists of interventions that address the high disease burden. 

The Health System Structure ranges from the Community Level (Village Health Teams) to Tertiary Level (National Referral and Specialised Hospitals). The majority of service providers from both the public and private sector focus on delivery of primary health care under the district local governments.

Madam Speaker, by 1997, only 47 per cent of the population who needed health care could access outpatient services (National Health Policy, 1999) and by 2016, over 86 per cent of the population were within 5km of a health facility. The Uganda Master Facility List shows that we have a total of 6,937 health facilities in the country of which 45 per cent are public or belong to government, 15 per cent are private-not-for-profit and 40 per cent are for the private-for-profit sector. 

I have provided a table with a breakdown showing health facilities by level and by ownership.

Health infrastructure status

The Ministry of Health Service Standards were developed based on the first national health policy, which recommended that a general hospital should serve a population of 500,000, a health centre IV should serve 100,000 people, a health centre III should serve 20,000 people and health centre II serves 5,000 people.

In fulfilment of the NRM Manifesto, Government committed to continue implementing the Health Infrastructure Policy of having and functionalising health centre IVs in every political constituency and health centre IIIs per sub-county. Many health centre IIs will be upgraded and expanded in line with the policy.

The current health infrastructure gap is as per the table that I have provided. We have the number of districts without a hospital at all at 39, number of constituencies without a Health Centre (HC) IV are 29, number of sub-counties with no HC III but have HC IIs that can be upgraded are 331. The number of sub counties with no HC III but with a HC IV or hospital is 188 and the number of sub-counties with no health facility at all is 132.

Health Centre IIIs

Madam Speaker, Cabinet approved the Ministry of Health proposal for upgrading 285 HC IIs in sub-counties without HC IIIs with funding from the Uganda Inter-government Fiscal Transfer Reform Programme. A total of Shs 200 billion has been allocated to the health sector and work started this financial year 2018/2019 with 125 HC IIs. This will be completed in 2019/2020.

Another 71 HC IIs will be allocated funds for upgrade in the financial year 2019/2020 and the remaining 89 HC IIs will be upgraded in the financial year 2020/2021. All the upgraded facilities will be equipped with solar lighting. 

Under the Uganda Reproductive, Maternal and Child Health Improvement Project, 41 HC IIs will be upgraded to HC IIIs and 40 HC IIIs will be functionalised in 56 districts. 

A request for a loan of 10 million Euros is being followed up for health infrastructure development in Karamoja region and this will include upgrading HC IIs to IIIs and constructing HC IIIs where they do not exist. 

Beginning the financial year 2019/2020, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (MoFPED) will enhance the Non-Wage Grant to local governments and provide funding for equipment of the HC IIs that are being upgraded to HC IIIs. 

For 132 HC IIIs in sub-counties that do not have any health facility, Cabinet directed MoFPED to obtain a loan. The construction is estimated at Shs 145.2 billion and equipping at Shs 46.2 billion. The Ministry of Health put in a request to MoFPED on 6 June 2018. We still await a response.

Health Centre IVs 

Of the 290 constituencies, 29 do not have HC IVs. The plan is to revamp existing HC IVs and construct new ones or upgrade HC IIIs to HC IVs in constituencies without HC IVs. The total cost for constructing the 29 HC IVs is Shs 101.5 billion and the cost of equipping is Shs 43.5 billion while the cost of functionalising them comes to Shs 19.6 billion annually. Cabinet advised that we conclude with the HC IIIs before we can commence the HC IV constructions.

District Hospitals 


According to the National Health Policy, a general hospital serves a population of 500,000 people. There are 147 hospitals of which 63 are Government, 64 Private-Not-For-Profit (PNFP) and 20 are private. However, there are disparities in geographical distribution and accessibility. Government provides Primary Health Care (PHC) Non-Wage Grant to PNFP hospitals to serve populations in districts where they exist. The amount is slightly higher than that which is provided to Government hospitals.

Madam Speaker, rehabilitation and equipping of nine hospitals under the Uganda Health Systems Strengthening Project (UHSSP) was completed by June 2017. These hospitals include Mityana, Nakaseke, Kiryandongo, Entebbe Grade B, Nebbi, Anaka, lganga, Moyo and Moroto Regional Referral Hospitals (RRH). These hospitals were allocated additional funds for recruitment of specialists, medicines and recurrent costs.

Rehabilitation and equipping of Kawolo Hospital started on 1 May 2017 at a contract sum of US$ 10.8 million (Shs 39 billion) and is on-going under the Spanish debt swap and was at 80 per cent completion by end of June 2018. 

Rehabilitation of Busolwe Hospital will commence when MoFPED has provided a counterpart funding of Shs 6 billion. The Spanish Government has put it as a pre-condition to MoFPED before they release the committed grant of US$ 6.4 million. This has been brought to the attention of MoFPED.

Contracts were signed for the renovation and expansion of Kayunga and Yumbe General Hospitals on 5 January 2018 and works are progressing well.

Madam Speaker, Koboko, Rukunyu, Kaberamaido and Maracha HC IVs were upgraded to hospital status. The Ministry of Health awaits funding to match their status. The current funding to these facilities still remains for HC IVs, which is inadequate to match the hospital status and services being offered. Ministry of Health has written to MoFPED to provide Shs 3.52 billion for this purpose in this coming financial year.

Eight districts have PNFP hospitals, which receive PHC non-wage grants to support them to provide services as district general hospitals. These include: Agago, Amolatar, Amudat, Budaka, Bushenyi, lbanda, Kaberamaido, Kalungu, Kiruhura, Maracha, Mayuge, Mpigi, Mukono, Napak, Ngora, Oyam, Rukungiri and Zombo.

Two districts have private hospitals namely, Buhweju and Ssembabule. Thirty nine (39) districts do not have any hospitals at all. These include Alebtong, Amuria, Amuru, Bukedea, Bukomansimbi, Bulambuli, Buvuma, Buyende, Dokolo, Gomba, Isingiro, Kalangala, Kaliro, Kamwenge, Kibuuku, Koboko, Kole, Kotido, Kween, Kyankwanzi, Kyegegwa, Luuka, Lamwo, Lwengo, Manafwa, Mitooma, Nakapiripirit, Namutumba, Namayingo, Ntoroko, Otuke, Pader, Rubirizi, Serere, Sironko, Kibale, Kakumiro, Rubanda and Omoro. 

The population in most of these districts does not meet the recommended catchment population for a general hospital except for Isingiro, Amuria and Serere.

In addition, there are districts that deserve special attention because of their geographical location. These are islands and mountainous districts like Buvuma, Kalangala, Namayingo, Mayuge and Namisindwa. 

When resources are available, the Ministry of Health will prioritise these districts first. The estimated startup cost per hospital for construction, human resources, medicines and medical equipment is Shs 31.3 billion.

I have provided a table showing the breakdown of the costs. As you can see, the total cost for 41 general hospitals is Shs 1,283,000,000. The Ministry of Health will consider constructing hospitals where they are needed upon availability of resources.

Regional referral hospitals 

Madam Speaker, there are 13 regional referral hospitals and they comprise Arua, Gulu, Lira, Soroti, Moroto, Mbale, Jinja, Masaka, Mbarara, Fort Portal, Hoima, Kabale and Mubende. 

Since Financial Year 2008/2009, each of the regional referral hospitals has been receiving a development budget ranging from Shs 1 to 3 billion, to enable them revamp and construct missing infrastructure. 

Most of the regional referral hospitals have utilised this money well although progress is slow because of the cost of construction. The hospitals have constructed staff houses, specialised wards, medical equipment maintenance facilities and private wings among others. 

Oxygen plants with adequate capacity to supply lower level facilities have been installed in all regional referral hospitals. Plans are also underway to scale up oxygen supply to lower level units at an estimated investment Shs 50.5 billion over five years. These costs include backup generators with the attendant accessories, oxygen cylinders, piping, distribution, maintenance and operational costs. This will be done when funding is available. 

In the meantime, National Medical Stores is delivering oxygen to the facilities that have oxygen cylinders while others are using oxygen concentrators.

Some regional referrals hospitals like Masaka, Mbale, Mubende, Gulu and Arua signed contracts for specialised units that are over and above what the Medium Term Expenditure Framework provides annually without consultation. 

This has resulted in slow progress and a number of projects stalling but also depriving the other regional referrals hospitals of their annual release of Shs 1 billion in their favour. To complete these projects, an additional amount of Shs 48.4 billion is required. I have given a breakdown of them. For instance, Masaka requires Shs 10.4 billion; Mbale requires Shs 16 billion, Mubende needs Shs 4.5 billion; Gulu requires Shs 3.5 billion; and Arua, Shs 7.7 billion.

The population of Wakiso District has exceeded 3 million people. The Ministry of Health discussed with Wakiso District Local Government about the need to upgrade Entebbe Grade A and B as one hospital to a regional status. This has been approved and the Ministry of Health has written to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development twice, in Financial Year 2017/2018 and Financial Year 2018/20199, to provide funding amounting to Shs 7.8 billion for refurbishing Grade A and an additional Shs 4.496 billion for wage, Shs 1.6 billion for Non-Wag and Shs 1.4 billion for development fund for operationalising it as a regional referral hospital and granting it a vote status. We still await a response from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

Madam Speaker, while the regional referral hospitals are expected to provide secondary care to the population, a number of them have not been providing services sufficiently due to challenges of inadequate specialised human resources and equipment. The regional referral hospitals are expected to provide imaging, diagnostic, intensive care, dialysis, and specialised surgical and medical services on top of the general services being provided by the general hospitals. However, the current status does not enable them to provide their mandate. 

The Ministry of Health with a Grant from the Netherlands Government of € 23 million and counterpart funding from Government of Uganda € of 23 million, which will be released every quarter for the next five years, plans to refurbish regional referral hospitals imaging departments and provide equipment such as CT Scans, X-ray machines, ultrasound machines, intensive care, dialysis and theatre equipment, and MRIs among others. 

Also, with support from the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), Hoima and Kabale regional referral hospitals were expanded and equipped and works are expected to begin in Lira, Arua and Gulu regional referral hospitals this year.

National referral hospitals

Madam Speaker, the country has six national referral hospitals. These include: Upper Mulago, Butabika National Mental Referral Hospital, Kiruddu, Kawempe and Naguru. The construction of Kawempe and Kiruddu national referral hospitals was completed and they are now functional, offering specialised in services in the following areas:

Kawempe handles pediatrics, obstetrics and gynecology, adolescent health and emergency medical services. Kiruddu handles internal medicine, plastic surgery, endocrine surgery, dialysis, burns and emergency medical services. Naguru handles orthopedics, trauma and emergency medical services. 

Upper Mulago handles all disciplines save for obstetrics and gynecology. This hospital needs revamping and equipping estimated at about Shs 80 billion.

Butabika National Mental Referral Hospital provides mental health services. However, it faces human resource challenges, inadequate medicines and equipment like X-rays and CT scans. The funding gap is estimated at Shs 6.2 billion for additional specialised medicines for Butabika and other mental health units in the Regional Referral Hospitals.

Specialised hospitals

Madam Speaker, I will begin with Mulago Specialised Hospital. Lower Mulago Hospital, which was part of the Mulago National Referral Hospital, has been converted into Mulago Specialised Hospital to offer super specialised services to Ugandans and the entire region.

The rehabilitation work for Mulago Specialised Hospital is still ongoing with the current progress of work being at about 97 per cent. Currently, we require Shs 35 billion, which is $9.6 million, for completion of the works. 

Mulago Specialised Hospital will provide super specialised services including organ transplant for kidney, cornea, liver, bone marrow, stem cell, among others. It will also offer laparoscopic services, neurospinal surgery, orthopedic surgery, nuclear and endocrinological medicine, among others. The funding requirement to operationalise this hospital is Shs 17.8 billion for wage, including additional expatriates and Shs 58.3 billion for recurrent non-wage.

The next is Mulago Specialised Women and Neonatal Hospital. I would like to report that the construction and equipping of this 450-bed Specialised Women and Neonatal Hospital at Mulago was completed at a cost of Shs 100 billion, which is about $25 million. It was launched by His Excellency the President in October 2018. 

The hospital requires a total of Shs 53.8 billion to become fully operational. However, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provided only Shs 4.8 billion this Financial Year 2018/2019 for recurrent non-wage. This Shs 53.8 billion includes wage, estimated at Shs 11 billion, recurrent non-wage at Shs 29 billion and capital development of Shs 13.8 billion. The hospital is currently depending on Mulago National Referral Hospital for human resources, which has caused a strain on the operations of Mulago.

Next is the Regional Specialised Paediatric Surgical Hospital at Entebbe. The construction of this hospital was commissioned in February 2017 in Entebbe and will be completed by 2020. The hospital will provide services to the nation and the region. The Government of Uganda provision of Shs 19 billion has been made so far and Shs 5 billion included in the budget for Financial Year 2019/2020, leaving a funding gap of Shs 21 billion.

Madam Speaker, allow me to report here that the contractors have left the site today because of lack of funds to continue with the construction -

THE SPEAKER: Where? Which one?

DR ACENG: It is the regional paediatric specialised hospital.

Next is the Uganda Cancer Institute. The East African Community identified and approved the Uganda Cancer Institute as a Centre of Excellence for training, research and treatment of cancer in East Africa. Government acquired a loan of $38 million, equivalent - about Shs 152 billion - to address training of specialists, procurement of specialised cancer equipment and construction of a centre of excellence.

To date, 183 students have been funded to pursue different courses in cancer related disciplines including 14 specialist oncology fellowships and 10 PhDs. The Uganda Cancer Institute has established and continues to develop training programmes to train specialists locally including in Paediatric Oncology, Medical Oncology, Gynecologic Oncology, Hematology and Oncology Nursing.

A Linac machine has been procured and will soon be installed and a contract has been signed for the construction of the centre of excellence.
 
The Uganda Cancer Institute commissioned a new Cobalt-60 Radiotherapy Machine and another has been donated by the Government of India; so, we have two Cobalt radiotherapy machines. 

The Uganda Cancer Institute is constructing six more radiotherapy bunkers, which will house four Linear Accelerators and two brachytherapy machines to improve the radiotherapy services. This construction is expected to be completed by close of this year.

The next is the Uganda Heart Institute. The Uganda Heart Institute has attained the necessary technical expertise to position it as a world class cardiovascular care centre, in addition to being a training and research hub. 
Using this mandate, the institute has registered major achievements in cardiac surgery, cardiac catheterisation interventions, high caliber research and fellowship training of super-specialists in the cardiac fields, meriting special recognition by collaborating institutions of international repute. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to report that many of the specialists have been recognised internationally. (Applause) One of them is Dr Emmanuel Okello from Apac, who received his award recently.

The institute requires specific support in the area of infrastructure development to solve the challenge of space and funds for super-specialised sundries and supplies. 

The Uganda Heart Institute has excelled in developing its human resource structure - over 30 super specialists have been trained locally - and attaining a robust international standard of care, which are a pre-requisite for developing financial independence if it can be given initial support.

The Ministry of Health has requested for Shs 331 billion for the construction of a stand-alone centre of excellence for the Uganda Heart Institute. This will be in addition to the current infrastructure in Mulago. All these documents are with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; they have been duly approved.

Human resources for health

The national staffing level is at 73 per cent; 45,029 out of the 61,796 approved posts have been filled in the public sector. This is from our 2016/2017 Annual Health Sector Performance Report. The target is to increase to at least 76 per cent this Financial Year 2018/2019 and 80 per cent by Financial Year 2019/2020. In Financial Year 2018/2019, a wage enhancement of Shs 150 billion was provided to the health sector by this Parliament and we are grateful.

Overall, the stock of qualified health professionals available for employment in the health sector increased from 90,412 in 2017, to 101,350 by June 2018. However, recruitment is constrained by the limitation of wage and failure to attract and this has mainly affected the specialists due to the low remuneration.

Regarding consultants and senior consultants - currently, there is a gap of 219 clinical specialists and 650 support cadres at the national and regional referral levels in the public sector. 

The 2015 Human Resources for Health Audit indicates that the vacant posts for consultants and senior consultants in the national and regional referral hospitals in the country is at 61 per cent while the gap for the specialised cadres is at 83 per cent.

The Ministry of Health requires Shs 5.4 billion to recruit specialists for the 13 regional referral hospitals and the 14 general hospitals, which have been rehabilitated to fill in the gaps. A request to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was made on 9 January 2019 and we await a response.

The current structure of the lower health facilities and the regional referral hospitals is constricted and plans are underway to review these structures with the Ministry of Public Service. Even if the current positions are filled, the human resources available will still be inadequate to serve the ever increasing population. 

A training, absorption and retention plan was developed to address this gap over the next 5 years. The estimated total cost for training specialists is Shs 14.37 billion and super specialists is at Shs 43.32 billion. Government needs to enhance the salaries of the medical personnel to attract and retain them.

Madam Speaker, overall, the stock of qualified health professionals available for employment in the health sector increased, as I mentioned before, but recruitment is constrained by limitation of wage and failure to attract. This has mainly affected the specialists.

I have given a breakdown, as a comparison, showing the disparities between clinical specialists and the academicians. As you can see, when you look at the salaries of the professors per month - it is about Shs 9.1 million while senior consultants earn Shs 4.5 million. Associate professors are at Shs 8.5 million while a consultant is at Shs 4.2 million. A senior lecturer is at Shs 7.7 million while a medical officer special grade is at Shs 3.7 million. A lecturer is at Shs 7 million while a principal medical officer is at Shs 3.7 million. An assistant lecturer is at Shs 5.2 million while a senior medical officer is at Shs 3.3 million. A professor and a senior consultant have comparable trainings and years of experience and yet an assistant lecturer earns more than a senior consultant as seen in the table above. 

All consultants who were in the regional referral hospitals left this financial year to join universities for a more lucrative academic career. This is to say that all the regional referral hospitals do not have any consultant at all. They all left. Therefore, there is urgent need to replace them at more competitive salaries if the regional referral hospitals are to function. If we are to recruit them at the current salaries, we shall not attract any because they will still move away to the universities. 

I will now move to other critical cadres for the lower health facilities. 

The Ministry of Health has awarded scholarships for health workers from hard-to-reach areas as well as for those pursuing courses to fill critical gaps. 

Under the Uganda Reproductive Maternal and Child and Adolescent Health Services Improvement Project (URMCHIP), a total of 188 scholarships were awarded in the Financial Year 2017/2018. These include 21 in masters in anesthesia, 41 for bachelor of anesthesia, 32 in diploma in anesthesia; 15 for masters of anesthesia and 78 for theatre assistants among others. 

Another 529 scholarships were advertised under the same project for Financial Year 2019/2020 also targeting critical cadres including biomedical engineers and cold chain technicians.

Medicines and health supplies

Overtime, the Essential Medicines and Health Supplies (EMHS) allocation has been increasing from Shs 202 billion, in Financial Year 2010/2011 to the current Shs 284 billion, in the Financial Year 2017/2018. 

However, the budget increases for essential medicines are not in tandem with the population growth over the years and thus the declining trends in the per capita allocations. This represents only 49 per cent of the annual medicines need for the country.

The average allocation of essential medicines and health supplies per level of facility in Financial Year 2017/2018 was as follows:

    1. Each health centre II was allocated Shs 5,395,450 annually translating into Shs 900,000 for every two months for a population of approximately 5,000;

    2. Each health centre III is allocated Shs 10,790,900, which translates into Shs 1,800,000 for every two months;

    3. Each health centre IV is allocated Shs 21,581,800, which translates into 3,600,000 for every two months;

    4. Each general hospital is allocated Shs 77,610,810, which translates into 13,000,000 for every two months as a referral for a population of 500,000; and

    5. Each regional referral hospital is allocated Shs 240,584,615 every two months which translates into an average of 1.4 billion annually.

State of emergency medical services in the country

Emergency medical services have three levels, which include care at scene of emergency, care during transportation and care at the emergency unit at the health facility.

The ministry has approved the strategic plan for addressing emergency medical services gaps in the country and also endorsed the emergency medical service policy for presentation to Cabinet. 

A Certificate of Financial Implications has been requested from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development before presentation to Cabinet. We still await this certificate.

The Ministry of Health has been training lay first responders and medical first responders in order to improve on the responsiveness to emergencies wherever they occur. This is planned to be scaled up in the next five years.

Madam Speaker, financing for the Emergency Medical Services Strategic Plan is as follows: 

    a) We require $ 117,670,700, which translates to Shs 447.148 bil1ion to finance the five years of the policy;

    b) The first and second year annual expenditure for ambulance care is Shs 125 billion, which is $ 32.8 million for 225 health sub districts in Uganda;

    c) Operationalising the existing 173 ambulances, each at $ 26,585 or a total of $ 7.9 million, which is the equivalent of Shs 30.3 billion;

    d) Establishing a call and dispatch system - that is the communication system; and

    e) Ambulance stations and spots are excluded in this cost.

Therefore, the total need for the first two years is Shs 155.3 billion. We are still awaiting a Certificate of Financial Implications.

Madam Speaker, we also acquired a universal medical emergency response number - 912 from the Uganda Communications Commission; we shall establish 14 medical call and dispatch centres and attach one ambulance per command centre per region.

On transportation, the country has 441 ambulance vehicles and the majority are in private hands as per the table I have given. Sixty five per cent of the ambulances in the private sector are in the Kampala Metropolitan area. These cannot be rationally distributed because they are privately owned.

The recommended ambulance vehicle per population ratio is 1 to 100,000, meaning that Uganda, as a country, requires 400 ambulance vehicles for basic emergency care response. The Government owns 173 ambulances, showing a deficit of 225 type B ambulance vehicles. Type B ambulance vehicles are the ordinary ones and not the super-specialised ones. This gap will be filled over the medium term. The existing 173 ambulance vehicles need to be re-equipped and staffed to meet the minimum ambulance standards. On average, the cost of a type B ambulance vehicle, from purchase to functionality annually, is Shs 429,631,800, which is US$ 113,000. 

Madam Speaker, we have also planned for five type B boat ambulances for island districts and each costs, on average, $350,000 to $400,000. We intend to liaise with colleagues in South Africa to establish further the actual costs. All these are included in our request for financial implications.

Health Financing
Madam Speaker, the total budget allocation to the health sector for financial year 2018/19 is Shs 2.3 trillion, up from Shs 1,824 trillion in financial year 2017/18. This accounts for 7.4 per cent of the national budget, up from 6.4 per cent in 2017/18.

The table below shows the proportion of primary healthcare non-wage requirement that is funded by the current budget. As you can see - if I can go through the table - the first is the local government health office, which is the district health office; their average monthly requirement is Shs 8.2 million and their annual requirement is Shs 99.3 million. The current average month allocation is Shs 1.9 million and the proportion of requirement funded by the current budget is only 23 per cent. That also goes for the others; as you can see, the health centres II receive only 25 per cent of their requirement.

An additional funding requirement in financial year 2018/19 is Shs 39.5 billion and I provided a breakdown in the annex indicated as Annex 2. We have been bringing this to the attention of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the health committee.

Universal Health Coverage

Madam Speaker, currently, Cabinet is discussing the draft National Health Insurance Bill, 2014 that seeks to create a national health insurance scheme. Once enacted into law by Parliament, that legislation will be a major milestone in the journey of attaining universal health coverage because it will reduce out-of-pocket expenditure, which is currently at 40 per cent of the total health expenditure, and has been a big hindrance for access to healthcare.

Working closely with partners, the Ministry of Health is also focusing on improvement of reproductive, maternal, neonatal, child and adolescent health services to reduce avoidable deaths of mothers and children and improve their health status. Another critical area of focus is the improved supply of selected reproductive commodities, including contraceptives, pregnancy test kits, blood grouping reagents, vaccines, among others. There is an urgent funding gap of Shs 5.6 billion for vaccines for this financial year. Allow me here to state that if this money is not provided by the end of March 2019, there will be no vaccines in the country.

Madam Speaker, the ministry is also focusing on health service delivery: on health promotion, disease prevention, community health interventions, reproductive health, maternal, neonatal and child health, prevention and control of communicable diseases and outbreaks as well as non-communicable diseases. Strategic plans have been developed to guide implementation of key interventions under each programme area. 

Hepatitis B testing and vaccination has been concluded in the 41 districts of Northern, West Nile, Karamoja and Teso subregions in the first phase of the exercise. Phase II is ongoing in the eastern region, including Busoga and Bugisu subregions and the remaining parts of the country shall be covered by the end of 2019. 

His Excellency the President launched the National Exercise Day on 8 June 2018 and the final draft for the non-communicable diseases multi-sectoral strategy is waiting for costing. Health education is being conducted in all health facilities on how to prevent non-communicable diseases. 

Our Antiretroviral Therapy (ART) coverage among HIV infected adults and children increased to 86 per cent, meaning we have 1,140,110 people out of the estimated 1.3 million people who are HIV infected on treatment. This rose from 73 per cent in 2016/17 where we had 1,028,000 people out of an estimated 1.4 million people, and 61.4 per cent in 2015/16, where we had approximately 898,000 people. 

This progressive trend implies that the country is on track to achieve the second of the 90-90-90, meaning 90 per cent of people know their status, 90 per cent of people are put on ARVs and 90 per cent achieve viral load reduction, by 2020. Once we achieve this 90-90-90 target, then we shall be on track to end AIDS by 2030, that is, 81 per cent of all HIV infected people enrolled on ART. 

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development have committed to provide an additional Shs 50 billion this coming financial year, 2019/20, because the United States Government has clearly indicated that they will not provide it. If it is not provided, then we shall have a big number of people drop off from treatment. However, because of the procurement process, this money is required now.

Madam Speaker, that is the end of my presentation. I beg to submit. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for this comprehensive update. Honourable members, you realise that this is a statement but we need to have action points. Therefore, with your consent, I would like to ask the Committee on Health to draft a motion with resolutions and then we shall debate and agree on them one by one. We cannot adopt this because it does not say anything. We can have a few comments but the real thing will have to come later. Committee on Health, draft a motion, we debate it and take resolutions. 

There are so many areas where we need resolutions. I have not heard anything about neurosurgeons. This country has a very acute shortage of neurosurgeons. When is the country going to train neurosurgeons? Yesterday, I received a delegation of nephrologists; they said that dialysis in Uganda is only provided at Kiruddu and Mbarara. So, there are so many gaps. Can we ask the committee to draft a motion with prayers, so that we come and have a debate and speak to them. 

12.23
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Once again, I would like to thank the minister for this very important and informative report on which you have rightly guided. I am very sure the Committee on Health will do us justice in sieving out those issues that need to be concretely dealt with.

There were issues that the minister brought out pointing to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development where they expected responses yesterday. I had thought that those issues could be dealt with right away by this House without necessarily going to the committee, because they are urgent matters such as issues to do with vaccines. There has been an outbreak of measles all over the country and it is worse in West Nile. We have been receiving calls every day. 

When I contacted the Minister of State for Health for General Duties, she told me they were short of finances yet requests have been made to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development without response. Therefore, Madam Speaker, those issues that need to be addressed urgently can be sieved out of this report and dealt with. I would urge you to allow Members to bring them out, particularly those that need urgent responses –

THE SPEAKER: No, how would I know where they are going to stop?

12.25
MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The report seems to be a bit incomplete. In 2009, Government built health centres II and they were never operationalised. They are tactfully not mentioning anything about that. It is not a problem that you do not have money. You capture these health centres II in the report and then tell us what is happening with them. You have given us the status of the health sector but you are not mentioning the health centres II yet they were constructed by Government.

Madam Speaker, I would like to beg for your indulgence and intervention; before we tackle any business here concerning the health sector, these health centres II must be captured. The minister should tell us how many they are in Uganda and what their status is. What are they doing about the health centres II that were constructed? 

THE SPEAKER: That is something which the Committee on Health will take up. It is now our business. The minister brought her information and we now want to work on it.

12.26
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I would like to thank the minister for this statement. (Applause) We have been waiting for this kind of statement. Madam Minister, we shall work with you to support the Ministry of Health. We hear statements being made here to provide money for other sectors, for foreign investors when money is needed here. We are going to be with you.

Secondly, I am also grateful that the minister has brought up the issue of biomedical engineers and biomedical technicians. We also need a Government policy on how the recruitment and staffing norms are amended. How do you distribute these people from the national referral hospital to the health centres IV and health centres III or even to the lower levels? In every health unit in Uganda today, there are machines. Some of the problems we have in health service delivery are because of small things - a loose nut, a wire, connecting a refrigerator for blood, etcetera. In Obongi, I found a fridge that was not working. When I inquired, I found out that there was a small issue, which needed to be fixed by a medical technician. There are these problems that need to be fixed.

There must also be a proper policy or agreement to be signed between the students who are given the scholarships by the ministry and the health centres. They should go and study to become biomedical technicians but they should come back to the health centre –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are diverting. Honourable chairperson, is a fortnight okay? 

12.29
MR MICHEAL BUKENYA (NRM, Bukuya County, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think that with the precision with which the minister has presented the statement, a fortnight should be enough for us to come out with the motion with clearly outlined goals and funding requirements. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Committee on Health will present a motion for a full debate with prayers, so that when we finish we take a decision and demand for Government action. If you have views, take them to the committee; Members are now talking about so many different things. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a small procedural issue to raise. Thank you for your guidance. 

Madam Speaker, you raised the issue of neurosurgeons. I know many of them who were our classmates and are in South Africa. The minister has talked about the Uganda Cancer Institute doing well. The minister also said that 15 per cent of the health sector in Uganda is being run by the private sector but she never told us how much capital investment we, as a country, have put in those private hospitals.

Secondly, she has said that we have all the best doctors in Uganda. Instead of these working in hospitals, they are going to teach because the salary is better. She has not come out to ask us what we should do in the meantime so that we can alleviate that problem. By the time – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, when you look at the proposals from the budget, you will see how much the Government contributes. You have that information every year.

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF THE PROPOSAL TO ISSUE PROMISSORY NOTES NOT EXCEEDING US $379.71 MILLION TO FINASI/ROKO CONSTRUCTION SPV LIMITED FOR THE FINANCING OF THE INTERNATIONAL SPECIALISED HOSPITAL OF UGANDA AT LUBOWA, WAKISO

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last week we received a report but there were many areas which were not satisfactory. I do not know whether the ministry has any additional information to give on the specialised hospital.

12.32
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker and the honourable colleagues, at the last meeting of the House, there were some three or four issues, which were raised that needed more clarification. With your permission, we can give the clarification. 

On the first one, I wish to state that the specialised hospital at Lubowa will be fully accredited by the Joint Commission International. This will be the first in Uganda and next only to Aga Khan in the region, which is in Nairobi. Even Aga Khan is only partially accredited. The accreditation to the Joint Commission International comes with a number of benefits. Some Members raised issues to do with the benefits of this Government project that will accrue to our country.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, this project will stop Uganda from losing foreign exchange by sending persons for treatment abroad. 

This project will build our national and regional capacity to treat complicated cases such as organ and bone marrow transplants. 

It will promote medical tourism, including the hosting of international conferences, facilities and location of international organisations in Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please listen. Order! Do not have other meetings.

MR BAHATI: I know this could be close to your heart: it will provide confidence to the tourism sector. Most of the tourists that come here have insurance, which can be handled by internationally accredited hospitals. Therefore, when these tourists come and know that these facilities are available in Uganda, it will be a plus to us –

THE SPEAKER: Under what rule do you rise, hon. Nzoghu? Sit down. Please take your seat. (Laughter) Order, honourable members! 

MR BAHATI: He should know that there are elements in his report that I support, as I will be making my point, so he should wait a minute.

Of course, it will create the most important thing, and that is capacity for us. This includes training our people and equipping them with skills. Most of the people that will be working - 95 per cent of the human resource - will be Ugandans, who will be trained in issues that you have raised like neurosurgery and other areas.

What mechanisms shall we use to access this specialised hospital? This was an issue that was raised on the Floor. Access to the specialised hospital will be for all persons who will be approved by the Ministry of Health without discrimination. A mechanism to do this will be developed. One of the issues that the Minister of Health raised, which is a clear pathway for this, is the insurance scheme for all Ugandans. 

All patients accessing public health facilities will be referred normally to the lower level health facilities, including local governments, regional hospitals and also referral hospitals. Patients who require further treatment beyond the national referral hospital will now be – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please treat each other with respect. Listen to each other even if you do not like what they are saying.

MR BAHATI: There are two other points that were raised by Members: What benefits are there in using promissory notes? Promissory notes are beneficial to Government because they do not provide cash security in addition to making payments. 

How will the promissory notes work? I would like to emphasise this point again. Because this project is finance, build, operate and then transfer to Government, the project will be built by the developer for two years and equipped and the staff will be trained and equipped. During the construction period, at every stage Government’s own engineer from the Ministry of Health will certify that this work has been done. Once they certify that it has been done, the Government, through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, will issue a promissory note equivalent to that work that has been completed. That promissory note will not be cashed during the construction period; it can only be cashed after the hospital is operational and it is spread over six years.

Therefore, there will be no cash outlay by the Government; it will be constructed by the investor. That brings us an opportunity not really to add anything to the stock of our money.

There was a point raised by hon. Nzoghu – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, why don’t you listen to each other? Let him finish and then you can raise your issues.

MR BAHATI: Members, this is an important point to note; during the operations of this hospital, all the resources that the hospital will be generating will be banked on the consolidated account. This is because the Government will be paying back, through the promissory notes, which will be cashed after construction. 

There were two points on the issue of land that the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development will clarify. However, the last point that I would like to state was the point raised by hon. Nzoghu in the minority report, where we have convergence. He stated clearly, and I agree with him, that he supports the idea of having a facility of this nature here in Uganda. Thank you. The Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development can handle the other issue on land. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us get a response from the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development on the land issue. 

12.40 
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by indicating that the history of this land emanates from the 1900 Agreement. On the basis of the 1900 Agreement, there was what we call “allotments”. For you to get land under the 1900 Agreement, you were given an allotment. 

I have with me here allotment No. 4142 in the name of Yusuf Suna Kiwewa Omulangira. This allotment indicates what land each chief was given under the 1900 Agreement. In this allotment, there is no land related to the land in question. I would like to lay on the Table allotment No. 4142 belonging to Yusuf Suna with all the land he was allotted under the 1900 Agreement. 

Madam Speaker, we have a map, which would show you where the land is located under the allotment. I have a document here, which is a map showing those allotments where Yusuf Suna Kiwewa’s land is indicated. For those who have the map, I would like you to go to –(Interjections)– yes. You open that bigger one. I now want to tell you where this particular land is located. Look at the lower one, written on Lubowa and Aziba. It is written homes “B” and is a grant –(Interjections) No. I am talking about those who have. There are people who got theirs from wherever they got them. 

However, I would like to state that what is in this map indicates where Yusuf Suna’s land is located but in this map, you will see two distinct – (Mr Atiku rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Under what rule? What rule has she offended?

MR ATIKU: Madam Speaker, this is in regard to the procedure of this House. The minister has mentioned those who have the maps and there is a document she is referring to. Our rules say that any document that a minister is supplying should be accessible to all the Members but some of us do not have this document.

Therefore, is she procedurally right to proceed to refer to a few individuals? Are these people pre-selected to debate on this motion? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether she mentioned Members who have the map here. Did you distribute the map?

MS AMONGI: Madam Speaker, those who petitioned your office supplied selected Members in this House with maps. I have seen hon. James Waluswaka with a map; so, let me stick to my map.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the issue of the map cannot really be resolved here. I do not think this House has capacity to decide which map is right. Speak on the other issues.

MS AMONGI: Madam Speaker, since you have resolved the issue of the map, I only want to state clearly that I have a search report from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, addressed to the Chairperson, Parliamentary Committee on National Economy; clearly indicating that the land in question, Block 269, Plot No. 2772 in the name of Uganda Land Commission, Ministry of Health has no encumbrance at all. (Applause)

I would like to put it on record that the family of Yusuf Suna went to court and the matter was dismissed and that this particular block 269 has no issue in relation to this land. Under the Registration of Titles Act 1924, a title is the conclusive evidence of ownership. If you want to dispute, you are supposed to go to court and impeach that title. The family of Yusuf has not gone to court to impeach this title. They have not put any encumbrance on this title. The title is legal under the law. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, in the public gallery, we have pupils and teachers of Bukhari Junior School, Nakuwadde in Wakiso District. Their Members of Parliament are hon. Medard Sseggona and hon. Rosemary Sseninde. You are welcome. (Applause)

Let us have few comments. Honourable member, were you part of the minority report?

12.48
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will go to the page that will show this Parliament that what the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is disguising as a promissory note, in actual sense, is a loan. When you go to table 2, it shows that the cost of construction of this hospital is going to be $249 million. However, when you go down and see the cost of financing this project, it is $116 million. This implies that this investor is going to borrow money and the cost in percentage terms is 32 per cent. This is the most expensive loan this Government will ever take.

The idea that it is a promissory note is meant to disguise a hugely borrowed amount of money and a very expensive project. Madam Speaker, when it is premised that we are going to meet the equivalent and what the Minister of Health did not tell us in her report and it was very critical, is the amount of money that Uganda will pay in terms of treating people abroad. We have looked at this figure and it is not 72. We have looked at this figure and it is not more than $3 million.

Madam Speaker, this is the point of contention and what it means is that when the promissory note is due and Uganda does not have the equivalent amount of money –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute, hon. Kivumbi.

MR KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, the implication is that when the promissory note is due and Uganda does not have the equivalent amount of money to commit because of the treatment abroad, the gentleman or the lady will simply go to a Consolidated Fund and cash it and Uganda will be at a loss.
The point we are making here is very critical. If the Government is procuring a hospital, procurement should have been done in accordance with the law established. This is solicited procurement, which is contrary to the law.

Therefore, given the information the ministry has just given, as a country, we cannot afford to donate money to this expensive hospital when we have a catalogue of urgent needs in the entire health sector. It will be the most unpatriotic decision this Parliament will ever take. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, would you be happy if Ugandans were able to access their treatment here? - No, honourable members, last week, I asked the ministry whether they are dealing with the first 1,000 citizens or the other Ugandans. I think it is important for us to agree whether to facilitate Ugandans to be treated here; whether they are big or small –(Applause)

12.52
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Today, I would like to thank God that I am here to deliberate on the lives of the people while I have already packed my luggage to go to Kyankwanzi for a retreat. 

The point we are talking about is very critical. The people of Butaleja and I really love our people to be treated here. However, we prefer in a Government hospital located nearer to them. 

I would like to request -  I know the loan may go through but with your wise guidance –(Interjections)– this is a very critical thing. Madam Speaker, in your wisdom, you have always saved this country. I request that if we are to vote, it should be on tally so that the people know who has voted what -(Interjections)- There was no bidding process and no engineer’s estimates. The investor just came with – whatever he did and he was brought.

When we were in Public Accounts Committee, hon. Nandala was chair, ministry officials, especially the cardiology consultant in Mulago, were crying that there is no money. Right now, we have 39 districts without hospitals. I would like to see the Members of Parliament from those districts supporting a National Referral Hospital in the central. The minister noted all the specialised hospitals, which are all in central. There is none in the East or North or West Nile or West. 

The minister told us that the next National Referral Hospital would be in Mbarara and not in the East or West Nile or north. 

I would like to request that this money be borrowed but – 

THE SPEAKER: The point you have raised is very important. In fact, I want the chair of the committee to capture that as our recommendation. We should have equity in distribution of the resources. (Applause) It should be one of those. 

12.55
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have just received technical information from the minister about specialised hospitals. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is talking about a specialised hospital. On page 10 of the minister’s report, we are talking about “if Mulago is given the facilities”. Indeed, Mulago needs only $ 9.6 million at the standard we want.

Madam Speaker, if we are fair to Ugandans, any Ugandan can access Mulago Hospital. If we talk about facilities in Mulago Hospital, the money being talked about is less than what the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is talking about. 

I suggest that we go with your wise ruling of sending the Committee on Health to come up with resolutions and recommendations so that we adopt them and work on the motion, so that we do away with what the Minister of Finance, Planning and economic Development has brought and we go with our own –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Members say that you contributed last time. I would like to check and see if you contributed. The list of those who contributed is here, she did not contribute. 

12.58
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her report. What I want to draw the House to, as you rightly guided, do we want to have specialised facilities in this country? The principle is that, indeed, we want specialised hospitals in this country and it has enormous benefits. It shall cut down on costs. That is even how the economy of our country can grow. 

When I looked at the report, I did not discuss it last time, indeed, as a country, we looked at, for example, a women’s hospital in Mulago. We all welcomed this hospital because as women, we thought it inconvenient to travel abroad and the ordinary woman should have relief. 

We need to ensure that these Government projects in which we invest a lot of tax payers’ money, indeed, benefit the ordinary Ugandan. We perceive the principle that we indeed want the specialised services but we must, as a Parliament, ensure that –(Interjections)- we must -
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, respect one another.

MS ANYWAR: We ensure that the service is for Ugandans and is making their lives better. Therefore, Madam Speaker, as we are debating this sensitive issue, we should not lose track. Let us welcome the undertaking because as a country, we need those specialised services. Then internally, this is within our mandate. We can streamline and ensure that, indeed, it benefits Ugandans other than becoming a white elephant within the country.

For me, it should come quickly. We uproot – (Member timed out.)

1.01
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Mr Michael Bukenya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am neither an expert at Economics nor an expert at land matters. I studied Medicine and I know some little statistics. 
When we had a debate here last week, I went to the Indian High Commission to get statistics. I was given statistics that in 2015/2016, 3200 Ugandans sought medical visas to go to India alone. In 2016/2017, it was about 4800 people. They are still calculating; they will give me last year’s figures. 

Those are 5000 Ugandans going to India for medical treatment, not through the Medical Board and each Ugandan goes with at least, between $25,000 to $30,000 excluding transport and the person accompanying them. When you convert that to Uganda shillings, that is about Shs 200 billion per year going abroad. 

Therefore, in principle, I would like to inform the Members that in principle -(Interjections)– that information is available, you can get it from the Indian High Commission. That is India alone without counting those who go to Kenya and South Africa.
This is money outside what Government spends to sponsor Ugandans.  It is much cheaper for us, in a strategic way, to have a hospital here and we do not hemorrhage our dollars abroad.

Madam Speaker, in principle, I support the international hospital based on scientific facts not emotions. (Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter as per rule 77(1)(d)of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

On 12 February 2019, this matter was brought to this Parliament as a paper being laid on the Table. Today, on the Order Paper, we are talking about approval of a motion. Yet, in our records, on 12 February 2019, the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development did not move a motion but just laid the paper on the Table. 

The second procedural issue I would like to raise is - I believe that His Excellency, the President who is the Chief Executive is substantively the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and other ministers are delegated with that responsibility. Madam Speaker, the letter, which was laid on the Table on Thursday was dated 23 April 2014 and signed by His Excellency, the President. I would like to read paragraph three of the letter. The President said “the private people who will build the hospital will not get a financial Government guarantee as they wanted.” (Applause) Excuse me. I have not finished. This is the statement of His Excellency who is the Chief Executive running this Government. He continued to say …”instead, we agree that we guarantee them only the handling of the patients we have been paying for abroad per annum.”

As a matter of procedure, does Parliament have the power to recede the decision of the President moreover in writing? I think this is a smuggled document.

The women’s hospital has been built recently, with 450 beds  costing only $ 25 million and yet, this international world class hospital is going to have only 250 beds, costing $390 million. Are we talking with sanity in our heads? There is something definitely wrong. Someone has smuggled something dangerous in this Parliament and they want to involve us to approve what is illegal. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to respond to what hon. Ogwal has said. The author of that letter wrote again on the 25 February and I would like to read it. The letter originates from State House, Kampala. 

The addressee is the Speaker of Parliament and the subject is “’International Specialised Hospital of Uganda at Lubowa’ 

I have been made to understand that the Parliamentary Committee on National Economy requires my position in respect to the proposed International Specialised Hospital of Uganda (ISH).

As I have stated at numerous occasions including at the launch of the hospital project in June 2017, the hospital project proposed by FINASI and its Chairperson, Ms Enrica Pinetti, is very important to the development of Uganda in the following ways:

First, Uganda has been hemorrhaging foreign exchange by sending persons for treatment abroad at a cost of $73 million per year. This figure was given to you by the Ministry of Health in 2014 and it could be much higher now. I have led the fight to reverse this donation of resources from Uganda, whose fight Mama Pinetti is a useful ally. 

Secondly, the hospital will create the national regional world class capacity to treat specialised cases such as organ and born marrow transplant. This is a major development as very few hospitals in Sub Saharan Africa apart from South Africa actually have. The international world class capacity hospital that will be built at Lubowa will not only benefit Uganda but also other neighbouring countries given the near proximity of the hospital. 

Thirdly, it will open Uganda’s door to medical tourism and this translates into foreign exchange inflows.

The fourth benefit is that the hospital will provide creation and retention of specialised human resource. While Uganda has trained several health professional over the years, they have left the country for many reasons including work conditions. Most doctors leave the country because there are no specialised hospitals where they can practice their specialties. Since a hospital will be here and accessible, they will be able to work and Ugandans will benefit from them.

I, therefore, wish to confirm my unquestionable support for the International Specialised Hospital of Uganda and request Parliament to expedite consideration of the project and accordingly approve its financing arrangements if they are in line with the law. 

President Yoweri Museveni.” 

It was copied to the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. -  That is the letter.

Honourable members, you can go and tell the President that he did not write this letter.

Honourable members, I am going to put the question and we are going to take the vote. I put the question that the majority committee report be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the minority reported be adopted.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE SPEAKER: The majority report is approved. Thank you. Honourable members, House is adjourned sine die. 

(The House rose at 1.11 p.m. and adjourned sine die.) 

