
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Thursday, 31 March 2022

Parliament met at 2.04 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE deputy SPEAKER: Colleagues, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I will start on a sad note. Our Chief Opposition Whip, Hon. Nambeshe, lost his dad, Mzee Masolo, yesterday. I request that we stand up and observe a minute of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

The Deputy Speaker: Members, I hope each one of you received a copy of the programme for the arrival of the body and burial of our former Speaker. If you have not yet, please, the Department of Communication and Public Affairs should ensure that they share that programme with the Members who would want to participate. 

As you know, the body is arriving tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. at Entebbe Airport. Arrangements have been made for people who are going to attend that ceremony at the airport and testing for COVID-19 has been arranged. I hope each one of us, in one way or another, shall be able to welcome our late Speaker. 

I saw informal arrangements being made for the dress code and all that. Whereas they are informal, I request colleagues that in order to give our senior leader a befitting send-off, let us liaise, as a team, and follow those informal arrangements being organised by colleagues.

Colleagues, as you are also aware, on Tuesday at 9.00 a.m., the body will be brought to the House. At 10.00 a.m., we shall have a special sitting. Therefore, I urge each one of you - we shall have a long day because we would want each one of you to have the chance to speak about our late Rt Hon. Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah. (Applause)

Thereafter, the body shall lie in state overnight. I urge each one of us to be here because we cannot have the body of our Speaker lying here alone with the family when we are in the comfort of our beds. We shall make arrangements to ensure that that evening, all of us are here until morning. The next morning, we shall head to Kololo to pay tribute. 

I just wanted you to have that information so that you can prepare yourselves. We are going to have a long week of activities. Each one of us should be able to participate.

Colleagues, you also know that we are now going into the budgeting process and we have lost a lot of time. I know committee chairpersons - most of you have been calling me and the Speaker because you must report back to the House by the 15th of April, as per rule 149 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The timelines are really tight. 

Therefore, those ones who were requesting and those who have not yet reached out to us, I would urge you, as committee leaders, to link up with your clerks and assess the ministerial policy statements. You have already received the alternative statements. You have all the documents necessary. Study them and bring out the salient issues.
 
You can even write to the sectors for now, as leaders, on some of the salient issues so that by the time the committees start sitting, you will have already moved a little ahead because your timelines are going to be really tight. Since they are enshrined in the law, we shall not be able to make any extension. 

Therefore, I request you, colleagues, that let us do that and report by the 20th of April as per rule 149(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. 

Without further ado - because I told you last time that we shall not be having issues of national importance and most of you have been coming to me – let us go straight to the items on the Order Paper. 

bills
first reading

the excise duty (amnedment) bill, 2022

The Deputy Speaker: Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - point of order?

Mr ssemujju: Mr Speaker, you have called the minister for finance, who seems to be lost: first, coming to your Chair as if you are still part of Cabinet, and secondly, now invading the Clerk instead of proceeding straight away to lay the Bills.

Is the minister in order to come to Parliament unprepared and begin wasting our time, knowing the circumstances that we are going through? (Laughter)

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable member, let us give the minister a chance to see whether he is prepared. Minister, demonstrate that you are prepared. (Laughter)

2.12
The minister of state for finance, planning and economic development (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2022” be read for the first time. 

Mr Speaker, I also beg to move that the Bill -

The Deputy Speaker: Can we do them one by one? Honourable minister, I want you to also lay a Certificate of Financial Implication for the Bill.

Mr musasizi: Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance. We have sent the Certificate of Financial Implication to your Office.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable minister, that certificate is not for me, the presiding officer. It is supposed to go on the record of the House.

Mr musasizi: Mr Speaker, I beg for your indulgence that I send for a copy from office.

The Deputy Speaker: I am going to allow you to lay your Bills, honourable minister. However, ensure that before this session ends, we have the certificates so that they are laid and captured.

Mr musasizi: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. 

The Deputy Speaker: Procedure?

Mr ssewungu: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Congratulations upon that big office and I can see you are totally different from this side now. (Applause)

The procedural matter I am raising is that when a Bill is being read, it must have seconders. I see the minister reading Bills without seconders. Are we proceeding well, Mr Speaker? And without laying a Certificate of Financial Implication, they still remain null and void. So, are we proceeding well, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, I would like to agree with you in regard to the certificates of financial implication because that those are a must and that has to go on the Order Paper. However, as you all know, for Bills, First Reading, we do not need seconders - not only tax Bills, but any Bills presented for first reading. This is because they are eventually referred to the committee for processing; so, they don't need to be seconded. Therefore, the Bill is referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for processing and report back.

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That one has already been laid. 

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022

2.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2020” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I understand that on all the Bills, you did not bring the certificate. So, we shall do it at once. So, this stands referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

THE TAX PROCEDURES CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

2.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2020”, be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill stands referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

THE INCOME TAX AMENDMENT BILL 2022

2.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2022,” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

THE STAMP DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

2.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2022” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill stands referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

THE UGANDA REVENUE AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022

2.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Revenue Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2022,” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill stands referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

THE TAX APPEALS TRIBUNAL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022

2.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Tax Appeals Tribunal (Amendment) Bill, 2022” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill stands referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

THE FINANCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022

2.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Finance (Amendment) Bill, 2022,” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill stands referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

THE TRAFFIC AND ROAD SAFETY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022

2.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Traffic and Road Safety (Amendment) Bill, 2022,” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill stands referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE ANNUAL BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023

2.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, I beg for your indulgence to ask for five minutes to make a phone call.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know there is a time when even procedure or what does not help much because if he does not have the document, then he doesn't have it. So, if he has requested for five minutes, I will suspend the House for 20 minutes. The House will resume after that time. Thank you.

(The House was suspended at 2.20 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.37 p.m., the Deputy Speaker, presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Welcome back, colleagues.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of procedure, Hon. Gilbert?

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure basing on rule 32(1) of our Rules of Procedure. Looking at what is going on in this House, the papers to be laid were not ready yet our Rules of Procedure state very clearly that the Clerk shall ensure that the paper to be laid on the Table is distributed to all Members of Parliament before it is laid. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, seeing what is happening in this House, it seems our people are quite disorganised and not ready. Is it procedurally right to disorganise Parliament activities when the session is ongoing? Is the Minister proceeding well?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Gilbert. Colleagues, we are living in a world where we all understand. For example, the budget is a very different kind of document. If you look at the volume and all these papers - that does not mean that the minister should not bring them on time. 

I was not happy with the way we had to proceed. However, sometimes, what does it help you to come and talk a lot when the documents are not here? 

I think it is a much better way that if you encounter such a situation, you see a way of addressing it and then after, you go back to work backwards and ensure it does not happen again. Do not think that because I kept quiet, we are just going to leave it to business as usual - no, we are going back as the leadership of this House. We have to sit with the Leader of Government Business. We need to look smart and neat. (Applause) 

Therefore, the situation being raised by Hon. Gilbert Olanya - the rules say that they should be distributed. However, they do not give the time in which the minister should give the documents to the Clerk –(Interjection)– yes, it says, “before”, I understand but if you are given that volume one minute before, what will you do, as a Clerk?

We live in this world together, we see the situation together. What is important is to work backwards and ensure it does not happen again.

Colleagues, as you know, I wanted this sitting to take a very short time because of the situation we are in - (A member rose_) 

If I am to go into “procedure”, please - I suspended the House to come and do serious business; allow me to do serious business. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development -

2.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am moving under Rule 148 - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please take your seat and allow me to do my work.

MR LUGOLOOBI: I am moving in accordance with section 148 to lay on the Table the proposed annual budget for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

Mr Speaker, in accordance with the Public Finance Management Act, I have a number of documents to lay on the Table. A Budget is a very important statement to the country and as the rule indicates, we have to present it to the House.

I, therefore, want to make some very quick remarks so that the country can understand what we are laying on the Table. With your permission, Mr Speaker, allow me to proceed.

Articles 155 and 156 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda require the President to cause to be prepared and laid before Parliament the estimates of revenue and expenditure of Government for the next financial year.

Section 13(3)(iii) of the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Act requires the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, on behalf of H.E the President, to present the proposed annual budget of the Financial Year to Parliament by the 1st of April.

Mr Speaker, Parliament approved the National Budget Framework Paper for the Financial Year 2022/2023 on Friday, 28 January 2022. This formed the basis for the finalisation of the budget estimates for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

The budget for the next financial year is guided by the theme “Full Monetisation of the Ugandan Economy through Commercial Agriculture, Industrialisation, Expanding and Broadening Services and Digital Transformation and Market Access.” (Mr Ssewungu rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, first put on your mask and then sit. I will handle the rest. Hon. Ssewungu, I requested you to sit. Minister, proceed.

MR LUGOLOOBI: This is derived from the third National Development Plan (NDP III) -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, when you remove your mask, I will not hear you. 
 
MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I am in pain to raise a point of order to the honourable minister. I know he has taken over from his fellow minister. I do not know whether it is because of competence or not but it is up to them. 

However, the point of order I am raising is that the Rules of Procedure are very clear. When laying papers, you do not have to explain them. Here we are, and the honourable ministers sought for your time - five minutes - to go out and prepare themselves. Now, they are telling us about the budget and everything. Is the honourable minister, who is a senior member here, by the way, in order to continue lecturing us yet he is supposed to lay on the Table the Tax Bills, as mandated and directed by the Rt Hon. Speaker? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, I get your concern. However, I am constrained by rule 32(3) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, which allows the minister to make accompanying remarks if he or she wishes. The minister requested me and I allowed him. Minister, proceed.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. In fact, I am not presenting the Tax Bills. We have already moved on to the budget estimates and I am laying the budget estimates. Rule 148 allows me to make a presentation for your information.

The budget for the next financial year is guided by the theme “Full Monetisation of the Ugandan Economy through Commercial Agriculture, Industrialisation, Expanding and Broadening Services and Digital Transformation and Market Access.” This is derived from the third National Development Plan (NDP III) whose overall theme is increased household incomes and improved quality life of Ugandans, which is in consonance with the NRM Manifesto for this term. 

Mr Speaker, in line with the above, next financial year’s budget, therefore, has been prepared to bring about faster inclusive socio-economic transformation.

The budget and economic growth strategy for Financial Year 2022/ 2023 – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, I am concerned because you should make a very short statement. It should not be a whole speech. Under rule 148, you are supposed to present. So, if you could refer to rule 32(3), it limits you on the kind of statement you should be making. I can see you have a full budget speech but I request you to summarise it in two minutes.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Now, I beg to lay the documents – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition. 

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your indulgence. Incidentally, I can see my brother a bit bothered, but I am rising in your full defence. Section 13(1) and (3) of the Public Finance Management Act requires that the President shall cause to be prepared and laid before Parliament the proposed annual budget of the Government in a financial year.

Subsection (3) specifically states that the minister shall, on behalf of the President, present the proposed annual budget of the financial year to Parliament, by the 1st of April of the preceding year. The essence of this subsection, Mr Speaker, is to allow the minister to give to Parliament and the general public a peek into the essence of the budget. 

Mr Speaker, laying and presentation are two different matters. After the minister’s presentation, the general public will have an understanding because hitherto before we had this law, the President would initially present the budget; that was all, because Parliament would have done the needful. 

However, right now, we do prior work and then at the time of reading of the budget, everything is done, but the public will have no knowledge on what the budget is about. This particular moment for the minister is one that is needed for Parliament because even in Parliament, Members will be limited to what they will do in their own committees and they will have no knowledge of what else is in the other sectors. Therefore, I would like to request that the minister be afforded a gazetted time, which is limited in nature, to give Parliament a peek into what this budget is about as per this law. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. Those budget provisions in the Public Finance Management Act are operationalised by our own rules.

If you look at the item we have, he is laying that and that is why I have given him time. You and I are saying the same thing, but it does not mean that you present a whole budget. The minister’s statement is huge, honourable Leader of the Opposition. Indeed, it should have been a sneak peek of what is in the budget. 

Members, do not fear that you are going to be limited to your committees. No. You are allowed to go to any committee and read the budget in full. You have the ministerial policy statements and what you must do is to commit enough time. So, the minister, the Leader of the Opposition, Members and I, are all in agreement that we have time, but you will not have 20 or 30 minutes here. Please, you still have two minutes to summarise.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have realised that the House has got very limited time, but the Leader of the Opposition had requested – I was just going to give snapshots of the budget so that the country gets to appreciate what is contained in this very big volume - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you agreed with the Leader of the Opposition and now you are fulfilling your agreement with him, yet the presiding officer is not aware. (Laughter)
Proceed, honourable minister.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Just a few more remarks before I begin laying the documents. Mr Speaker, I request this august House to take into consideration the economic environment in which this budget has been prepared; and that is the inability to borrow over 53.9 per cent, which in itself is above the maximum requirement of 53.1 per cent of debt to GDP provided for in the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility. Nonetheless, we expect this to be restored to 47.8 per cent of GDP over the medium-term. May I now move to laying the documents?

Mr Speaker, in line with sections 13(7-11), 23, 39(4), 42, 44(5) and 76(1-2) of the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Act, 2015, I now lay before Parliament, the budget for the Financial Year 2022/2023, along with the following documents:

i) 	The revised National Budget Framework Paper for Financial Year 2022/2023 to the Financial Year 2026/2027 within which framework the budget was prepared. 

ii) 	The Charter for Fiscal Responsibility that has guided the preparation of this budget.

iii) 	A statement attesting to the reliability and completeness of the budget for Financial Year 2022/2023.

iv) 	The Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance for the annual budget for Financial Year 2022/2023.

v) 	The Certificate of Compliance for the annual budget to the National Development Plan, prepared by the National Planning Authority. 

vi) 	The Appropriation Bill, 2022 for first reading – 

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable minister, you will not lay the Appropriation Bill. I know it is a requirement under Section 13(11)(a) of the PFMA, but you will table it as part of the Bills.

Mr lugoloObi: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the list of accounting officers for Financial Year 2022/2023.

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Certificate of Financial Implication for the budget for Financial Year 2022/2023.

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Uganda multi-year commitment statement for the Financial Year 2022/2023 onwards.

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the statutory Votes in the Financial Year 2022/2023 for the following institutions:

i) 	Vote 101: The Judiciary
ii) 	Vote 102: Electoral Commission
iii) 	Vote 103: Inspectorate of Government
iv) 	Vote 104: Parliamentary Commission
v) 	Vote 105: The Law Reform Commission
vi) 	Vote 106: Uganda Human Rights Commission
vii) 	Vote 107: Uganda AIDS Commission
viii) 	Vote 108: National Planning Authority
ix) 	Vote 131: Office of the Auditor-General.

I am laying all these together in this pack.

Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table the draft estimates of revenue and expenditure (recurrent and development) for Financial Year 2022/2023 (Volume 1: Central Government Votes).

Allow me to lay on the Table the draft estimates of revenue and expenditure (recurrent and development) for Financial Year 2022/2023 (Volume 2: Local Government Votes).

Allow me to table the estimates of revenue and expenditure (recurrent and development) for Financial Year 2022/2023 (Volume 3: State-owned enterprises and public corporations).

Allow me to table the semi-annual budget performance report, as required by law, for Financial Year 2021/2022.

Allow me to lay on the Table the disposal list report by the Central Government, missions and local governments for the year ended 30 June 2021. Mr Speaker, this document is a continuation of Volume 1: Central Government Votes, because the document was so big.

Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table the tax expenditure for the period July 2021 to March 2022 for Financial Year 2021/2022. 

I also beg to lay on the Table the macroeconomic development and fiscal prospects.

Mr Speaker, allow me to also lay on the Table the report of public debt, grants, guarantees and other financial liabilities for the Financial Year 2021/2022.

In line with that, Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table the medium-term debt management strategy for the coming years 2022/2023 to 2025/2026.

Mr Speaker, allow me to also lay the consolidated status of the treasury memoranda submitted to Parliament since the enactment of the PFMA, 2015 as at 4 March 2022. 

Allow me to, finally, lay on the Table the recovery of monies arising from the Office of the Auditor-General’s recommendations during the financial year ended 30 June 2021. 

Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members, for listening to me. 

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you, honourable minister. The budget estimates are referred to the Committee on Budget and the relevant sectoral committees as per section (13)(4) of the Public Finance Management Act, and rule 148(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Honourable members, I request you to look at rules 148 and 149 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, especially rule 149, where we are having very tight deadlines in which to process all this. Therefore, the sectoral committees will have to pick out the relevant sections that fall under their jurisdictions and process them. As per rule 149, ensure you report to the House in time.

Honourable minister, also, indeed, like we had talked earlier, section (13)(11A) of the PFMA require you to table the Appropriation Bill together with the budget estimates. So, kindly do that - let him first table the Appropriation Bill before you come in, Hon. Ssewungu.

3.06
The Minister Of state for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning)(Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Mr Speaker, in line with the Public Financial Management Act and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I beg to lay the Appropriation Bill, 2022 for first reading. I beg to move that the Appropriation Bill, 2022 be read for the first time.

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you. The Bill stands referred to the Committee on Budget. Let us also allow the honourable Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development to lay, on the Table, Certificates of Financial Implication for all the Bills earlier on tabled.

3.07
The Minister Of state for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (General duties) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, I earlier presented a number of Bills for first reading and consideration by Parliament. As you guided, I now would like to present the following Certificates of Financial Implication:

1. 	Certificate of Financial Implication accompanying the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2022.” I beg to lay on the Table;

2. 	Certificate of Financial Implication accompanying the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2022. I beg to lay, Mr Speaker;

3. 	Certificate of Financial Implication accompanying the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2022. I beg to lay on the Table;

4. 	Certificate of Financial Implication accompanying the Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2022. I beg to lay on the Table;

5. 	Certificate of Financial Implication accompanying the Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2022. I beg to lay on the Table;

6. 	Certificate of Financial Implication accompanying the Uganda Revenue Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2022. I beg to lay on the Table;

7. 	Certificate of Financial Implication accompanying the Finance Bill, 2022. I beg to lay on the Table;

8. 	Certificate of Financial Implication accompanying the Traffic and Road Safety (Amendment) Bill, 2022. I beg to lay on the Table; and

9. 	The Certificate of Financial Implication accompanying the Tax Appeals Tribunal (Amendment) Bill, 2022. 

I beg to lay on the Table.

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you, honourable minister. Clerk, you are required to print copies for all Members because like Hon. Ssewungu raised, we should have received copies earlier. Please ensure that each Member receives a copy of each Bill so that they can study it and be able to contribute. 

Hon. Ssewungu, do you have something to add?

Mr ssewungu: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have touched my issue under rule 120. What I wanted to raise is that the ministers were supposed to deliver all these Bills to the Clerk so that he furnishes us with the copies. 

However, under rule 123, even the main Act must be provided for every Bill, unless where the Speaker sees under rule 124 that maybe the amendments in that Act are not very big - they cannot produce. 

Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence that you direct the ministers to provide every Member with all these Acts and Bills so that they can use them. Otherwise, what will they be doing in the committee? How shall we amend these Bills without reading them and internalising them using our researchers? That is the issue I am raising. 

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you, Hon. Ssewungu. Clerk, ensure that indeed you link up with the ministers as requested by Hon. Ssewungu, so that we have all copies of the Bills. 

Honourable members, I am referring very much to both rules and the Public Finance Management Act because most of the budgetary provisions in the Public Finance Management Act are imported into the rules of procedure; most of them. I know most of you might not have copies of the Public Finance Management Act, but the Rules of Procedure are like your Bible. Each one of us should have their copy all the time. 

Therefore, go to rule 149 and look at the different timelines. We do have a very tight schedule. The policy statements - we should report back by 20 April - I am coming, Mama Imat. I will allow you, do not mind - then, of course, by 30 April, the House should have considered the reports of the sectoral committees and their recommendations and then referred them to the Committee on Budget. 

The Committee on Budget should be reporting back not later than 15 May in line with rule 149 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. So, when you see your chairpersons calling you to even meet over the weekends or afternoons – we shall give you time. As presiding officers, we shall ensure we give you enough time by not holding plenary so that you can concentrate. Chairpersons of committees, please start working right away. We have very tight deadlines. Yes, Mama Cecilia Ogwal.

Ms ogwal: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I want to congratulate you officially upon your new assignment and elevation. I think people can see that you are performing well because we know where you come from. (Applause.)

I am rising on a procedural matter. I have seen what the minister has done and I am definitely as upset like many Members are, including yourself, because many ministers are coming in when they are not prepared. Maybe this is partly because they do not often come to Parliament. As you can see, now the Opposition line is full but on the other side, there are more ministers than on this side. They are absent and yet we are discussing very important national matters. 

However, the procedure I would like to bring is that the digital world, which I am struggling to understand at my age, dictates that when a Bill is laid on the Table like now, you also post it to our iPad so we can read and internalise it so that by the time you come to present, we know what to expect. 

Now, you have laid just one copy yet some of us are so inquisitive; we want to see it there and then. We would like you to upload them for us so that when you submit, we can at least understand what we are talking about. This is the digital world and please, do not disadvantage us. We are over 500 Members here and now we are all struggling to look for the one copy, which you put there. It is very unfair. 

Mr Speaker, I know I am old fashioned, but I am trying my best to catch up with the norm because that is the current method of work. In fact, I would want to bring a motion on the Floor of Parliament to upgrade our presentation methods here. There is a new technology for presentation, which we learnt from Northern Ireland, and if we catch up with that technology, you will be proud that even people at my age can be technologically ahead. 

Therefore, I would like to thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for sharing this information with the Members. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, the issue that Hon. Cecilia Ogwal is raising is indeed what should have been done. Luckily, these amendments are smaller than the Bills. I am sure the Acts are already uploaded on the system. Therefore, you have the mother law; you can look at the amendments alongside it. Clerk, by tomorrow, ensure that all these Bills are uploaded on our Alfresco System so that Members can access them. 

Members, I do not intend to be here for long. I will allow the Shadow Minister for Finance to make some remarks and then we go for other business.

3.16
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I thank you and once again, I congratulate you. It is rare for me to stand here and applaud the Frontbench, but on this occasion, I intend to do so. (Applause) 

It is unprecedented - and these standards should be kept - that Government complies, literally, with all the requirements of the Constitution, the Public Finance Management Act and our Rules of Procedure. I think after a long time, we are reaping the benefits of the experience of our former Chairman of the Committee on Budget and the Chairman, Committee on Finance, as being part of the Executive. 

This should also be a learning curve for the appointing authority, that sometimes, when you pick from among us, things move smoothly because they know the technicalities. I already had the list to falter them given the Order Paper, but I am literally empty. Therefore, I thank you and hope the details are as smart as the move that you have made because the devil normally lies in the details. 

That notwithstanding, on the question of the treasury memoranda, I only wish it had come a little earlier for us to see the level of compliance. I hope the committee will find the space and time to do so. 

Even the list of accounting officers; you know we are supposed to have those who are not performing well and you know the rules. I hope the committees will do the needful.

I move to really thank my two colleagues - you see, Hon. Bahati, they have done better than what you were doing. You never scaled up to those levels. I thank both of you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, this is the spirit; isn’t it? This should be the spirit; that we give due appreciation where it is expected.

3.18
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my shadow minister for the meticulous gatekeeping he is undertaking here, but also join him in applauding the ministers of finance for attempting to comply. Although they began too shabbily, they eventually shaped up. I would like to implore them to keep alert. 

That said and done, I would like to invite the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development and probably, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, to interest themselves in the document over which you raised a red flag for the Ministry of Health. 

When my minister raised the red flag, I thought he was not alert, but I called for the document; the only new pages are the forward, the cover page in the forward and the executive summary; the rest is cut and paste. The content is consistent even in commas, paragraphing and everything else. It is really shabby. If you go and look at page four, sometimes the cut and paste was not even done well. They are making a reference to expenditures of December 2020/2021 in March of 2022. 

Mr Speaker, that means that the recommendations of Parliament in the BFP analysis were not captured; that is what it means. Secondly, it implies that we have new regional referrals in this financial year; Yumbe and Kayunga are not captured. 

The salary enhancement for health workers is not captured and that is really a bit - I hope no one is trying to put away the ladder for my dear sister, the doctor, who really does a good job; and now the documents are scattered. Somebody needs to really question the motive for presenting this to Parliament.

Planning must be meticulous; it all begins and ends with planning. It is garbage in, garbage out. If you do not handle the planning properly, we shall all come back here to look at ourselves as though we were sleeping. This is about Parliament, and about our people. It is about their aspirations and frustrations. We need to work better. I would like to thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. Leader of Government business, do you have anything to say?

3.21
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Justine Lumumba): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the ministers of finance, for the work they have done. However, I also want to thank you, as the presiding officer; thank you for being patient with us. (Applause)  

Mr Speaker, we had this raised here by the Shadow Minister for Finance - they are yet to present the report to me. After that, I am going to write to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, who is coming in tomorrow, and we shall have a discussion with the leadership of this Parliament, of which you are part. Thereafter, we shall inform the House on what action is going to be taken. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of Government Business, what I expect you to do is to clean up internally; call the Minister for Health and meet because for us, once the document is here - now you only need to prepare because I expect very tough questions from the Committee on Health. In this case, what my colleagues on this side have said. 

Therefore, you need to dig deep and maybe start looking through these statements deeply even before they are brought on the Floor. That is very important, because every record that comes here will be looked into by our children and grandchildren. 

That is why I was telling colleagues that sometimes, after submitting on the Floor of Parliament, you need to go back and look at one of the best legislators you always hear people talk about and look at how he or she used to submit on the Floor, and then compare with your own submission. Look at the different debates that we are having. It will then help you improve. 

I congratulate the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development for having beaten the deadline. The deadline is tomorrow and you have done it before the deadline. You have been able to present all the necessary documents and complied with section 13(3) of the Public Finance Management Act. This is highly commendable! 

However, there is a culture I have seen, where someone tells you, “No, we came on the same day but we found you had adjourned.” 

The Parliament sittings start at 2.00 p.m. I came earlier and sat in my holding room watching the TV, trying to see if there is a Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I delayed for around 10 minutes waiting to see if someone was in. 

Therefore, this business of being on the Order Paper and then you want to come at 4.00 p.m. of that very day of the House, has to stop. (Applause)

If I am able to come on time and you are a minister who is supposed to present but then you say, “Let the House go on. At 5.00 p.m., I am coming to present”, it makes us look bad. 

Honourable ministers, I request you to be here on time. You are our colleagues and no one wants to harass you in this House. You never know I can reach here and look through the Order Paper and start with your item, when you are not yet prepared. If it is 2.00 p.m., let it be 2.00 p.m. and then we finish business early and go home early. I thank you. 

The House is adjourned to next Tuesday at 10 o’clock. 

(The House rose at 3.25 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 5 April 2022 at 10.00 a.m.)



