Thursday, 6 March 2014

Parliament met at 3.11 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. Yesterday, I informed you about the sad news of the death of the mother to hon. Betty Ongom Amongi. But I am even more saddened today to inform you that during the night, her father also died. So, right now they are burying both Mr and Mrs Ongom! They really need our prayers because these are very difficult moments for hon. Betty Amongi and hon. Jimmy Akena and their families. I now invite us to stand for a minute of silence in their honour.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the public gallery we have children of St Andrew Kaggwa Secondary School, Kasana Luweero, represented by hon. Abraham Byandala and hon. Brenda Nabukenya. They are welcome. (Applause)

We also have head teachers from Lwengo District, represented by hon. Isaac Ssejoba and hon. Nakabira. Where are they? Okay, they are here. Also in the public gallery, we have chairpersons of LC III for Goma Division, Mukono and two councilors. They are represented by hon. Betty Nambooze and hon. Chris Kusasira. (Applause)

Accordingly, we have a delegation from the Uganda National Tobacco Control Association namely: Dr Sheila Ndyanabangi, Principal Medical Officer Ministry of Health; Dr Prossy Mugyengi, the Director Centre for Tobacco Control, Africa Region and others. (Applause) They are also here to witness the presentation for first reading of the Tobacco Control Bill, 2014. 

But we also have in the public gallery, students and staff of Namilyango High School, Mukono, represented by hon. Betty Nambooze and hon. Kusasira. They are over there. (Applause)

Now, hon. Members, when you look at the Order Paper, you realise that the business that is lined up there is the business that we have. I have been repeatedly calling upon Members and the committee chairpersons to work tirelessly so that we can complete the Bills that are pending. But I regret to inform you that the Chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture asked for extra time, the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee also asked for extra time and the same applies to the Chairperson of the Health Committee yet those were businesses we had wanted to do today with the HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Bill, Implementation of Government Assurances Bill and the one on agriculture. So, we do have a problem.

I am going to have to demand that they do that work in one week. Otherwise, I am going to apply very serious actions, some of them pecuniary to the chairpersons. (Applause)

Hon. Members, I have received a letter from the lawyers representing the following Members of Parliament: hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, hon. Muhammad Nsereko and hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire, dated today 6 March 2014, in which they forwarded to my Office a ruling in Constitutional Application No. 04/2014.

In the said ruling, I am restrained by the Supreme Court from implementing the orders of the Constitutional Court until the substantive application for stay of execution and temporary injunction is disposed of by the court. The four Members mentioned are hereby permitted to sit in Parliament –(Applause)– take part in parliamentary activities, receive payments of all the salaries and allowances –(Applause)– plus other emoluments and entitlement to a Member of Parliament until such a time as the Supreme Court determines otherwise.

This is, therefore, to inform you about the ruling of the Supreme Court, which is the highest court of this land. I am again bound to comply with their direction. The Clerk to Parliament is also instructed to act accordingly. (Applause)

Hon. Members, I want to send a message of support from this Parliament to our President on the signing of the law against homosexuality. I want to assist Members and arm them with information which they can use in case they are being harassed and attacked. So, we have distributed, in your pigeonholes, data from the whole world about which countries permit homosexuality and which ones do not. And for the record, in Africa, 36 countries do not permit homosexuality –(Applause)– 18 are silent.

In Asia and the Middle East, 23 countries do not permit and 21 do permit. In America and the Caribbean, 11 do not permit; 24 permit. In Oceania, 10 do not and six permit. In Europe, the Balkans permit but Russia and Ukraine do not.

But of very much interest to the Members is the situation in the United States of America. The following states do not permit homosexuality: Alabama, Florida, Idaho, Kansas, Louisiana, Michigan, Mississippi, North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Texas, Utah and Virginia. (Applause) And they are part of the 50 states that form the United States. So, I thought I should arm you with that information. The rest will be in your pigeonholes. Thank you very much.

3.18
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for this chance. I would like to just comment on part of your communication in regard to the anti-gay law that we passed in this House.

I would like first of all to thank God for giving you life, Madam Speaker. (Applause) Had it not been for your stamina, your courage and your steadfastness, this Bill would not have seen the light of day. 

I know that from different sectors, you faced harassment. We even know that there was communication from the highest office in the land over this particular Bill. But you served Ugandans with resolve that you would give them a Christmas gift and a Christmas gift you gave to Ugandans! Congratulations, Madam Speaker, for steering this House in the right direction.

I know that with the support of Members, His Excellency the President had no alternative but to sign that Bill. 

Allow me to thank my brother, hon. David Bahati, for this initiative. (Applause) You are going to be remembered in the history books of the entire globe for standing up to fight this kind of funny behaviour that seems to be catching up with the whole world.

May I, at this time, thank my colleagues across the House for the first time standing up in your caucus at Kyankwanzi –(Applause)– and fighting this kind of devilish act that forced His Excellency the President – (Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, my colleague started very well and actually, I do not think that there is any Member here who was not supporting him in the way he was proceeding until towards the end. Is the hon. Member in order to insinuate that for the first time this side in Kyankwanzi have made a point when he knows very well that really in Kyankwanzi we have deliberated, passed resolutions of national importance? Is he in order to under rate this side?
 
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have stood together on many issues on this Bill, on the war in South Sudan, health issues – I think we have been working together. So, let us not spoil the relationship. Please conclude. (Applause)

MR AMURIAT: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. I am sure that hon. John Byabagambi knows that the anti-gay Bill is the very first in this country and I believe that it was the very first time that the hon. Members of the NRM considered this Bill in Kyankwanzi. (Laughter)

I would like to congratulate you for putting the country before your party, and I hope that this particular act is something that will be an eye opener in different circumstances where it comes to putting the country before ourselves.

I would like to call for courage from all of you, hon. Members and the public out there. I know that some of our members have been deprived – reading in the media, hon. Abia, the MP for Arua was denied entry into the United States to receive an award. Now I think that this is just going to take a while. I know that aid is going to be suspended to this country but as a country, we have got to move forward. Our resolve should not be watered down by any circumstances. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you again and congratulations for guiding this House in an honest manner and it is something that you will be remembered for years to come. Congratulations! (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much. Item three. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE TOBACCO CONTROL BILL, 2014

2.24
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Sometime back, I brought a motion here seeking leave of this House to allow me introduce a Private Members Bill entitled, “The Tobacco Control Bill, 2014.” I have the pleasure today to bring forward this Bill. I therefore beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Tobacco Control Bill, 2014” be read the first time. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded by several Members.

DR BARYOMUNSI: In accordance with our Rules of Procedure, I attach a Certificate of Financial Implication for this Bill issued by the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development and it is signed by hon. Maria Kiwanuka, the Minister. I beg to lay.

So, I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I do acknowledge the support of the Ministry of Health which is here and many civil society organisations that are represented and with whom we have worked. You could stand up for recognition. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: That is beyond first reading. Okay, the Bill is sent to the Committee on Health for perusal and report back. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE HOTEL AND TOURISM TRAINING INSTITUTE BILL, 2013

THE SPEAKER: The Minister for Tourism.

3.27
THE MINISTER FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, you granted permission to the Minister for Tourism to handle other official duties outside the House and she has delegated me to table this Bill for the first reading on her behalf.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Hotel and Tourism Training Institute Bill, 2013” be read the first time and I table the same here.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded. Hon. Minister, the Certificate of Financial Implication. 

MR MIGEREKO: It is true that when this Bill was being handled in Cabinet, there was a Certificate of Financial Implication and –(Interjections)– because even in Cabinet – 

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear him.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I could table this tomorrow when I have certificates of financial implication.

THE SPEAKER: Is it the same with the other Bills? Okay. First Reading of those three Bills is deferred. Item four.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON WHO SHOULD PRESIDE OVER THE DISTRICT WOMEN’S DAY CELEBRATIONS

3.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER AND CULTURE (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday during the plenary session here, I was tasked to come and clarify on who should officiate at the International Women’s Day celebrations in the districts. I would like to submit that the International Women’s Day is a gazetted day and therefore a national public holiday in this country. As per the guidance from the Office of the President and the guidelines from there, the President officiates at the national function that is on 8th March. As Government, he delegates his Resident District Commissioners to preside in the districts. Thank you.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I think it is high time we got to know the protocol of this country and it is constitutionalised - the order of precedence on a national function is known and clear. They are highlighted from the President, Vice President and the Speaker. If it is a national function and public holiday of Government, I thought that it would be prudent that we follow that order of precedence in the country.

I can imagine number 34 in order of precedence - suppose the Vice-President or the Speaker is there, you will get embarrassed! I think that this should not happen and we need to follow the order of precedence.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, are you suggesting that I should not go to Kamuli for Women’s Day?

MS NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, like I said, on 8th March we expect everybody including the Rt Hon. Speaker, the Members of Parliament and all the ministers to be at the national function. That is why I said 8th March.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, supposing the district of Ngora decides to hold theirs on 15th March, what would happen? I think that is what Members want to know.

MS NAKADAMA: When these people celebrate the day on any other day, the district organises and invites whoever they want to officiate on that day.

THE SPEAKER: I think it is clear now.

MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In regard to how the International Women’s Day came to be designated by the UN, it was on the basis of affirmative action. In this particular country, we have been praised by different countries and in Africa, Uganda is the third in promoting women.

In a situation in Uganda where we have 12 women RDCs out of the 100 plus RDCs who are men and we are celebrating Women’s Day in a district like Ngora, for example, and you are saying the delegation should be led by the President or the RDC, it is right for us to go by order of precedence and also look at affirmative action.

If there is a woman Member of Parliament or any female of stature in that district, I would think that it is prudent for that person to officiate as guest of honour in that particular district. I rest my case, Madam Speaker.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to seek your guidance on this matter. What would happen in Kamuli if the Resident District Commissioner who is supposed to be officiating on this function, in his wisdom or because of any other factor, decides not to invite you as the guest of honour on a function where you are invited to attend? Would we see the RDC being the guest of honour where the Speaker and the minister are? 

Madam Speaker, I appreciate the setting and the way we are proceeding in this country seems to be in an ad hoc manner. We are saying there is order of precedence. I would be of the considered view and I would want to invite my colleagues to belong to my school of thought that let us proceed in a normal way. I know they are trying to rule us the way things are moving but at least let us wrap this up in the correct way. So, I am only seeking your guidance, Madam Speaker, on the order of precedence so that we do not keep basing on internal politics where someone does not want the Speaker and the Speaker goes to a function, you feel like a small girl there. I would not want to see us operating in this style.

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Yesterday when this issue was raised, you tasked the minister in charge to go and come back with a position.

Madam Speaker, I believe that this is the position of the Cabinet. It is not the position of the minister but a Cabinet decision and the minister has come here to present what they decided. So, I think the task should be on the Cabinet and not on the minister as a person. The Cabinet decided that no – (Interruption)

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, the information I want to give the hon. Member is that yesterday when the minister came, I remember very well that she told us that this is a policy of Government; that the RDCs are the ones to preside over the function. Madam Speaker, I would like to find out whether that decision has been rescinded, if it is a policy.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the reason for this issue is that over time, there have been scuffles at Women’s Day celebrations between the Members of Parliament and the RDCs and we had wanted the government to help us resolve this. We have an order of precedence; now what do we do? Please conclude.

MR SSEBAGALA: Madam Speaker, it is true and indeed that is why it was raised yesterday because on various occasions, there have been scuffles. I believe that this should be solved at Cabinet level so that we know who is who. As Parliament, we are saying that the women members of Parliament should officiate during the Women’s Day function but the Cabinet position is that the RDCs should preside. What is the way forward? Cabinet should be put to task because this is not the minister’s statement but rather the Cabinet’s decision.

MR MULIMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for her statement, which was a Cabinet position and I think is a position of precedence. But I also want to learn from you, Madam Speaker: Is Women’s Day all about women only so that it must be a woman to preside over it? I thought the day was about all of us as much as we know its goal.

Secondly, I thought that on the national event presided over by the President, whoever represents that President must have a delegated function because they present a message from the President. But I also know that in many cases, I have had RDCs who are supposed to preside but when they see senior citizens at the function, they have always passed over to them. So, I do not think we should cause a stampede about this. I welcome the clarification that has been brought by the minister and now that she has said that on the national day the President –(Interruption)– I will take information.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to pass on to my colleague is that the order of precedence in this country is well stipulated. He is saying that in a situation where the RDC has been invited as the chief guest and he sees someone senior, the RDC automatically gives way, he is actually lying. We have seen Members of Parliament fighting for a microphone with the RDCs in places where the RDC is the chief guest. 

We are looking at a situation where the Woman MP for Kamuli is going to celebrate the Women’s Day with the women of Kamuli and the RDC is the chief guest, officially designated as the person to preside over the Women’s Day. And the woman MP of Kamuli is supposed to stand up and invite the chief guest to speak – that is the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda. But we are saying that can we follow the order of precedence in this country. The President presides over this day as the head of state; we are not looking at a situation where the President also says that, “I am delegating my RDCs” and yet the order of precedence puts the RDC far below the Member of Parliament. Thank you.

MR MULIMBA: I thought you were going to give me something unique. But what you are talking about are isolated cases; we are now dealing with the ideal. My submission is that Cabinet has given us a position according to precedence. And, Madam Speaker, like you guided, if it happens on any other day outside the national gazetted day, then a decision will be taken at that level. Thank you.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to encourage our colleagues because I have attended several functions in my district at times as MP and minister. At times the scenarios Members are describing do happen but we have the order of precedence in this country. I am aware of a certain national day, where a Woman MP was invited in writing as chief guest but when a minister arrived, she gave way and the minister became the chief guest on that day. But I am also aware that on national days, the RDCs are given the mandate to officiate and where he or she is not able, they normally invite not necessarily a woman MP but can even be a male MP or male minister. 

Let me tell you that on 26th January – which is another national day – we were in Masindi as MPs but the RDC was the chief guest and we were given an opportunity to contribute and we did contribute. I will also tell you that even on Independence Day, which is also a national day – which clarification? I am about to –(Interruption)

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you, hon. Kabakumba, for giving way. You see, when there is a mistake in something that you are narrating, it cannot be a good precedence. The clarification I am seeking is: Did you consider that as something right and that you can even come to Parliament and think that it can be a precedence on which we can base our decisions?

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much. I do not see anything wrong because the RDCs are mandated. And the issue of the woman MP for Kamuli has come up; please the woman MP for Kamuli is not an ordinary citizen of Uganda – she is No.3 and whether invited or not, the moment she arrives at a function, all those below her must give way for her to officiate in that particular function and that is how I understand protocol. Thank you. 

MR JOHN KAMARA: Madam Speaker, the MP from Masindi, who is also a woman and a former minister, has asserted that this day which is meant to highlight the importance of a woman be given to an RDC, who is even lower in hierarchy. 

Madam Speaker, in Kisoro, for example, consider when I am there and there is this woman MP and there is the minister, hon. Tress Bucyanayandi! Consider a situation where, Madam Speaker, you will go to your district and the RDC chooses to give you platform or not. Is it in order for the Woman Member of Parliament from Masindi to try to take way even the powers of women when this Parliament is also chaired by a woman? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I want to propose that we observe order of precedence in the country. I think we should encourage the RDCs where there is someone senior to them to give that person opportunity to officiate – I do not know what you think minister. 

MS NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, I concede. 

THE SPEAKER: I think it is settled; the minister has accepted that where a guest of honour is to celebrate and there is someone senior to the RDC, the RDC should give way. 

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, we have walked a long way and I think we are still talking the language of affirmative action to improve the participation of women in leadership, including in Parliament and I think we have every reason to celebrate the fact that we have improved the number of women in leadership. And we should celebrate that right now; we have men who are sensitised and willing to help women to come up.

Now, in this era of liberation, we should not be debating as to who should preside over the Women’s Day Celebration. It is automatic that when a Woman Member of Parliament is in attendance of that celebration, or if any Member of Parliament is in attendance, that Member of Parliament automatically becomes the guest of honour. 

I therefore, want to move a motion, Madam Speaker; this is not a debatable matter. The official hierarchy is known. I therefore move that for all the celebrations of Women’s Day, the woman representative of that respective district will automatically be the guest of honour in the absence of a minister. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is leaving out the other Members of Parliament. If arrangements are made in Ibanda, hon. Byabagambi will have to sit aside because hon. Kiboijana is around. I think we should not just tie this – my proposal was simpler; that where there is somebody senior, that senior person should preside. Otherwise, we will lock out our colleagues – honourable members, let us take my proposal. 

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORTS OF THE PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATIONS ABROAD

THE SPEAKER: Just a minute. Apparently, the minister is now in a position to do some of his business; the minister for trade. 
BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE HOTEL AND TOURISM TRAINING INSTITUTE BILL, 2013

3.53
THE MINISTER FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Hotel and Tourism Training Institute Bill, 2013”, be read the first time. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded; okay, it is seconded. 

MR MIGEREKO: I do lay the same on the Table accompanied with a certificate of financial implications. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill is sent to the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry for perusal and report back. 

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA WILDLIFE RESEARCH AND TRANING INSTITUTE BILL, 2013

3.54
THE MINISTER FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Uganda Wildlife Research and Training Institute Bill, 2013”, be read the first time. 

THE SPEAKER: The Bill is seconded. 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the same on Table accompanied with a certificate of financial implications as per our rules. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Bill is sent to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry for perusal and report back within 45 days. 

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA WILDLIFE EDUCATION CENTRE BILL, 2013

3.55
THE MINISTER FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Uganda Wildlife Education Centre Bill, 2013”, be read the first time. 

THE SPEAKER: Seconded. 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I wish to lay the same on Table accompanied by a certificate of financial implications as per section 10 of the Budget Act, 2001.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Bill is equally sent to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry to peruse and report back within 45 days. 

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORTS OF THE PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATIONS ABROAD

3.57
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, in accordance with Rule 32(1) and (2) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, I beg to move that the COS report by the Pan African Parliament Delegation to the Pan African Parliament to attend the Seventh Ordinary Session of the Second Parliament of Pan African Parliament held in Midrand South Africa from 21st May – 31 May, 2012 be laid on Table. I beg to move. 

Madam Speaker, likewise, I beg to lay the fifth report made by the Pan African Parliament delegation for the meeting that took place in Midrand from the 21st May – 31st May, 2012. I beg to lay. 

Likewise, Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the sixth report containing the First Ordinary Session of the Third Parliament of the Pan African Parliament, held in Midrand from 3rd to 20th October 2012.

I also beg to lay on Table, the seventh report by the Pan African Parliament delegation on the Second Ordinary Session of the Third Parliament of the Pan African Parliament, held in Midrand, South Africa, from 6th to 18th May 2013.
 
I also beg to lay on Table, the seventh report by the Pan African Parliament delegation on the Permanent Committee Session of the 3rd Parliament of the Pan African Parliament, held in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, from 11 to 16 March 2013. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, the ninth report by the Pan African Parliament delegation on the Permanent Committee Session of the 3rd Parliament of the Pan African Parliament held in Midrand, South Africa, from 10th to 17th August 2013.

And finally, Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, the tenth report by the Pan African Parliament Delegation on the Third Ordinary Session of the Third Parliament of the Pan African Parliament, held in Midrand, South Africa from 21st October to 2nd November 2013. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, you realise that today I have laid on Table seven reports covering the period of 2012 and 2013. You also realise and you have acknowledged that the Pan African Parliament delegation has been prompt in submitting its reports in accordance with the Rules of Procedure. But due to urgent matters to be handled by Parliament, it has not been possible for these reports to be included on the agenda. You are also aware that Parliament has been very busy with the budget matters, discussions on the OPM scandal, the bicycle scandal and many other scandals in the nation, which took precedent.
 
The delegation however, wishes to register its gratitude to you, Madam Speaker, the Clerk to Parliament and the entire leadership of Parliament for the strong support you have given the Pan African Parliament Delegation. You made our work easy and effective.

For the purpose of those who wish to know, the delegation is made up of five Members of Parliament. There are three members from the ruling party, one from the independents and another member from the Opposition side and for the sake of time, I don’t have to get into details because all these are in the report. But, Madam Speaker, I wish to highlight a few issues that could be of interest to this House. However, before I get into those issues, Madam Speaker, you know that you have been our strong supporter and participating in matters concerning the Pan African Parliament. In that regard, I would like to move that the House stands to observe a moment of silence in memory of the former Pan African President, Dr Iddris Ndele, who passed on last year soon after he handed over power to the new President, Mr Bethel Amadi.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us observe a moment of silence.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, in May 2012, the Pan African Parliament went through a process of peaceful change of power as we transited from the Second to the Third Pan African Parliament. Dr Iddris Ndele was the President of the Second Parliament and if you recall, our own powerful lady from East Africa, Mama Amb. Mungale was the First Pan African President. She handed over power to Dr Iddris before he handed over power to Mr Bethel Amadi.

Madam Speaker –(Interruptions)

MR WAMAKUYU: Madam Speaker, I have just seen hon. Cecilia Ogwal lay reports on Table. However, the reports are not signed. If they are not signed, who should own them? Why are reports not signed?

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I think Members of Parliament should be aware that we are now modern in our technology. Yes, I am aware of the fact that the hard copies should have been given to Members – all the reports tabled here have been signed by all Members. But also the same reports have been posted to you on the network. I was the last person to pick the iPad. So, if you don’t have one, maybe something wrong happened to the transmission. It is assumed that all Members have iPads – the signatures are here and you can verify them. 

Madam Speaker, as I was saying, we went through a period of peaceful transfer of power - and I think that is what is disturbing my brother on the other side – and it is generally accepted in Pan Africa that a President stays in office only for one term of three years. It was only Madam Mungale who enjoyed more than three years but thereafter, it was agreed that after those three years, the President must vacate the office. This is now a tradition in Pan African Parliament –

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Cecilia Ogwal, I think you have finished laying the reports and we are supposed to appoint a date for the debate – yes, you have laid the reports and they now belong to the House. We shall appoint a day for the debate.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, it was agreed that I highlight just a few points because the next time it will be debated, I won’t be still the leader of the delegation; I am now handing over to the new team. So, I just wanted to highlight the key points of concern –

THE SPEAKER: If you are highlighting the decisions taken, I would understand but now you are going to the history, who started, who came next. All those are known. Me, I thought you wanted to highlight major decisions taken that affect –

MRS OGWAL: I agree. I will be very brief. Give me only three minutes –

MS KABAKUMBA: Procedure.

THE SPEAKER: Point of Procedure.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You have correctly guided that you give us an opportunity to debate. I did attend yesterday’s session where hon. Atim Ogwal Cecilia Barbara designated somebody else; I think hon. Okupa to represent the Opposition in the Pan-African Parliament. I do believe that by doing that, she ceased to be a member including leader of the Ugandan delegation to the Pan-African Parliament. So, does she have a locus standi to even highlight what is in the report? Why doesn’t she follow your guidance and she will contribute then when there is an opportunity for all of us to debate. Is it procedurally correct?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we have received the documents. We shall appoint a day for the debate. I thank you. But I want to thank you for the leadership during that tenure, the regular reporting. PAP has been exemplary. I thank you very much.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am handing over power peacefully –(Applause)– and I need those hand claps. I pray that the tradition will be maintained – for the first time when I was there, with my prayer and the prayer of Ugandans, we were able to have more women in leadership than the men. We are three women and two men in the leadership of the Pan-African Parliament and that, you need to know.  

You need to know that through our lobby, the Pan-African Parliament had to stand as a solid team behind the candidate of Uganda and that is why our Speaker was unanimously supported by the Pan-African Parliament. So, those are issues that you needed to know. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Ogwal. Next item.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR SELECTED MUNICIPALITIES FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE, 2009

THE SPEAKER: Now, have you delegated?

4.12
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I have been requested by the new Chairperson to present this report on her behalf as we continue to complete the handing over of the office.

Madam Speaker, allow me to present a report of the Local Government Accounts Committee on the Report of the Auditor-General for selected municipalities for the year ended 30 June, 2009. As you remember, we presented a report of 2008 and the minutes for 2008 and 2009 were presented here.

The Local Government Accounts Committee on behalf of Parliament under Act 163 is mandated to monitor expenditure of all public funds, whether transferred from the centre or locally generated by the local governments.

The committee assesses and evaluates levels of compliance to the established laws of Uganda, the performance, adherence and compliance to set performance standards and regulations governing public expenditure. 

You have this report on your iPads and we shall go to (VI). Madam Speaker, this report covers the audited accounts of six municipalities namely: Jinja, Kabale, Masaka, Lira, Mbarara and Soroti for the end of June, 2009. 

The report highlights observations and recommendations of the committee. I think you can read the background. 

The methodology

The committee interfaced with accounting officers and their technical team to respond to queries raised in the audit report and there were also public hearings which were attended by political leaders and the general public.

General observations and recommendations

As a matter of concern, all of the accounting officers who appeared before the committee were new in their stations and not the ones who generated the audit queries. 

Compliance with accounting regulations

The committee noted that accountability regulations are still not adhered to in most cases. Accountabilities were not submitted in accordance with the relevant regulations. 

The committee therefore recommends that financial regulations should be strictly adhered to and any deviation by the accounting officer should be held liable. The committee also recommends regular sensitisation of the accounting officers particularly the new ones and other finance managers of the regulations in order to minimise the abuse and misuse which in some instances is due to lack of requisite knowledge. 

Embezzlement of public funds

The committee observed that there were cases of outright theft of funds by officers. 

The committee noted that much as such cases were reported to the Police, prosecution did not take place and the end result was that the suspects were released and Government funds lost. The committee therefore recommends that in such instances, state-attorneys should be available to defend Government cases and district officials present be witnesses in such cases.

The committee recommends that such irregularities and negligence should be addressed by the accounting officers through effective supervision and disciplinary action. The accounting officers should be held personally liable if such irregularities persist and retooling of staff to adhere and follow the financial transactions to conclusion.

Persistence of the above failure should be perceived as a failure on the part of the accounting officer to train and discipline staff and therefore be liable.

Non remittance of statutory deductions

It was observed that some accounting officers did not remit the statutory deductions, particularly to URA, in time. Also in some instances, URA did not issue receipts acknowledging these deductions in time. The committee recommends that the statutory deductions should be remitted in time and URA issue acknowledgement receipts in time.

The committee also recommends that the contractors who do not meet the obligations in remitting tax obligations like VAT should be blacklisted and made to pay any arrears.

Unauthorised transfer of funds 

The committee noted that this practice affects programmes in the municipalities and the transfers were done without authority. To make matters worse, there were no activity reports for the deviations or to show the urgency. This is a dangerous precedent because it breeds corruption and promotes poor planning and prioritisation in financial management.

The committee therefore recommends that this practice should stop and disciplinary action be instituted to the perpetrators.

Irregular procurement process

Although the Public Finance and Accountability Act came into force in 2003, the previous arrangements to manage the procurement process were being abused - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Is there a problem?

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have got the report in my hands and I am trying to follow the presentation but I have failed. It seems the chairperson may have a different copy. Can we try to synchronize so that we can know from which page he is presenting? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Actually, hon. Chairperson, you have said something but I thought it is 1.46. Are you on page 9? 

MR SABIITI: I am now on 2.7 page 8.

THE SPEAKER: 1.47. But you said 2 point-

MR SABIITI: I think you should follow 2.7. That should answer your question. Madam Speaker, we changed the numbering but the content is the same.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, read the head note like “Irregular procurement” and then the recommendations so that Members can follow.

MR SABIITI: Okay. Irregular procurement processes. Although the Public Finance and Accountability Act came into force in 2003, the previous arrangement to manage the procurement processes was being abused. It was also noted that since the PPDA came into force, cases of this nature have reduced although the ones that come up are of a big magnitude.

The committee also noted that there were numerous cases of influence peddling, collusion and conflict of interest in the management of procurement in municipalities.

The bidding process was flouted in many areas such as maintenance and the construction sector especially in roads in the municipalities. The committee also noted that there were many cases of goods not taken on charge. This means that the purchases were made but not delivered since there were no goods’ return note or store releases and in other cases, no stores at all.

The excuse of lack of personnel to manage the stores was a lame one; that was the excuse given. At least usage should have been documented.

The committee therefore strongly recommends improvement in stores recording and adherence to PPDA and relevant regulations.

Debtors

The committee noted that sundry debtors of some municipalities remained outstanding and had been appearing in the financial statements of the councils over several previous years. The committee noted that outstanding debts become bad debts. The committee therefore recommends that the accounting officers should monitor and vigorously follow up debtors on a regular basis.

Pay As You Earn (PAYE) deductions

The committee observed that PAYE tax deductions effected on the meager sitting and transport allowance as required by the Income Tax Act of 1997 as amended Section 19(a) was demotivating the councillors and hence affecting the performance of councillors in local governments.

The committee therefore recommends an amendment on the Income Tax 1997 Act with a view of exempting councillors from paying PAYE on sitting and transport allowances. This is a serious matter, which I think Parliament should look at.

Madam Speaker, the above general comments are substantiated by a vote by vote analysis, which follows in the main body of the report. It should however be noted that most of the general concerns raised above run in all the financial years. I therefore beg the august House to adopt this report and the recommendations therein.

Allow me to look at the observations and recommendations as per each municipality.

Jinja Municipal Council; underpayment of revenue by a private firm. I think you can go through to see what the accounting officer talked about. We discussed this matter and discussions amounted to sub judice since the matter was in court. The committee therefore recommends that the accounting officer should follow up this case because we could not handle it as it was already in court.

Unremitted taxes

The accounting officer failed to prove to the committee that remittances were made for Pay As You Earn and VAT.

(d) 	From the letter written by URA, extra charges were levied on money not remitted on time. The committee observed that to-date these funds have not been remitted to URA.
(e) 	The committee noted that noncompliance of the taxes may attract penalties. 

Recommendation: The accounting officers should remit all taxes to URA in time and to meet the extra charges accrued from delayed payment from his personal funds.

Lack of the Solicitor-General’s endorsement for contracts
If you look at our recommendations, the committee noted that the council acted contrary to the regulations and the committee recommends that municipal council management should adhere to the contract regulations and the town clerk should be penalised for not adhering to the procurement regulations.

Vacant positions

If you can look at that problem, there is a problem with nearly every municipality and you can have a look at the comments of the accounting officers. But the committee observation is that financial constraints, general ban on recruitment by the Ministry of Public Service and terms and conditions of recruitment hinder councils from recruiting staff. Madam Speaker, this is a serious matter and the committee, therefore, recommends that the Central Government should increase funding to municipalities to fill vacant posts and the municipalities should identify and explore other sources of revenue to widen their tax base. There should be prioritisation to ensure that critical vacant positions in local government are filled.

Kabale Municipality

I think you can read what the accounting officer talked about. Let us look at the committee’s observations and recommendations:
    (a) The public is not well sensitised on the newly introduced taxes and this brings about challenges in effecting collection. For example, this hotel tax – they were not acquainted with this law and therefore it caused a problem.
    (b) The committee noted that the council had expected to get more revenue from garbage collection but the plant was not completed on time. 
    (c) Council had budgeted for sale of scrap but ended up going through a number of procurement procedures and the financial year ended before it disposed of the scrap.
    (d) Lack of enough staff contributed to shortfalls in revenue collection yet municipalities cannot recruit without extra funding from Government.
    (e) There are delays in procurement procedures. For example, awarding contracts by the contracts committee and generally lack of concern on collection of taxes.
    (f) The committee also noted that the accounting officers failed to give a plan to rectify this anomaly. 

We recommend that:
    (a) Council should form teams of different members of staff to sensitise the public on the new taxes as an avenue to boost revenue.
    (b) The accounting officer should come up with a clear programme of collection of taxes and to identify other new sources of income for the council.

Outstanding payables of Shs 189,749,324

On this, the committee recommends that the accounting officer should adhere to controls of creditors by minimising accumulation of debts. The commitment should be entered into when funds are available and the commitment control system be complied with as per the regulations. 

Debtors

Observations

The committee verified the receipts of the recoveries of debts and found out that recoveries were properly receipted, banked and supported by the banking slips. More effort is needed in monitoring and following up the data.

Recommendations

The accounting officer should vigorously monitor and follow up debtors on a regular basis.
The executive committee should follow the right procedure to write off the unrecoverable balances.

Weakness in procurement planning

Again here, the committee noted that the user development plans were not availed for verification at the time.

The committee recommendation: The procurement planning should be followed to the procurement regulation. 

Lira Municipal Council

Construction of Kwania roads

The committee observed that works were allegedly completed using another firm since Mukalazi had failed to complete the work. This was a policy by Government to empower the local firms and build the capacity but this has proved counterproductive in most cases.

Here, Madam Speaker, we recommend that the firm should be blacklisted; there was a mistake of dropping the queries but we said that the firm should be blacklisted.

Non-current assets

Depreciation of assets

After hearing from the accounting officer, the committee observed that the accounting officer failed to perform his mandate as required by law. The committee, therefore, recommends that the accounting officer should take corrective action in the shortest time possible and the council property and other Government property should be valued and the process should be expedited.

Personal advances of Shs 74,447,102

Observations

The committee observed that out of the Shs 74,447,102, management presented accountability of Shs 18,943,154, leaving a balance of Shs 55,503,948 as recoverables. The committee also observed that personal advances were stopped in many local governments because they were impoverishing the districts. It was an incentive but now there are many banks giving salary loans which should be accessed by the employee. 

The accounting officer should recover the Shs 55,503,948 outstanding in personal advances within a specified period as the law states.

Funds not accounted for - Shs 24,468,600

The committee observed that the accounting officer did not adhere to the regulations particularly regulation 43(2), of the Local Government Financial and Accountability Regulation. 

The committee recommends recovery of all funds within six months. The accounting officer should be charged with abuse of office. 

Doubtful payment of Shs 1,900,000

Here the committee observed that the act of refunding alone should not be entertained if the issue involved intended fraud. The committee therefore recommends that the officer should be cautioned because he accounted. 

Late procurement plans

The committee observed and noted that this may affect releases of funds and implementation of programmes. The committee therefore recommends that the procurement plans should be made at the beginning of each financial year as per the law and the accounting officer should be disciplined for not adhering to the provisions. 

Masaka Municipal Council

The committee observed that the accounting officer had poor control system. For example, out of Shs 260,881,194 only Shs 69,941,183 has been paid by the respective beneficiaries, leaving a balance of Shs 190,940,011 outstanding. 

Recommendations 

The council should clear the outstanding balance reference to above to avoid court fines and other related charges. 

Outstanding administrative advances

The committee requested for evidence of recoveries that were being made; schedules of payment and proof of communication with the accounting office – documents were submitted that revealed that out of 77,921,300 recoveries, only Shs 8,618,220 had been effected leaving a balance of Shs 69,303,100 outstanding. 

We recommend that the accounting officer should recover the outstanding balances. The accounting officer should be cautioned because we felt he was not doing his duties well.

Irregular payment

The court and law council should handle the matter judiciously. We felt the law council should intervene and handle this case of the Shs 164,831,350. 

The committee observed that the Solicitor-General took over the matter but no progress had been made towards recovery of the money in question. We recommend that the Solicitor-General acts on the matter expeditiously. 

Infrastructure

The committee requested for evidence from the accounting officer to prove whether the procurement procedures were followed in letting out the park. Site inspection was done and the following was discovered: 

One of the parks had started functioning but not fully and there was need for cooperation by the interested parties. The condition of the park was not good; some lights from the streets were working but not all. 

Recommendations

The committee recommends that the park be used to generate income for the municipality and the lights should be installed on the streets. The query stands until this is implemented. 

Mbarara Municipal Council

Un-deducted payment – Pay As You Earn from council allowances: The committee noted that it was the incompetence of the accounting officer to deduct Pay As You Earn from the councillors’ pay. This is a legal requirement which the accounting officer should have implemented. This council might lose out in case the councillors do not comply and pay. 

The accounting officer tabled the recovery schedule which was forwarded to the Auditor-General for verification. The committee also observed that deductions are still going on and Shs 13,306,453,000 is outstanding balance as at 31 December 2010. 

We recommend that the accounting officer should deduct the outstanding balances and the query stands. 

Irregular payment of housing allowance: observations of the committee; whether local revenue or from central Government, this payment remains illegal and the justification from the accounting officer is not tenable. The Ministry of Public Service did not clear this payment but the accounting officer continues paying without a justifiable authority. This should have been an indicator that payment is illegal. The council does not have the powers to offer allowances unless they are authorised by the Ministry of Public Service. 

The committee therefore recommends that the payment should be stopped and the money must be recovered from the beneficiary. The accounting officer be cautioned to always adhere to the provisions of the law when making payment and the query stands until funds are recovered. 

Assessment of trading licence

The committee analysed the documents and found them genuine and therefore acceptable. The councils should make business assessment on time and in the opinion of the committee we say this query should be dropped. 

Weakness in VAT return

The committee observed that evidence availed does not correspond with the year and review and there were too integrated for the committee to make a clear confirmation of the information contained therein. 

The committee observed that council did not maintain VAT leger and returns lack tax inputs. The finance section lacked adequate capacity to prepare returns and as a result they relied on tax audit by URA to establish its tax obligations. 

The committee also noted that Shs 44,896,008 was outstanding in unremitted VAT obligations by 30 June, 2011 though it could not be confirmed due to lack of a leger. The committee recommends that Shs 44,996,896 outstanding VAT obligation should be ascertained and cleared. Accounting officers should ensure VAT returns are filled on time in the future and that unremitted VAT returns should be remitted without further delays to avoid penalty.

Query on drugs

Weakness in the procurement of drugs

On this query, the committee noted that the issue of drugs involves life and should be treated with the urgency it deserves. There is always shortage of drugs and so the issue of having balances in cash is not being fair to the people who need the services. The committee established that the municipality kept the ledger up to January 2009 and was not up to date. Drugs worth Shs 2,468,191 were delivered but the balance of Shs 996,360 was not accounted for. The accounting officer should refund the outstanding balance of Shs 969,360 as the query stands.

Irregular payments on false accounts

Observations

The committee in agreement with the Auditor-General could not verify the emergency because there were no minutes for the contracts committee or any other authority declaring the situation as an emergency. The accounting officer failed to avail the letter of authority. It was noted that some funds were used on already contracted out activities, which is irregular. It could have been conspiracy to defraud the council funds. The committee noted that there is need to investigate the whole project.

Recommendation

This matter should be handed to CIID for investigations and further action.

Weaknesses in Procurement and work for Kyamugorani Road
The accounting officer reported that the road is completed though the work had been done in phases. But we observed and agreed with the Auditor-General that shoddy work was done and that the monies amounting to Shs 94 million were spent without authority.

The committee also noted that the procurement process was not followed by this and this should have had bad impact on the work to be carried to be done. The committee observed that this is abuse of office since the PPDA Act is very clear on the procurement process that was deliberately ignored.

Recommendations

Procurement of civil works should be undertaken in accordance with the procurement regulation. This matter was also handed over to CIID for investigations and possible prosecution.

Court cases against the council

Observation

The committee observed that the council had not demarcated the road reserve to block encroachers as noted in this case. We came to learn that this is actually sub judice since the matter is already in court. The committee recommends to the council that property including road reserves should be clearly demarcated and secured and anyone who encroaches on it should not be compensated. The counting officer should follow up the case awaiting court ruling. But we also recommend that the council should harness the opportunity to settle some of these cases out of court and that in future, officers should act responsibly to avoid these cases that are nugatory in nature.

Soroti Municipality

Unremitted Revenue by contractors

The committee observed that there was no contract between the municipality and Pearl Agencies. The contract was not availed for perusal and so the content could not be established. Pearl Agencies was sued for Shs 119 million. The case is still in court, which is also a matter of sub judice as of now because the matter is still in court.

Abandonment of contracts

The committee observed and found it unusual for the Ministry of Works to supervise a project which is never implemented. The committee noted that the contractor, Omega Construction Company, was procured by the Ministry of Works and Soroti Municipality was supposed to supervise it.

The committee also noted that the extension of the contract was granted but the contractor did not come back to the site. We also observed that the money that was paid to the contractor was more than the performance he was supposed to pay.

Recommendation

Omega Construction Company should be blacklisted. The Accounting Officer of the Ministry of Works should be held responsible for the failure of this project and that the Solicitor-General should take up this matter for further management.

Outstanding administrative advances
The committee noted that out of Shs 33,478,000 accountabilities, only Shs 19,217,00 had been accounted for and evidence tabled for verification. The balance has turned out to be personal advances - the management of Ministry of Public Service requesting for recovery. A request letter and the reminders were tabled for verification. 
The committee recommends that until all funds are recovered, the query stands.

Unspent balances

National Medical Stores

Observation

The accounting officer did not follow up on the money, which remained unutilized because of the laxity of his side.

Recommendation

The town clerk was directed to follow up and ensure that supplies are claimed and get used for the intended purposes.

Undelivered drugs by National Medical Stores

Observations

The National Medical Stores misallocated laboratory supplies meant for Soroti Municipal Council.
Recommendation
National Medical Stores should be held responsible for messing up the supplies or make good the loss.

Unpaid rent

Observation

Management did not have a properly and documented agreement with the tenant.

Recommendation

Management should ensure value is achieved from transactions made.

Madam Speaker, this is the report of the Committee on Local Government and the Public Accounts Committee. As I have already stated, the minutes were presented here when we were handling 2009. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Sabiiti and your committee. Hon. Members, the report has been signed by 17 out of the 30 members and so, it is eligible for debate. 

Members of the committee should not tempt me, please.  We start with hon. Mawanda, three minutes.

4.59
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for its report and I really agree with them and most of their recommendations.

There are issues that I would like to highlight in this report. First, is the issue of procurement plans: Various entities at times delay to submit procurement plans intentionally in order to delay procurement so that they can end up swindling the money for use in various entities. I would like to call upon the ministry to ensure that they tighten on this smatter of procurement plans and to ensure that the spending agencies confine themselves to the procurement plan.

Secondly, there is a general complaint in the Solicitor-General’s Office in respect to delays of sanctioning agreements for contracts or in advising these ministries, local governments and various entities. We are really wondering because this is hampering Government work; very many entities that we interface with in various committees are complaining. 

I would like to call upon the Ministry of Justice to look into this matter. As you look through this report, you will find that Government has lost a lot of money in respect to the failure of Solicitor-General’s Office to either advise or sanction contracts to be followed by various municipalities.

There is also the question of this company called Omega Construction. I have for the last three years been seeing this company being blacklisted but up to now, this company is still doing work. 

So, I am wondering whether the instructions being issued by PPDA are not being followed by the Government. I would like the Minister for Works to really comment on this matter of Omega Construction, which I have seen has led to a loss of more than Shs 500 million in Soroti. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, just to add to what hon. Mawanda has said, in our outreach programme, one of the complaints that we got from the local governments was that they are disabled from making bylaws because when they submit to the Solicitor-General, it takes very long to clear their bylaws. There is also that problem. 

5.02
MR MARTIN MUGABI MUZAALE (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Chairperson and members of the committee for coming up with its report. I will take you to page 3 of the report where the committee made some observations. Observation (a) was that there were some irregularities in Jinja Municipality in awarding the contracts. And when you look at the committee recommendations, I find them very light because they say that only the Town Clerk should be penalised. 

Madam Speaker, I realise that the Procurement Officer is also responsible and therefore, I suggest that in this recommendation, the Town Clerk together with the Procurement Officer should be forwarded to the relevant authorities for action.

I also looked at page 10. If you look at the committee observations in regard to Mukalazi firm that was contracted and it failed to complete the work; in the recommendations, they are proposing that the query should be dropped. In observation (b), they went ahead to say that there were some interests – (Interruption)

MR JUNJURA: I thank you. I am rising on a point of procedure. We are discussing a very serious matter apparently and it will take time. When I look at the front bench, may be if I am assured by the Chief Government Whip, perhaps through your ruling, I do not see any sector minister and yet, these are serious issues that we are raising on local government. So, I am raising a procedural issue on whether it can be – I want to be clarified on the matter. 
    
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have given hon. Onzima medical leave; he has gone to India because he is sick. But I do not know whether the senior minister is here. 

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I think that is why a Chief Whip is appointed; to take note of everything and inform the ministries. But in the case of this report, I want to inform my colleague that the one you need most, though I am here, is the Minister for Finance because after such a report, it is the responsibility of the Minister for Finance to make Treasury Memoranda that have to be brought here to Parliament. But I am present, listening and noting.

MR MUGABI MUZAALE: Madam Speaker, I was on the leaders of the municipalities on page 10; the contract was awarded to Mukalazi and it was worth Shs 578 million and they had already paid Shs 448 million but work was not completed. 

Much as the committee went ahead to propose in their recommendations that the query be dropped, we do not know at what percentage of the work Mukalazi left incomplete. 

Therefore, I propose that in their recommendation, other than dropping the query, we should interest the Police CID to investigate further into this matter to find out how much was lost in terms of value-for-money –(Interruption)

MR LUBOGO: I thank you very much, hon. Muzaale. Madam Speaker, as I was listening to this report, I realised that the Chairperson of the committee on the particular recommendation he is referring to, said that the company should be blacklisted. But now, we seem to be having a different copy of the report. So, my colleague is debating from the report that we have when actually, the Chairperson has read different content and recommendations. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Chair, what was the recommendation in respect to that firm?

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, I made it clear that Mukalazi should be blacklisted. That is the recommendation of the committee. It was a typing error and that is why I am here to inform you what the decisions of the committee were. 

MR MUGABI MUZAALE: Thank you chair for that information. But if the proposal is actually to blacklist Mukalazi, I want to also say that is not enough and we should also recover our money.

Looking at the entire report, there were very many advances to the various individuals and according to the Financial and Accounting Regulations, officers must write their accountability within 60 days. In the event that they have failed to make accountability - and I find this a common practice in most Government agencies - I want to give a general recommendation that all officers who have failed to give accountability for advances should refund the money within 60 days. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.09
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like address myself to page 9, which according to the hard copy is 1.4.7 on irregular procurement processes across the board and specifically paragraph 2, which says, “The committee observed that there were numerous cases of influence peddling, collusion and conflict of interest in the management of procurement in the municipalities.”

Since the abolition of the district and municipality tender boards, the introduction of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act has put all the power of putting out the bids, of advertising, evaluation, qualification, award of contract and after that, monitoring and finally, payments in the hands of civil servants. What has happened today is, once the district technical planning committees and the DECs or councils have passed the budgets for the financial years and they have mentioned their priorities, the civil servants take over. 

The district engineer together with the heads of departments whether it is in education or building teachers’ houses say, okay let us advertise for building of classrooms or for procurement of drugs or books. From that point, there is nowhere the politicians come in. They come only at the time of monitoring because the civil servants are the ones who advertise in the papers what they want to put out. They are the ones who receive the bids –(Interruption)

MRS NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE: Thank you, hon. Colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give to this House and my colleague is that this report is a result of queries raised way back before the new policy was introduced. So, even that new policy you are talking about was introduced because the old tender boards chaired and run by politicians were not doing their work properly. That is why there were changes, which brought in the civil servants. So, the information I want to give to you is that this is a report arising from issues of 2009.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Hon. Member, I was a district planner as far back as 1995 and the PPDA Act and regulations came in 2003. This report is about financial year 2009, so, the PPDA regulations were there.

What I am saying is that initially, we thought that by bringing the PPDA in place, we would solve the problem of the district tender boards where politicians were awarding contracts to themselves. Unfortunately, what has happened is that we have transferred the same disease to the civil servants. They are now the ones in charge and the district chairpersons and LCVs are now to go and kneel in front of the civil servants if they want to be awarded a road. So, there is collusion. 

In the award of contracts, the CAOs together with their engineers and chief finance officers are the ones who advertise and receive the bids. It is the civil servant who evaluates the bids and from the evaluation committee, they send to the contracts committee. Members of the contracts committee are civil servants appointed by the CAO. After the civil servants award the contracts to whoever, they are the ones who monitor. Whether it is a classroom or water, they are the ones who monitor. After monitoring, they are the ones who decide who to pay and they are the ones who give a certificate of payment to the civil servants.

Can you imagine a situation where, like the report says, there is collusion? If this contract is given to one of their friends or relatives or to one of the civil servants, what happens? They are the ones who award themselves, monitor themselves and pay themselves.

Madam Speaker, what I am advancing is that this new arrangement that we brought under the PPDA Act needs to be reviewed. We need to re-examine this because the district local governments and district councils only stop at the time when they approve the plan that there will be this road, it must be repaired this year. After that, the engineer, the CAO and the respective heads of department take over. They are the ones who do everything and that is why you realise there is collusion.

It is not that they do not know about the PPDA regulations. It is not that some of them are incompetent. They have undertaken very many studies and you will find them with Masters’ degrees in Procurement.

The law, as put in place, has enabled these people to run these kinds of situations where you find the district engineer is a member of the evaluation committee because it is something to do with roads, bridges and buildings. After evaluation, in the contracts award committee he is also a member. The same engineer is the one who goes to monitor and find out whether you are doing the right thing. The same engineer is the one who generates the first payment certificate for you to be cleared for payment.

So, the whole thing is done by one person. He starts from putting the bids up, evaluating your bids, giving you the evaluation, giving the awards, finally giving you the contract, coming to monitor you and processes your payment.

In this circle, where one person or a few people; the CAO and engineer are involved, how do we expect to break this circle of collusion? Madam Speaker, as a Parliament, we need to go back and review the law relating to the running of local governments particularly through the procurement processes. What has happened is that there is an elite capture in the districts by the civil servants. They have captured everything and the politicians have become beggars. 

You find a politician saying, “Please, give me this road.” They want contracts and this has brought a lot of corruption. Shoddy work is because of this kind of collusion among the civil servants. The CAO is the one who appoints people to be in the evaluation committee. He is the one who appoints people to be in the contracts committee. He is the one in charge of the engineer. All these things are micro-managed by one person; evaluation, award and everything.

Madam Speaker, my point here is that we need to go back, review and see that there were benefits in the district tender boards because these tender boards were managed by politicians. On the other hand, the evaluation was done by civil servants; the technical persons. But now, all of this has been captured by a group of civil servants largely Chief Administrative Officers, engineers and procurement officers and in the end, it is difficult for us to break this vicious circle of collusion of people. This kind of shoddy work will continue if we do not review the law. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I recollect that we did pass regulations relating to the PPDA. Maybe, we may have to check whether we did not address that issue because we did pass regulations here to strengthen the PPDA Act. The Clerk will have to check to see whether we addressed the issues that are being raised in those regulations.

5.27
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for finding time to make this comprehensive report.

I wish to draw your attention to (vii) to the effect that regular sensitisation of the accounting officers and financial managers should be done. This is the last paragraph as recommended by the committee. 

My concern here is that I am a bit reluctant to agree with this recommendation and I find it redundant because there is no accountant officer recruited without the requisite knowledge and expertise to do his work. More often than not, these people look like they do not know what to do but these are very knowledgeable people and yet, at the same time, very dangerous. 

Therefore, the public resources that we lose is not because these people do not know what to do; they know that they are defrauding the taxpayers. So, the aspect of constant sensitisation does not hold water. But I think that any accounting officer who defrauds the public should immediately be brought to book.

Madam Speaker, on part (ix), I thank the committee for bringing up the aspect of irregular procurement process. Many cases of abuse of public funds start from the procurement stage; they compromise both quality and quantity. Recently, when I went to the PPDA and requested them to go and do an audit of the work done in my district – a road that was barely 10 kilometres was indicated as 11 kilometres in the contract document. And you know that one kilometre in road construction is a lot of money. A road that was contracted out at six kilometres was reduced to barely two kilometres and Shs 105 million was paid to the contractor for doing only one kilometre and he disappeared from the site without the approval of the district authorities. So, variations are made without approval. 

So, Madam Speaker many agencies that use these procurement procedures fail to adhere to the PPDA regulations. So, we have always wondered what it is that we can do differently to make these people comply and how we can ensure regular audit of procurement processes and strictly, relate it to the outputs on the ground. This is because if you stop at the district level, you will not get the feel of what happens on the ground. So, this is, indeed, a huge challenge that we need to deal with squarely.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, if I may add my augment  to the point raised by my colleague, hon. Martin Muzaale, usually, the normal practice is that you pay for work done – this is what is referred to as progressive payment. But certification of payments are usually done by districts or town councils for work not done and this is what has led us to this situation – where Shs 448,380,681 was paid to the contractor for doing a small job and he ran away from the site. I do not know – maybe the committee could clarify; did you take interest to investigate whether there was value for money when this amount of money was paid? If that is not the case, then recommending that this company be blacklisted alone is not enough; we need to find out if there was value for money. If there wasn’t, who is this officer who certified payment for work not done? So these are the issues that we need to address rather than merely calling for the blacklisting of the contractor. Thank you. 

5.22
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We thank the committee for this comprehensive report. This report has revealed that our service delivery programmes are clearly frustrated because there is no proper supervision and monitoring of the funds that are distributed to perform this function.

The recommendation by the committee to blacklist all companies that do shoddy work will not address the problems they have pointed out. This is because the directors that are involved have a leeway to go and form other companies, which can apply for new contracts and tenders and get them. I would, therefore, have desired to see in the recommendations that firms are blacklisted together with their shareholders or directors; that should be clearly stipulated.

Madam Speaker, if you look at the way the accounting officers – that is the Chief Administrative Officers, the town clerks – are saying to ensure that monies are remitted (deducted) from the councillors’ allowances – that you flout such a legal requirement – this is a serious matter and we should make sure that the people involved are practically prosecuted and punished. 

If we look at the award of contracts for roads, if it is a legal requirement that the Solicitor-General must endorse these contracts and the contractors together with the administrators in the municipal council go ahead to sign contracts without this being fulfilled, then how shall we be in a strong position to apprehend and prosecute these people when such important legal requirements are absent?

Madam Speaker, I just looked at, for example, Soroti Municipal Council, on page 30. How can one kilometre of road be done for four months? 120 days for just one kilometre? I feel that there is a conspiracy to cheat taxpayers because if you consider that they are going to be given a contract to make three kilometres of road, it will take a full year. This is a serious matter. And moreover, for this contract, some money almost totalling Shs 50 million had already been paid to the contractor and he abandoned the work. So, how can such a thing happen when we have people in charge of monitoring?

Therefore, we need to review the law and amend the procurement laws as you, Madam Speaker, had intimated and ensure that we strengthen the internal financial control systems to ensure compliance and accountability. That way we shall realise value for money. Otherwise, we are losing a lot of money presently and something should immediately be done to arrest the situation.

One, the question –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I thank the hon. Member for giving way. I am on page 30 where he mentioned Soroti Municipal Council. It is true that the government allocated some money to some towns, including municipalities and this money was in the range of about Shs 400 million each town. On the request of the town clerks, when they came for a meeting, they decided that we should amalgamate these short roads into bigger contracts, which can be attractive to bids. And there is a Memorandum of Understanding between Ministry of Works and the municipalities to that effect. So, what happened is that a contractor like Omega – it was not only in Soroti –  its contracts were in Soroti, Lira and another town, which I do not remember;  he had about five to six kilometres from Eastern Region. So, they would get towns, which are near each other’s and make it like a lop. Then they would advertise it on behalf of these towns. But this money was deposited directly on the accounts of the town councils. 

So, the duty of the Ministry of Works and Transport was to advertise, get a contractor and then thereafter, the responsibility for supervising, issuing interim certificates, payments etcetera were for municipalities and town councils. 

Now, it is not true that he was supposed to do one kilometre. There were many kilometres, but it happened that within Soroti Municipality, there was only one kilometre. 

Finally, there is a typographical error, which I want the chairman to clarify. You said the advance was Shs 46 million. Then we said that – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ministe, you are moving a head of the House. 

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What the minister is saying is surprising. This committee moved to almost all these municipalities and found out that it was the same company, Omega. They received money yet Omega did not complete work in any of those municipalities. They would go and do some bit of work on one area and then go to another yet it has continued getting contracts from the Ministry of Works. 

Madam Speaker, the committee even queried its ownership. We want to find out who Omega is. Why did he continue  to receive contracts, year in and year out; they do shoddy work; they never completed their work and yet, continued being paid. So, I would like the minister to tell us who Omega is. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, are you going to give information on Omega?

MR BYABAGAMBI: She asked for clarification and I wanted to clarify. I do not know whether I should give it at the end?

MR KATURAMU: Madam Speaker, I wish to appreciate the response of the minister. But what we get from the report of the committee is specific and precise. Look at Lira Municipal Council. In June 2008, a private firm was contracted to do 1.5km of Kwania Road within a period of six months at a cost of Shs 578 million. That is very precise –(Interjections)– I do not know whether it was Omega. 

But what is at stake is the question of road reserves. I have an example in Mbarara Municipality where a non-gazetted road is being constructed on private property. I took the initiative to meet the Mayor, Mr Tumwine and he confessed and said that is not normal. They had been taken to court and they accepted that the matter should be settled out of court. 

The report of the committee suggests that it is only the people who encroach on road reserves; even – (Member timed out_)

5.34
MS VICTORIA RUSOKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to talk about the irregular procurement processes. These cases are not new to Parliament and they are not new to ministers. It is a pity that Parliament seems to be lenient with the thieves and therefore, the districts are copying the same culture. 

Let me give an example of NGO funds that come to districts. Whenever a technical officer tampers with that money, in the auditor’s report, it is categorically put that he must refund it within a stipulated period. The district public accounts committees trace it. 

I have a case in my district where officers were arrested and they refunded the money. But when it comes to Government money, everybody thinks you can use the money and get away with it. 

The committee has boldly put its case that irregular procurements are on the rise and they are of a big magnitude. My colleague MPs will agree with me that when the roads are bad, the MPs are to blame. But the people who eat the money are known to the districts; the PAC gets allowances for sitting to go through these cases yet nothing happens to the offenders. 

So, Madam Speaker, I suggest that we review the laws. Why should you sit with a thief you know; maybe he is the engineer and you know he ate the money, yet you sit get allowance to deal with those cases that are never followed up. 

When it comes to goods purportedly purchased and delivered as the committee observed; they are non-existent; they supply air. Why should someone just get away with this? The committee just says, we strongly recommend the improvement of store management. But the good never entered so the stores had nothing to manage. 
We should borrow a leave from other countries where before such a case is considered, if you are the engineer, in a country like Rwanda you would be in prison already. By the time they conclude the case, your accounts would be frozen and the money recovered. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.36
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the Committee on Local Government Account for this report. I want to comment on the issue of understaffing. Indeed, in urban areas and the municipalities, there is understaffing; and because of understaffing, certain activities cannot be done. 

Today, there is a programme called Force Account – you can spend money, but your activity must be approved by the Central Government. When approving it, they consider the qualifications of the staff to be doing these activities. You find that local governments and municipalities have money for certain activities but they cannot execute the work because they do not have sufficient staff. 


I wanted the committee to come up more clearly other than just saying, “Recruitment”. Due to this issue of wage bills activities are stalling because there are no sufficient staffs to execute them, yet they are saying you can go to Force Account and spend the money, but at the end of the day, the money is brought back. Is it logical for Government, instead of getting back this money and they waste it?

Number two, revenue generation and encroaching on road reserves; local governments and especially municipalities have very many activities but they are curtailed by generated revenue because specific activities and businesses that take place in towns are not licensed by urban authorities. Trade licenses are just looked at regulatory items and so, they are not supposed to tax people. Some of the trading licenses are given by professional bodies like the pharmaceutical and bank associations. Somebody establishes a bank but that the local government is not supposed to license it. But the same bank is encroaching and using utilities of the urban authority – occupying parking space, they want water, electricity but that they are not supposed to pay any taxes to that urban authority. That remains a challenge for such local authorities to generate local revenue.

Therefore, I would like to ask the committee to examine this issue and establish how local governments are supposed to benefit from these trading licenses – most of the institutions that operate from there do not pay yet, they infringe on the services –(Member timed out_)

5.39
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also wish to sincerely thank the committee for this good job done and the highlights given. My first concern is about the number of municipalities that were sampled – 6 out of 13. From what has been said in the report, I feel that more than 50 percent was left out. So, I do not know whether it were the highlights by the Auditor-General or from the committee selection. 
But my appeal would be that such a monitoring committee should be given more time and more resources to cover more areas because there is a lot of dirt. This random sampling of just six out of 13 may not give us enough. What we have seen is quite bad enough.

Secondly, my other observation relates to issues at pages 26 and 27. On page 27, the committee has given a very serious observation. For example, in part (a), they observe that money amounting to Shs 94 million was spent without authority and in (b) it is said that the procurement process was not followed; (c) this is abuse of office and in (d) I noticed that there is information gap in what was submitted to the committee.

Madam Speaker, my concern is that when we get down to the recommendations, in my view, they do not seem to correspond with the observations. While the observations are very grave and heavy, the recommendations have been toned down. For example, in c) when we talk about overpayment being recovered from the contractor –  in my view, this contractor was just given a donation. When you look at page 26, the accounting officer responded to say the road had been completed. Hon.Also I notice that the information is missing deliberately.

So, these people are deliberately covering up. And if we do not touch in any of the recommendations, we will be handling them with kid cloves.

The last issue of my concern is on page 32. I am looking at A and B on the monies that are given to staff to account for. It appears that in all the reports that come to this House, staff are given money to carry out operations but later on, they are told to recover. This is treating this money as a free interest loan. I think something should be evolved so that the staff also feel it that it can be a risky venture for staff to take advances and fail to give accountability. But if we just say we are giving them a year to deduct from their salaries as if this is an interest-free loan – one, the people are not getting the intended services. 

Two, Government image is tarnished deliberately by these people who take advances and do not account. That is why I feel that we should have had stronger recommendations to make such actions risky ventures in the interests of the people.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. But for the record, there are not very many municipalities and we debated one batch earlier. They are only about 14 – what - 22 now because we created some new ones? Okay, let us hear from hon. Dr Lulume Bayigga.

5.43
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA LULUME (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee chairman for doing this presentation, which is very good.

There are three things that I would like to comment on. One concerns the taxes, in terms of Pay-As-You-Earn that is cut from the allowances of the councillors. I would lie to think that councillors in their own right have got oversight functions that they perform. Some of them come from far to attend council meetings and they are paid only Shs 200,000 but you deduct Shs 60,000 and they are left with only Shs 140,000. That is the rich local government. But it also extends to the sub county level where councilors are paid Shs 30,000 but also deducted – you know, it does not make sense.

Madam Speaker, the committee was right in their recommendation that this needs to be reviewed to see how our councillors can reserve the little pay in terms of the allowances they get. I am saying this without prejudice because I know the majority of the councilors are indeed from the NRM Party all over the country. And I believe this is the right thing to do. I also believe that Parliament cannot just look on when people who do a great job are not well remunerated.

The second issue is just an observation. Madam Speaker, whenever we interact with our local governments – I have been hearing about this PPDA – it is like a prayer - as if it was cast in stone. We believe it has certain bottlenecks that delay the implementation of projects and does not give leeway to decision making to be done promptly to save situations from going bad.

This is a question of the post-legislative evaluation and I believe Parliament has even debated such a matter. So, Madam Speaker, we need to scrutinise and evaluate the PPDA instead of reciting it as if it was cast in stone, especially when it hampers quick fixing of problems – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute to conclude.

DR LULUME: The last point I wanted to talk about is in respect of – and I want to interest the committee to proactively look at this because the sub county chiefs are more educated than many of the LC III chairpersons. So, they collude with the sub county accountants to take away the money that is meant for construction and repairing of roads. They time when it is Christmas or Easter time; when everybody is doing other things, they go and fleet accounts and run away with this money. This is something that we can proactively, as Parliament, pronounce ourselves in order to prevent this. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.47
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before I raise the hot issue from this report, I beg for your indulgence, Madam Speaker, to state that the colleagues that you indeed mentioned, who are welcomed to rejoin us in Parliament, have been arrested. They were at Old Kampala Police Station but have now been moved to Kira Road Police Station.

Madam Speaker, I would like to implore you to appeal to the authorities that this is unnecessary and that they should be allowed to do their work as parliamentarians and we should proceed to respect the rule of law, particularly, the Parliamentary Privileges Act that allows Members of Parliament to come to Parliament without any disturbance. I beg your appeal as the authority.

In the report, my particular concern is page 10. I do not get the exact facts because the facts and recommendations seem to be completely not related. Section 3.1 provides that a private firm was contracted to construct only 1.5 kilometres of Kwania Road within six months for Shs 578 million. And then this particular firm was paid Shs 448 million and abandoned the site and did not complete the work.

Now, the accounting officer admitted, however, in the typing and I do not know whether this was an error – he admitted that they abandoned the site but then they are saying that they completed the 1.5 kilometres. So, I do not know but maybe the chairman needs to clarify that.

Secondly, he says that this particular firm, Mukalazi, did not complete the work but the Mayor and District Engineer reported that the firm had completed the work and there was value-for-money. The recommendation is that the query should be dropped. I –

THE SPEAKER: It has been corrected. It is that the firm should be blacklisted. He corrected that in the presentation.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. If that was corrected, then it is fine. But what about the recovery of the money because if they blacklist and yet, they had paid them Shs 448 million? Blacklisting without completing work; this appears to be almost over 85 percent of the funds meant for the road and if they abandon the site without doing any significant work, Government should recover the money. That is my view.

But I also still appeal to you that if you could do something about our colleagues who are still under arrest right now.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have not quite understood the circumstances under which they were arrested and I will ask the Government to take an interest and let us know because –

MR KARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, I was with the Parliamentarians at the Supreme Court and as soon as the ruling was made, there were so many people and there was jubilation. As we were driving towards Parliament, many people kept joining us and indeed, we were really a crowd. So, if they wanted, they would have stopped the crowds because it was clear that we were coming to Parliament.
 
They never actually tried to disturb anyone except the Parliamentarians who were in one vehicle and then they were rushed to Old Kampala Police Station. Right now, I am told that they have been taken to Kira Road Police Station. This is exceedingly unnecessary and they should be allowed to do their work.

5.52
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to speak on the general observation 1.4.2 concerning embezzlement of public funds. The committee’s observation was that there were some cases of outright theft of funds by officers and in many cases, these cases where reported to Police but at the end of the road, usually, the culprits were released and Government funds were lost.

Madam Speaker, in Soroti Municipality, about two weeks ago, in spite of the many cases that they have lost, they are riddled with a lot of awards from court; awarding individuals because of the cases they lost in court. They again lost another case where an individual was awarded over Shs 100 million. 

I raise a question because it looks like there is laxity by the lawyers of the municipalities because each municipality has its lawyer – and the committee also recommended that the State-Attorneys should participate in this. However, usually, you find that the Government or State loses these cases because of complacence by either the State-Attorneys of the municipality lawyers. My understanding is that they do this in a reluctant manner because when money is awarded to the other private client, they can claim a portion. 

I would propose that we find a way as Parliament to hold these people accountable because if the Town Clerk or accounting officer goes to court without even evidence of advice from their lawyer – like that case in Soroti, it was evident that they were going to lose the case but anyhow, they still went to the courts of law and after losing the case, the client was awarded Shs 100 million. 

 The collusion needs to be looked into because I am seeing collusion between the lawyers, the State-Attorneys and the accounting officers. I am imaging that at the end of the day, they get a portion of these awards and so, they do not care because the money that we are losing is taxpayers’ money. We need to hold these people accountable. First of all, to see the processes that they took before they went to court and as they went to court, how was the case handled? We should not just look at the end result because there is a lot of connivance in this. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before hon. Nambooze comes, for me, one of the most painful things is that the property of the Government, which it really pays for is not free from attachment. You can imagine that they can attach an ambulance on 24th of December and sell it before January 1st; they attach our road equipment. I had written to the Minister for Local Government and the Attorney-General asking them to find a way of ring fencing so that they are free of attachment. But these are the targets - they are the first targets. The new cars and ambulances is what they go for. I really do not know and it is just too stressful.

5.55
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): I thank you, Madam Speaker. It is quite unfortunate that we are debating this report and both minister and the Chief Whip who had volunteered to take notes for them are away. 

THE SPEAKER: There is a Minister for Works.

MS NAMBOOZE: Okay, thank you. The local governments are turning into institutions, which are running on their own.  The Ministry of Local Government does not have capacity to supervise the local governments. In the policy statement of the ministry for 2012/12013, the ministry reported that they were able, for example, to inspect and assess only 43 out of the 11 districts that they were able to inspect and assess only 86 of the 1,116 sub-counties in the country, that they were able to reach only 56 of the 196 urban councils. 

At this rate, it is very clear that these local governments are running without supervision. They reported in that statement that they were able to conduct anti-corruption workshops for only 30 local governments in the country.
   
Madam Speaker, when you do not supervise these local governments, they will turn into conduits through which money is stolen from Government and these small monies at the end of the day, totals up to huge sums in the billions. When you talk about these billions of money, it means that this is service lost. 

Therefore, I do not know what we should do as Parliament. But I still believe that Parliament as the parent of the local governments because it is here that we create these administrative units, we have the duty to monitor and see if those institutions that we created in form of administrative units are really doing their work. 

Of recent, we have been taking a review of decentralisation after 20 years and the reports coming in from across the country are that there are low staffing levels or they do not have the necessary staff in all the local governments. So, how do you expect them to account for funds or even provide services to the people when the service providers are not there?

Two, there is need to review the Trade Licensing Act. (Member timed out_)

5.59
MR AMOS MANDERA (NRM, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to also thank the committee for the work done. However, I need to be guided on how we shall always make reports that respond to the Auditor-General’s report swiftly especially those that deal with sectors and the colossal amounts of money involved therein.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the committee that it is very prudent to make a full assessment in order to guide our debate. If I may refer to page 29, it says, “The accounting officer explained that the Council advertised for a new service provider but Pearl Agencies secured a court order to stop the process. He also told the committee that Pearl Agencies further sued the council for alleged loss of income in excess of Shs 500 million. The Office of the Town Clerk forwarded the case to the Attorney-General to defend the Council and recover this amount. The matter is in the commercial court, Kampala and the hearing is on 20 January 2012.”

I need to be guided because the report was written in March 2013, yet, the committee interacted with the accounting officer and you can imagine where the accounting officer said the matter is in court and the hearing is to be on 20 January 2012. Why didn’t the committee go further to find out what happened in order to have some insight into the progress of the matter in the commercial court so that our debate becomes more relevant? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.01
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will restrict myself to page 28 of this report where there is an issue to do with road reserves. A number of urban councils have plans to construct roads and a number of roads are not opened up. The main reason is these urban councils do not have money to compensate the owners of the different lands. In such a scenario, how are we going to ensure that urban councils, municipalities and even districts are able to construct roads without a different amount of money, which can be sent to these different urban councils?

The other day, we were in Mbarara with the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. Government is compensating people along the Mbarara-Ntungamo road, a road which we have known for a long time as a gazetted road. So, under which circumstances can Government compensate such people?

The other problem is that of administrative reviews, which is a problem with PPDA. Somewhere, the local council is compensating someone who was supposed to collect revenue. This is the same case with markets where the Basajjabalabas and so forth used to be compensated.

The other time, we were in Kanungu where a bridge, which collapsed ten months ago, cannot be constructed yet money is readily available. This is because one of the bidders went to court to stop the construction of a bridge so people are cut off. When shall we sort out such problems?

Lastly, time and again, we have always recommended blacklisting of different companies and the same companies continue to appear. Even the Committee on Physical Infrastructure has recommended the blacklisting of Dott Services. Today, if you analyse contracts which are awarded, they continue to be awarded to the same companies, which we continue to recommend for blacklisting. It is high time we got to know the owners of these companies; these people who are untouchable because this is the only way we can sort out this mess. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.04
MR GODFREY LUBEGA (Independent, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to someone who felt concerned with the allowances of councilors at sub county and district level. I tell you, Madam Speaker, there is no work down there. People are already frustrated, they take time to sit because of lack of funds and they come from long distances. 

You can imagine some do not even eat because there is nothing like an income at the sub county level. I was even of the view that we should suggest some small allowance for these people, which can come monthly. Imagine they take three or four months without meeting because of lack of funds and when you look at their services, they are working day and night but nothing is earned. I feel that the local government should find a way of convincing the government to give some little salary to these people because salaries can be earned monthly. That is my small contribution.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, during the budget debate, we made recommendations concerning the remuneration of the councillors and we really appealed to Government to alleviate their situation. Hon. Minister, you can now respond.

6.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr John Byabagambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Members for the comments and observations they have made especially on my sector. I have noted down those which are not in my sector and I will pass them on to the Chief Government Whip to be passed on to the relevant sectors.

Before I proceed, I wanted some clarification from the chairman because on page 30, where works were abandoned in Soroti, you went ahead to say that Shs 340 million was lost. I would like to ask, where is the balance of Shs 326 million? Because you said the advance was Shs 46 million and the contract sum was Shs 374 million. But when you went up, you said, there appears to have been collusion between ministry officials and local authorities in construction of this road leading to a loss of Shs 374 million. 

Can you clarify to me where because the advance, which was paid to the contractor was only Shs 46 million and you say the loss was Shs 374 million, which means all the contracted sum was paid to the contractor, which is not true. So, where did the Shs 326 million go? Did you find out from the Town Clerk where they put the money? Where was it utilised or did the Auditor-General find out where it was utilised? I would have loved to know that.

Madam Speaker, when it comes to the recommendation to terminate, we take these recommendations seriously but the problem we have is that the termination procedure is the same as procurement procedure. The steps you go through when you are procuring a contractor are the same you follow when you are terminating him. In other words, the documents have to go to the user department, procurement unit, contracts committee; from the contracts committee – (Interjections) Well, I am clarifying the procedure of how the termination is done. So, this process takes – (Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Women’s Day is around the corner but I am seeking clarification from the minister because he says that the process of termination is just as long as the procurement process. But after you have had one experience of a company doing shoddy work and you are in the process of giving out a contract, don’t you reserve yourself from giving a contract to that same company before you verify whether it has done good work or not? This is because this has gone on over and over again and there is no reason the minister can say that the process is very long. 

This is because once you give a contract to a company and they fail to complete, you should not give them another one. Or is it because they give out contracts without caring whether the said companies have done a good job or not? I think that is not a valid reason.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I had just started on the process of termination and I was coming to the issue of giving a contract to one contractor several times. So, if you gave me a chance, I would answer all these questions. You are already ahead of me, hon. Member.

Now, Madam Speaker, I was talking about the termination process: After the contracts committee has decided that a contractor should be terminated, then the papers are forwarded to the PPDA – it is not actually the entity that does the blacklisting; we forward to PPDA and then, they call the parties concerned and they sit down together and listen to both sides to hear their arguments. It is a very laborious procedure. So, I think when we were making these laws – I, inclusive, because this law was passed in 2003 when I was here –we looked so much into the procurement without considering the termination process. Actually, I the termination process should be shorter and quicker. And mind you, Madam Speaker, what annoys me most is that unless I have terminated officially, I cannot put another contractor in place – I cannot re-advertise. That is why you realise that when you start the process of termination today, the next contractor to come on site will arrive after one and half years. So, sometimes our hands are tied; should I terminate or not? This is because you see people suffering due to impassable roads; when I terminate now – (Interjections) Let me finish the point. If I terminated the contract now, by the time I have another contractor on site, will the specifications, scope of work, price be the same after one and half years? Automatically not; they would have doubled or tripled. 

So, we get these problems. I agree with the honourable member who stated that we should look into the termination process with a view to making it simpler so that once a contractor has failed and has been given notice three times and has got a liquidated period of 100 days, then automatically that one should be terminated and blacklisted. 

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, there is one thing which I want the Minister to clarify: What the Members are concerned with here is the blacklisting – that a company that has from time to time been blacklisted is the same company that is still getting contracts. Omega, for example, when I was still chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurances, we came to this Floor with a report, which proposed that Omega be blacklisted for the substandard works they had done in Hoima on some bridges because even work was abandoned when incomplete. 

The minister is talking about the procedure of terminating work – not blacklisting. Let him clarify to the House whether the process of terminating a contract can stop him from blacklisting a contractor. We are talking about a company being blacklisted by Parliament but it is still getting more contracts; can’t you do the same concurrently – the company being blacklisted while you continue with the termination process? 

THE SPEAKER: What is entailed in blacklisting?

MR BYABAGAMBI: What is entailed in blacklisting is exactly what I have been going through; my duty is to first go through the contracts committee and then forward the issue to the PPDA – because it is PPDA that blacklists and not the ministry. Therefore, if the PPDA in its wisdom decides to first call the parties to a roundtable and eventually does not blacklist the company then the hands of every procurement entity are tied. When it comes to advertising, you do it openly and if Omega is good at making documents and you fail to find any fault in them, automatically they will get the contract. 

But that notwithstanding, what we usually use, as procurement entities, is to bid. In the bid document – that is what we are actually doing now and it is also being challenged in the courts of law. We put it in the bid documents that whoever has not completed its work “may not” tender – by the way you do not use “shall not”. (Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, when we were somewhere – the minister knows where we were – I told him that in the Ministry of Works, every employee almost has a company in the names of either the wife or of the son, who could even be one year old or cousins. In other words, they are the ones who give contracts to themselves, monitor themselves and even give themselves certificates of completion. 

Now, the clarification I want from the minister is that bearing in mind that where there is a problem even in Gulu when this man called Obey whose company named Lamba was given a contract to build an X-ray unit but since he was arrested there has been no work, who is the owner of OMEGA? That is all we want because you could find that he is an insider – that is where the pathology is. You tell us the owner of Omega and we shall conclude.

THE SPEAKER:  The other problem we have is the absence of the Treasury Memorandum; if the Ministry of Finance had come back to on our previous reports and recommendations, maybe we would be having a way forward. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Well, Madam Speaker, I need to give the names of the directors of Omega; according to the books that we have – the Memorandum and Articles of Association of that company, the Managing Director is called Pius Mugarasi, the owner of a certain hotel in Wakaligga called Ivy’s Hotel. (Interjections) No, I said upholding to the books of memorandum and articles of association – (Interjections)– usually, we ask for the profiles; the profiles are there. 

As far as I am concerned, I do not know anybody in the Ministry of Works and Transport who owns Omega. But that does not mean that I am saying that there may not be internal trading in the Ministry of Transport and Works. 

I am being sincere because it might be in other ministries in the names of Wafula Oguttu – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, what we should do is to demand for the Treasury Memorandum urgently from the minister on the previous report. This company has been mentioned; what have they done?

MR MAWANDA: Madam Speaker, let me give you information on Omega. This company was black-listed about a year ago. But as we talk now, they are rehabilitating a road from monitor headquarters to Kansanga.  This company was black-listed and it was in the papers. So, there must be something wrong with that company. As we speak now, they are busy working. 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I am quite bothered by the minister’s response in regard to effort to get companies blacklisted. When they contract these companies, you are the user department. It is the user department that determine the extent of performance in your contract. The extent of completion – you are the ones who originate the initiative that the PPDA uses to blacklist them. If you do not provide proof that you have provided such information to have some of those perpetually bad performers in the road sector; how do you convince this House that it is the business of PPDA and not the business of the user department?

Madam Speaker, Mukalazi has been on this row for the last 10 or 15 years; Zzimwe has been here; Dott Services has been here; Omega, we are not hearing it for the first time. Hon. Minister, you must actually know who Omega is because you repeatedly give them work. Why don’t you tell us, that the fellow is too big for you?

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Madam Speaker, it is not entirely true that PPDA necessarily has to blacklist a company. The PPDA regulation of 2003 clearly states that the PDU unit – that is the procurement unit once they receive a bid from whoever is interested in getting a contract, one of the requirements that is detailed is that the procurement unit must do diligence to get the details of the interested bidder. They should get their address; their experience, whether they have the equipment; their record of performance for the last ten or five years – basically you have to know the bidder, just like in primary school we knew the parts of an insect. You have to ask, does this bidder have the capacity to do this work he is interested in? This is what they call due diligence by the procurement unit; it is in the regulations. 

They even have the capacity to disqualify that bidder without going any further. Apart from the financial capacity, there are other things that can make the PDU stop a bid. 

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a serious problem and the Executive needs help. The minister is lamenting that the termination process is so long so they get reluctant to terminate those who fail. Somebody can fail on one site and you give him another one. The person is not capable of anything. 

 It is not right for us as a country to continue losing colossal sums of money when the minister is just hiding behind technicalities. You see, if Omega is not blacklisted, then our hands are tied. How can they be? You fail on the first, second and third contract and many other contracts and now – (Interruption) 

MS NAMAYANJA: The information I want to give is that there are conditions and terms of a contract. And if one bleaches them, the contract is terminated. In this case, if someone abandons the site, that is bleach of contract. Therefore, I do not know what the minister means when he says that the procedures tie them down. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, let me make is clear. The termination process; even the blacklisting process starts with the user department – I was very clear on this. And when it goes to PPDA, they have to give these people a hearing. Should PPDA not blacklist that company, then automatically, that company comes back to work. 

Madam Speaker, I want to give a very live example –(Interjections)– wait, Member for Kasese; let me give a live example. There is the example of the emergency procurement of the Kanungu bridges, which I do not know whether to call it emergency or not. But somebody mentioned it here. This work was started on –(Interjections)– this guy lied to us that he did some bridges in South Sudan. We did due diligence and sent people to South Sudan and found that actually, this man had never even laid a culvert in South Sudan. So, we decided not to give him the job. When we denied him the job, he jumped into the courts of law. Immediately, temporary injunctions were placed. We fought the temporary injunctions and we got clearance. 

After that, he jumped to the IGG and we cleared the IGG. As we were clearing the IGG, he went to the High Court. We beat him in the High Court. As we were about to award the contract to the right contractor, the guy is going to the Supreme Court. Now, you can imagine what we go through with these local contractors. 

Finally, if I am to blacklist; maybe only two or three can survive here in Uganda –(Interjections)– including the companies owned by my colleagues in Parliament of Uganda.(Interruption) 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, this time cannot wait. Hon. Eng. Byabagambi is my good friend and we believe that the President gave you a job to ensure that you do not frustrate him; even if it is a Member of Parliament here with that contract and they are doing shoddy work, don’t mind. Just terminate the contract. 
So, is he in order to say that he cannot terminate these contracts because they are owned by Members here without substantiating who those Members of Parliament are? Is he in order, without substantiating to this House, the members who are doing shoddy work for this country – we want to know them? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know the taxpayers and voters of this country just want service. So, whether it is a high or low person doing shoddy work, you should blacklist.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I withdraw that last bit of my submission because I was just using it as an example. Anyway, the message I wanted to put across, Madam Speaker, and maybe I put it in a light note – is that we still lack the capacity of local construction –(Interruptions)

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Thank you very much, minister for giving way. You said that if we were to blacklist companies, there will be just one or two to pass the test. And you also said that even companies owned by Members of Parliament –(Interjections)– okay. But the clarification I would like to seek from you is: is it the companies that are owned by Members of Parliament or most of the companies are actually rotten and so not doing the right thing? What are we withdrawing? I am saying this because actually, if most – we come here to supervise the usage of taxpayers’ money because they are the people who elect us. 

So, if this taxpayers’ money is deliberately swindled, then you are committing a crime. And you should be telling – maybe, Madam Speaker, we should ask him for a list of all the companies that they think don’t qualify so that Parliament can decide.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, as a country we have some problem. And as I was saying, the message I want to put across is about the capacity and capability of our local companies. And this is known to everybody because as Ugandans, we have seen this though we have been trying our level best to build the capacity of these local companies. Though some of them have let us down tremendously, some have picked up. But also not all the local companies fall under the category of Omega Construction Ltd though as a country, we still face that challenge. 

But also let me tell you the truth, there is no country that has ever developed on the basis of foreign companies; you must build local capacity. It is like when a child is walking and they fall down; you have to hold them by the hand so that they learn how to walk. So, that is what we have been trying to do. But that does not mean that we really don’t supervise these companies. We try our best to supervise these companies.

Madam Speaker, I would like to state that I don’t have anything to do with Omega Construction Company. I said this company is owned by a man called Pius Mugarasi and I am called John Byabagambi –(Interjections)– wait – and at the same time I don’t know who could be the other directors in Omega. 

By the way I don’t have any kind words for Omega and he knows it though I don’t need to stand in Parliament to say this. Otherwise, I can assure you that we have taken some measures against Omega Construction Company. Actually, I am very much shocked that he managed to secure a contract from KCCA. I don’t know how he managed to do it because as Ministry of Works and Transport, as we talk, other than the works that are ongoing, he can’t secure another contract because of what he did on the roads in Karamoja – and maybe you needed to know of that breach of contract that occurred in respect of the bridge in Karamoja.

THE SPEAKER: We need to conclude.

MR BYABAGAMBI: So, I am not hiding under this company because that is not how I do my things. 

On Kanungu, I have already said something about it in terms of how far we have gone; we have spent one and half years in the courts of law.

On money for compensation to people while constructing roads especially on that Mbarara-Ntungamo Road – we are expanding that road. And automatically when you expand a road, you require extra land. We are moving from 6.3 metres to 11 metres and automatically we have to acquire extra land and that is why we went in for compensation. I don’t quite recall who posed that question, but I have answered it.
On the bypass, which is a brand new road, we had to acquire even a bigger chunk of land for it. For Kwania Road, it was the same arrangement - under Omega and it was not only that road, there was another road from Gulu to some place. So, it was not only 1.5 kilometres.

I don’t know whether the chairman tried to find out whether they utilized this money; I mean the balances or whether those balances were brought or whether they completed some of the roads because that money had been actually put on their account.

Madam Speaker, those are the specific questions that were in respect of the road sector. I am actually happy that members are now supporting us to blacklist these companies. Let us do – we can forget the repercussions of courts; when they come, we will see how to handle them as we move on.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable chairperson of the committee, there was of course general support for your report, but there was a proposal for recovery of funds in addition to blacklisting. And in another area, they proposed that in addition to the town clerk, you include the procurement officer. Those were the two amendments that members brought up.

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, I thank the members for their responses. I also thank the honorable minister for responding to the issues raised.

On the issue of councillors, I want to say that we even commented on them in our last report. So, that is a matter, which when the treasury memorandum comes, Government should see how it can help the councillors.

On the cases of outright theft, as you know the powers of Parliament don’t go too far because we have other institutions of Government. Therefore, we normally refer such cases to CIID, the IGG, the Attorney-General and so forth. So, really until this law is changed, we cannot take drastic decisions. Otherwise Parliament will be taken to court.

On local governments’ capacity, yes, it is true little money is sent to them. Most sources of income were taken over by the central government. But because of the lack of capacity to utilize this little money, it is very much mismanaged. That is why we stated that most of the accounting officers are new and some in acting capacities. So, it is a crisis in the local governments.

On road reserves, yes like in the case of Mbarara and many other districts, surely we should come up with a law. There is no need for a Ugandan who builds in a road reserve to be compensated; there is no way. I think we should have a clear law. 

In Tanzania, maybe because the land system is different from ours, if you build in the land reserve, you can’t even talk about compensation at all. But here you build in my land, which is Government land and you expect compensation. Really that is not good. May be we should come with a clear law.

On Omega and Mukalazi, yes, we blacklisted them and that is how far we could go as Parliament and think that it is the duty of the minister and the Secretary of the Treasury to follow up this matter and make sure that such people and companies are not given contracts.

On advances to individuals, the Local Government Act is very clear in terms of periods. Some are for six months, three months and as you know, local government public servants are remunerated, obviously we have a plight and so we have to also look at how we increase the remuneration of these public servants in local governments.

On procurement, I am beginning to understand that actually, this law is under review. For example, they have looked at how much a district can use as far as I know, is under review and so, maybe we can leave procurement to first do their work and then, we see what to do. This is all, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You are not taking up the amendments – the two proposals on recovery – there was that- 
 
MR SABIITI: Well, it is now Parliament to take a decision and that is what we came up with. But I agree with the amendment.

6.38
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): The committee rightly observed that the PPDA has not solved the biggest hills of the District Tender Board and you say that you have observed that there was really influence peddling, collusion and so forth. Instead of saying that the committee recommends improvement in stores recording, which is actually unrelated to the legal issues here and what they have observed, I would recommend that Parliament reviews the procurement regulations relating to procurements at the district levels because you find that these are basically controlled by about two or three people at the district level; the Chief Administrative Officer and the engineer – basically, that is it – that is all –(Interruption)

MR SABIITI: Sorry. Madam Speaker, you remember that in the past, politicians were fully involved in the procurement process and this system was changed because they were equally corrupt. This is why the current procurement law shifted to technical people to do that job. Now, if you want us to go back, I do not how this will be. Let politicians do their work of supervision and the technical people do their work so that the technical people are taken to book in case there is any violation of the law. 

THE SPEAKER: His proposal is that we should look at the law in relation to the local government procurement. He says that he is still not satisfied not with your report but with the law.

MR SABIITI: I have no objection to that.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: The regulations may have been hastily drafted to the extent that it is the CAO who appoints the evaluation committee. It is also the CAO who appoints the contracts committee and yet, these are two different bodies. And now, finally, along these committees that do the evaluation and the engineer is in all of them – they are the ones who do the awards and the monitoring because these are technical  things like the bridge and road so the engineer is everywhere. And then, they are the ones who issue the Certificate of Payments – and this is CAO, engineer –

THE SPEAKER: I think that that was the point that you made in your submission.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Let us review these regulations –

THE SPEAKER: The proposal is that we look again. I think that nothing is perfect and of course, with time, you learn, make mistakes and limp. So, let us take the proposal that we review the PPDA Act and the regulations. 

Hon. Members, with those amendments, I put the question that the report of the Committee on Local Government Accounts be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as I indicated earlier, I am frustrated by the lack of work in the committees and so, I indicated to the committees that I am hunting and should have delivered work here sometime back. So, I want them to use next week to do all the Bills that are outstanding because they have been telling me to give them one week, two weeks – so, plenary is adjourned for one week and when we resume, any committee that is not ready, we just move. As I said, we shall issue pecuniary sanctions now to the chairpersons. I thank you very much.

(The House rose at 6.45 p.m. and was adjourned until Tuesday, 18 March 2014) 
