Thursday, 12 March 2015

Parliament met at 2.11 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Today, we have decisions to make as I communicated yesterday. There are debates we have had on some reports that we need to take a decision on and also we have a loan that is urgent, which, if it were possible, we should consider and take a decision on today. Everything is ready for us to move forward with this.

Yesterday, the honourable member for Kole County, hon. Ebil, raised the issue of the press. It was about some communication that had come from Parliament written by the Clerk making some statements and some demands on some media houses. A particular phrase of that letter, which copy I now have, I will read and make some guidance on the same.

This letter was dated 9th March. It was received in my office on the 10th March, but I saw it today because of the pile of documentation that was on my desk. Therefore, by the time this matter was being raised yesterday, I had not yet read the letter, but I have now read it.

“…The specific reference is that the purpose of this letter, therefore, is to inform you that the Parliamentary Commission has, in the interest of balanced media coverage of the Parliament, made a decision to the effect that all reporters who have been covering Parliament for more than five years be replaced with effect from the 1st of May 2015.” It is signed by the Clerk to Parliament. 

As I said yesterday, I went and held consultations and looked at the records of our proceedings as a Parliamentary Commission or any other institution of this House that could have taken this decision. I found that the last time a matter relating to the press was discussed by the Parliamentary Commission was on the 21st of August 2014 in the Speaker’s Boardroom and personally, I was absent with apology.

There was an item on bad press reports on Parliament, but this is the decision that the Commission took, which I now communicate to you on that matter. It says, “The meeting agreed to have a press conference and a breakfast interaction with editors of media houses.” That is what the Commission agreed. 

After this meeting of the 21st of August 2014, there has been no other meeting of the Commission that discussed this matter. So, if this letter written by the Clerk is based on this particular decision, then it would be a very wide interpretation of what was said by the Parliamentary Commission. (Applause) To that effect - and now I speak on behalf of the Parliamentary Commission - we have not taken a decision that could have amounted to what has been communicated and this letter should be taken as just a letter but its command should be treated as no command for these purposes. (Applause) The date set shall not be effective until the Parliamentary Commission comes with some formal decision on this particular matter other than what was decided in August of last year.

I urge the members of the press and all of us to keep this matter as it is now because this letter has no effect and does not take effect. (Applause)Thank you. (Members rose.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On this matter? No, this matter is not debatable. [Mr Kwizera: “Mr Speaker, can I proceed with national issues?”] Yes, proceed with national issues. The other matter is finished –(Interjections)- dictatorship of the chair. 

2.14
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, I wish to raise an issue of national concern where Lugogo Indoor Stadium was handed over to MTN exclusively implying that no other people can use it without the authorisation of MTN.

This is contrary to PPDA Act and what is surprising is that by the time this agreement was being entered into, the Manager, Corporate Affairs who is in charge of legal affairs in MTN was at the same time the Chairman of National Council of Sports. It has closed out all intending players in Lugogo Indoor Stadium and we would request that the matter either be responded to by Government or be investigated as to why some sections of Ugandans can be denied an opportunity to use a national asset. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do we have somebody from Government? Honourable members, we will be passing this particular concern to the minister responsible for Sports unless, of course, the Member has some responses. Thank you. We will be raising this with the ministers when they come.

2.16
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance relating to National Forestry Authority (NFA). Since the enactment of the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act in 2003, Zombo and Nebbi districts have been suffering some perpetual disturbance by the NFA. They disturb the local people in the areas where they have been located. They have chased people every year from the reserve where they agree that the local people can plant short term crops in a way of clearing the land to plant trees. Every other year, when the season comes - like now the rains have come and people are trying to plant - they chase them away. At the moment, the locals have been given an ultimatum of seven days to leave and yet they have a stake in that land.
 
My question to NFA is - and they have never planted trees there - these people clear land for them but they do not plant trees. The little land they have cleared and they plant a few acres, they do not protect the trees. Why do they disturb the locals who have gone there to settle for livelihood? Why aren’t they planting at the rate they have undertaken in other forests? Why aren’t they supporting the local communities with what would be termed as social corporate support such as schools and roads. They are not doing that but every other year, they are chasing people away from a well settled place. 
Thousands of people are going to be displaced. Zombo and other neighbouring districts are going to suffer shortage of food. Can I get these explanations from NFA or the ministry concerned? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Are you the Leader of Government Business?

2.18
THE MINISTER FOR SECURITY (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Mr Speaker, I would like to request that the relevant sector minister comes at an appropriate time to give an answer to these questions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we shall see how to address this to the minister concerned in that sector.

2.19
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The economy is not doing very well. At the moment, the exchange rate of the Uganda Shilling to the US dollar and other foreign currencies has caused the shilling to weaken further.
This has a very serious impact on the lives of ordinary Ugandans, the goods we consume in this country and the future of this country. Other economists have argued that this is good for the agricultural industry because our exports will have high returns. However, having done an analysis on the clothes our farmers use, the hoes and the seeds are imported, the value will be wiped out. 

With this trend - I have done a study of other economies within Sub-Saharan Africa, COMESA and I realised that among the challenges is that of our capital account, the foreign exchange policy is so weak and open that anybody can enter this country with any junk in form of goods and carry away money. That is vital and affects our economy. May I know from Government what short term, medium term and long term measures it intends to use to salvage the shilling and the economy from collapsing?

MR MURULI MUKASA: Mr Speaker, I would like once again to pray that the relevant Minister of Finance comes in to give a very conclusive answer to this question that has been raised by the honourable member.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us wait when the House has these ministers and then we can proceed.

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, we know that there is no coup in the country and we know that Cabinet met yesterday. We need a substantive response from the minister who is here as to why his colleagues are not here. Are they in Entebbe? Are they on lunch time? Can we wait for five minutes - because we cannot transact business without them?
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, where are your colleagues?

MR MURULI: Mr Speaker, Government business elsewhere is still going on in the various ministries. I would like to say that the ministers who are in the country are actually on the way coming here and within a short time, they will be here. (Members rose.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the ministers are not here. Let us wait; when they are here, then we make -

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, there is something we should put straight in this House. The President appoints ministers and ministers of state. Both of them cannot be in the same meeting; at least one minister should be in the ministry and another minister comes here. This should be the policy of Government. So, you cannot say that all ministers - some ministries have five ministers - (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, Government delayed the business of this Parliament by organising a retreat in Kyankwanzi; it took two weeks. Yet, the media and the same Government are criticising Parliament for not concluding Bills and it is closing business. We are now here to handle very serious business, the Executive is not represented. If we do not do work, MPs are criticised that Parliament is useless. 

We need your intervention as the fountain of honour and the head of the institution to protect us from this attack. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The fountain of honour is a constitutional phrase, which relates only to the President of the Republic of Uganda and no other person. (Laughter) 

Honourable Members, I will be making a statement in Prime Minister’s question time on Wednesday and seek the intervention of the Prime Minister so that the House cannot be delayed anymore. That will be proper time to raise this matter.

2.25
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, there was a rather an unfortunate situation on the Floor of this House, where I stood up to raise a matter about a petition of the residents of Kabeho, Boma in Ntusi Ssembabule District. It was unfortunate that the matter got out of hand when you had guided and some soberness would have prevailed but the matter was very hot. 

To that extent, I regret causing this discomfiture to you and indeed, to you my colleagues Members of Parliament. (Applause) It is not my usual way. I am always a peacemaker and not an extremist. Mr Speaker and honourable members, permit me to seek and kindly beg your indulgence. I sincerely apologise to you and the entire House.
With your guidance, we would have gone far to reach an amicable solution, which I am kindly - you know matters relating to the people are usually touchy, particularly for some of us who are here because of the people. It is that that was high on my mind but coupled with just the misreading of the guidance that you had given. 

Mr Speaker and Members, accept my sincere apologies. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The apology of the honourable member for Lwemiyaga is recorded and that should be the spirit. In life, we sometimes apologise for things we have not done. So, if you done something and you apologise, you become stronger. I am sure you feel stronger now that you have done so. (Applause)
BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE INDIGENOUS AND COMPLEMENTARY MEDICINE BILL, 2015

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister - next item.

LAYING OF PAPERS

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2014 TOGETHER 
WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Commissioner, before you do that, let me recognise - in the public gallery in this afternoon, we have teachers and pupils of Gems Cambridge International School located in Butabika, represented by hon. Fred Ruhindi. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

2.28
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative,Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on Table financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2014 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General as follows:

    i. Ministry Of Education and Sports – Universal Post Primary Education and Training (UPPET) Project
    ii. The Parliamentary Pension Scheme audited accounts for the year ended 30 June 2014
    iii. Ministry Of Health – Uganda Health Systems Strengthening Project (UHSSP)
    iv. Ministry of Water and Environment - Kampala Water Lake Victoria Water and Sanitation Project
    v. Ministry of Water and Environment - Bridging Support to Climate Change Initiative Project
    vi. Ministry of Health – Improvement of Health Services Delivery at Mulago Hospital and in the City of Kampala Project (MKCCAP)
    vii. Energy for Rural Transformation (ERT) Project - Bank of Uganda Component 
    viii. The Universal Post Primary Education Training (UPPET) Project – Inspectorate of Government 
    ix. Uganda National Council of Science and Technology – Transfer and Commercialisation of Low Cost Charcoal Manufacturing Technology for Entrepreneurs and Farmers in Uganda - Project UG – 0074 
    x. Uganda Energy Credit Capitalisation Company – Energy for Rural Transformation Project II (ERT II) – IDA CR. NO. 4554 – UG and GEF Trust Fund Grant Agreement No. TF: 9094484
    xi. Ministry Of Education and Sports – Austrian Partnership Programme in Higher Education and Research for Development (APPEAR) – Makerere University College of Natural Sciences 
    xii. Energy for Transformation Project II (ERT II) – Rural Electrification Agency
    xiii. Ministry of Water and Environment – Joint Water and Sanitation Sector Programme Support (JWSSPS) implemented by the Water and Sanitation Development Facility – South Western Branch (WSDF/SWB) Component 
    xiv. Ministry of Health – East African Public Health Laboratories Networking Project (EAPHLNP)
    xv. Ministry of Water and Environment – Joint Water and Sanitation Sector Programme Support (JWSSPS) implemented by the Water and Sanitation Development Facility – East (WSDF-E) Component. 
    xvi. Ministry of Water and Environment - Water Management and Development Project (WMDP).
    xvii. Ministry of Public Service – Uganda Public Service Reform Programme (PRSP) and Uganda Public Service Performance Enhancement Programme (UPSPEP) IDA Credit No. 4190.
    xviii. Ministry of Water and Environment - Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project Phase II, IDA Credit No. 4531 – UG
    xix. Ministry Of Education and Sports - Support to the Post Primary Education and Training (ADB IV) Project – ADB Loan No. 2100150018143. 
    xx. Support the Development of a Specialised Maternal and Unilateral Health Care Unit in Mulago, National Referral Hospital, Mulago III, project ID UG 0077-80. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable commissioner. Honourable Members, let the record capture the financial statements for the year ended 30th June 2014 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. It stands committed to the Committee on Public Accounts to handle within the frame work of the law and report to the House and guide us on how to proceed. The Clerk is directed to extract the minutes and forward to this committee. Thank you. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT APPRECIATING THE 
ROLE PLAYED BY GOVERNMENT IN ENACTING LEGISLATION WHICH 
PROTECTS THE RIGHTS AND DIGNITY OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES

THE SPEAKER: PWD, Eastern, hon. Asamo - Honourbale members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have students of Nkumba University, Wakiso District. They are represented by hon. Joseph Mutebi Balikuddembe and hon. Rosemary Seninde. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

2.35
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I move a motion for a resolution of Parliament appreciating the role played by Government in enacting legislation, which protects the rights and dignity of persons with disabilities. It is moved under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament (2012). The motion reads: 

“WHEREAS objective 21 of the national objectives and directives and principles of state policy enjoins the state and society to recognise the rights persons with disabilities to respect and human dignity;

WHEREAS objective six of the national objectives and directives, principles of state policy further enjoins the state to ensure gender balance and fair representation of marginalised groups;

AWARE that Uganda is a signatory to the United Nations Convention on the rights of persons with disabilities, which specifically enjoins Government to, among other things, protect and guarantee the rights of persons with disabilities;

FURTHER AWARE that, the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda Article 77 and 79 establishes a Parliament of Uganda with a mandate to make laws on any other matter for peace, order, development and good governance;

RECOGNISING the efforts to Government in mainstreaming disability issues as an integral part of relevant strategies of sustainable development and enacting legislation aimed at protecting and guaranteeing the rights and dignity of persons with disabilities;

APPRECIATING that Government has spearheaded and enacted various laws, which protect the rights and dignity of persons with disability, including electoral laws, employment laws, income tax laws, which have all played a part in enhancing the lives of persons with disabilities and resulted to increased contribution by persons with disabilities to the economic growth of Uganda;

NOTING with appreciation that the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the Parliamentary Elections Statute as well as the Local Government Act, Cap 243 have been selected by the Zero Project, selection committee of renown disability and accessibility experts has been outstanding in the world all over, for ensuring that elected political bodies at all levels reserve a minimum of seats for persons with disabilities;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows; 
1. That this House appreciates the role played by Government in championing legislation that protects the rights and dignity of persons with disability.
2. That Parliament expedites the process of passing the Persons with Disabilities (Amendment) Bill, 2014 which is currently before the committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development.” 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? (Members rose.) It is seconded by Adjumani, Ndorwa, Bufumbira, Busiki, Kigulu, Pader and the whole House. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MS ASAMO: Mr Speaker, the Zero Project is an organisation based in Vienna, Austria, which it carries out assessment on the laws, policies and practises that promote the potential and participation of people with disabilities. Majorly, they look at the UN Convention that promotes the rights and dignity of persons with disability. 

On 27 February 2015, I was lucky to be one of the Ugandans supported by this Parliament to travel to Vienna to receive a certificate and that certificate was given to Uganda in support of promoting the laws that bring political participation of people with disabilities right from the village to the national and into other councils and boards.

The numbers of people with disabilities are 47,000 politicians; this is the number that is very big all over the world. I think this number should not be taken for granted; this is a very big number even in the House you may not believe it but you just need to look at the research and then you will see.

Mr Speaker, people with disabilities compose 15 per cent of the population of Uganda according to the demographic and household survey, 2011. Their number must have risen due to accidents on the roads - this Parliament has always talked about accidents caused by “boda-bodas” and vehicles. We have diseases like nodding disease, HIV/AIDS, to mention but a few and drug abuse inclusive that could have increased the number of disabled people in Uganda.

I do not support the notion that says disabled people have reduced; they have increased and of course, all of us, are candidates to this. We note that even domestic violence in families is causing disability. 

In Uganda, because of the enacted laws that have enabled PWDs to participant in politics of this country through affirmative action, this participation has brought the potential of disabled people out right from our villages and to all levels of sectors.

This big number of politicians with disabilities in the whole world is the reason Uganda was awarded a certificate of innovative policies and laws that have enabled a positive participation of persons with disabilities. In that conference, we were 170 countries. In Africa we are only two; Uganda and South Africa. I think this was a good credit to this Parliament and to the Government of Uganda.

Countries like Ghana, South Africa, Kenya, Rwanda, Zimbabwe and Zambia have come here to learn about these laws and they have implemented them more than us. We make the laws and others implement them better because when South Africa presented, we saw that they were in a better position.

Mr Speaker, I would like to recognise the districts, which have identified the potential of persons with disabilities in this political arena; the speakers of Amuria, Busia and Kayunga are people with disabilities and in Kayunga, we have a blind speaker who has been there and he is still there since he was elected into that position.

We also have people who have been in local government like in Kole where the vice-chairperson is a person with disability and I know that before Bugiri went for by-elections, we also had a person with disability as a vice-chairperson and they have performed well. Others are sectoral committee members like in Tororo, Bududa and Sheema. 

I would like to appreciate the Parliament for not only making the laws but walking the talk for ensuring that the environment of Parliament is conducive for the participation of leaders of persons with disabilities. To mention but a few support to our aides; we appreciate the washrooms that are user-friendly, the parking lots that are specific for persons with disabilities. Sometimes some Members ask why ours are wider. The reasons are very clear and the leadership of Parliament needs to be commended.

There is provision of talking lifts, especially in the North Wing where you even have brailles on the lifts. I think this is very critical for this Parliament to take the lead. I hope other ministries, departments and agencies can borrow from Parliament. 

This morning, I was going to Public Service, I had to sweat to go there on the steps, which were very stiff. Maybe the others will borrow from Parliament because those are public offices and the Constitution says anybody serving the public should be able to put in accessibility for people with disabilities.

Mr Speaker, we have also been appointed as leaders of committees without any kind of discrimination in this Parliament. So, we really appreciate this support. 

I also want to say that the political space has also opened space for some of our friends and I want to mention here hon. Baba Diri and Ababiku who have competed with other women. I think this is a good move because they have not been left in the circles of only disabled people. These are capable women, they are women first and I think they are doing a very great job wherever they are. We pay tribute to Government for opening space and the public out there for identifying our potential.

However, Mr Speaker, implementation of some of the laws that favour people with disabilities is still a nightmare to the people who are supposed to deliver services to PWDs.

There are still stereotypes of looking at PWDs as disabled rather than their potential. There are still elements of negative attitude among the population that believe that PWDs are disabled. When I say disabled, it means you look at me as something, which cannot do anything but when we say PWDs, it means you look at me as a person first and then with the disability. Just as I would say, “The Speaker with a wig” to identify his position as the Speaker, then I look at the wig. You do not start by looking at the wig and imagine that anybody with a wig is a Speaker.

I would like to say that it is time that this attitude changed so that the potential of 15 per cent of Ugandans are put to beneficial use rather than keeping them redundant. In the long run, the country will benefit from this of population.

Mr Speaker, there are no disabilities where the environment is conducive. We only have impairment. A conducive environment for persons with disabilities is conducive for others. For example, the ramp and lifts in Parliament are used by all Members of Parliament and some people even prefer our washrooms and parking area. We need to make the environment positive so that all of us will enjoy these facilities. 

I would like to add and say that the Bill before the Committee on Gender be handled in a way that it promotes the human rights and dignity of persons with disability. In its current state, it has taken us back to the medical model where disability was seen as a sickness. We are not sick and we are able. I was born with my disability and I will die with it – I do not need a medical doctor to do the assessment. When the time comes, I humbly request for this support. Mr Speaker, the wearer of the shoe knows where it pinches most.

In conclusion, I thank you for giving me this opportunity to move this motion. The struggle continues and disability is not inability. Nothing for us without us! I thank you. (Applause)

I would like to lay on Table the certificate that was given to Uganda - Innovative Policies 2015. 

“The Zero Project is proud to certify that the Ugandan Constitution, Parliamentary Election Statute and Local Government Act was selected as one of the 50 Innovative Practices and Policies by the Zero Project Selection Committee of renown disability and accessibility experts exemplary in the areas of motivation, outcome and impact and transferring Uganda’s Constitution, Parliamentary Election Statute and Local Government Act are outstanding of ensuring that elected political bodies at all levels must reserve a minimum number for persons with disabilities.” I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the certificate.

MS ASAMO: I would also like to lay a report of all the 50 organisations that were assessed; some of them were on independent living, political participation, Zero Project Report 2015. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records also capture that copy of the report of the Zero Project. Honourable members, disability is actually not inability. 

On this particular motion, we had agreed that it would specifically be to introduce the certificate but you can see how smart the Member has been to bring in broader issues that captures the entire subject and has widened the debate. Otherwise, it was supposed to be for receiving that certificate and report, which we have now received. Can the seconder speak to this motion?

2.51
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Asamo for bringing this motion to Parliament. As she said, we are all potential candidates of being disabled.

It is long overdue for this Bill to come on the Floor of Parliament and my focus is particularly on the pupils and students with special needs.

The Committee on Equal Opportunities recently visited the western part of Uganda and went to one of the schools in my constituency called Ishekye Primary School for the Disabled and found many issues on the ground that the Ministry of Education and Sports needs to pay attention to. Without having persons with disability educated, I do not think we would have had the applauded members that have been mentioned on the Floor of Parliament. 

When pupils at Ishekye Primary School pass their P.L.E, they are seconded to other secondary schools. It was, however, unfortunate that in one of the schools where a child with disability performed very well - he is being handled by a primary teacher – he is blind - but when they go to secondary school, the person who studied the primary curriculum goes to teach in a secondary school. I think Government should support and ensure that persons with disability are supported at all levels.  

As hon. Asamo mentioned the facilities we have at Parliament, I applauded it. However, there is a lot to be desired especially in other facilities upcountry and in other sectors. Orthopaedic facilities are very expensive and for some of us who interact with persons with disabilities know that they find it very difficult to buy those facilities because they are expensive and yet they are very poor and are not supported economically. When you look at these programmes that are supposed to empower people like Operation Create Wealth, they do not consider persons with disabilities – (Interjections) - no, not their land being grabbed - but they do not consider them to be as part and parcel of such programmes.

Therefore, there is need for a deliberate move that whatever programme is being implemented by Government, persons with disability should be catered for and the affirmative action, as we have appreciated it in Uganda, should cut across such that such people are supported. 

Mr Speaker, brailles are expensive and yet, we have many pupils and students who are blind. There should be a deliberate move to ensure that they are subsidised such that parents – parents do not even support them; there is still stereotyping and bias of saying that the children are disabled and they do not see the need of investing a lot of money in such facilities to support them. 

Therefore, Government should subsidise on brailles and orthopaedic facilities to ensure that our pupils, especially those who need to study, are supported and they become very important people like hon. Hellen Asamo, hon. Ababiku and others in our lower local governments. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The motion is that I propose for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament to appreciate the role played by Government in enacting legislation, which protects the rights and dignity of persons with disabilities. Debate starts now and each member will take two minutes because this is a fairy straight subject.

2.56
MS CD OKETAYOT LOWILA (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Mr Speaker, I rise to support the motion and also would like to thank hon. Asamo for moving it.

It is worth appreciating the effort of Government for all the enactment of laws and programmes that are in place to protect the dignity of the persons with disabilities in the country.

However, as we appreciate the efforts of Government, I would like to appeal and urge Government to urgently consider the issue of the education of children with disabilities. Just like my sister, hon.  Nyakikongoro was raising, I think this is an area of great concern.

Recently, I was faced with a situation of a boy who completed primary seven but with a hearing impairment. The entire Northern Uganda has no school that can support the education such children. I had to bring him to Wakiso Secondary School of the deaf; he is in senior two now. The boy had become wild; he almost strangled the mother because he cannot speak or hear yet he wanted to study. So, I appeal and urge Government to consider at least having one school that can accommodate such children -(Member timed out.)

2.58
MS MARGARET BABADIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Hellen Asamo, for moving this motion. Indeed, people with disability have achieved a lot. We must thank our Government because the National Union of Disabled Persons of Uganda has brought together all people with disability to speak with one voice and advocate for their rights. This union was formed in 1987 and the NRM Government came to power in 1986. So, we cannot separate the disability movement from the NRM Government. 

I would like to thank Government very much for providing all the necessary conditions such as security and freedom, which has enabled people with disability to express themselves.

Mr Speaker, I would like to talk about the National Union of the Disabled Persons in Uganda having branches in different parts of Uganda. This representation in all local governments and Central government did not come on a silver plate; it was the effort of people with disability under this union that advocated for these rights. 

I would like to thank our founders of National Union of the Disabled Persons in Uganda and the first Member of Parliament  with disability who came to Parliament in 1996, the late hon. Kassim Azima, for his tireless work when he was a Member of the Constituent Assembly. May his soul rest in peace.

It is this provision in the Constitution that has really made people with disability what we are. But may I also thank the Parliament of Uganda – when we first came to Parliament of Uganda, we met the Speaker then, the late Rt Hon. James Wapakhabulo to whom we said that, “Please, we are here; we have shortcomings with our disability; please can you do for us -(Member timed out.)

3.01
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to thank my colleagues for this motion. However, I want to say that there are other Members of Parliament in this House who are also our members but accepting disability is dependent on one’s choice. 

Therefore, I request Members of Parliament with disability to join our caucus -(Laughter)- so that we continue advocating for the rights of people with disability. Your presence in our caucus will add to our voice in advocating for the rights of persons with disability.
Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the existence of the laws to protect our rights and dignity has increased on our hope and empowered us to advocate for accountability and to regain the humanity that God gave us. I thank Government for that.

We have key challenges in the implementation of these laws. One is on the issue of accessibility. We normally queue for services, but when I did my research, people were limiting our accessibility to entry. After putting the ramp, they don’t give us space and so we are forced to queue with others. I think that should be considered if we are to enjoy accessibility to buildings in totality -(Member timed out.)

3.03
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank hon. Hellen Asamo, for moving this motion. As a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee, I really feel the onus is on all of us to offer equal opportunities to all the citizens of this country.

Mr Speaker, when you look at the distribution of schools for special needs in the country, you realise it is not evenly done. To that end, I urge the Ministry of education and Sports to ensure that at least each region gets a school for special needs, which is fully furnished. It is not enough to have a school and just leave it at that. 

When we visited the schools for the special needs children, we realised there is a lot to be desired. The facilities are not in place. There is completely almost nothing in place in most of the schools  and yet the equipment that these children with special needs would require to have adequate knowledge and be acquainted with what takes place in a normal school, is very expensive. 

I know that the Minister of Education and Sports is not here, but Mr Speaker, I request that my voice reaches out to that minister to make special budget requirements to accommodate the needs of the children with special needs in this country. 

The children with special needs who grow up to able Ugandans should be fully equipped with vocational skills.  All of you will agree with me, out of experience, I have had the benefit of using some of the equipment made by people with disability. If a lame person happens to make for you something, they turn out to be so exceptional. They may not have the ability to have all the force but God gave them that special talent. What they make is usually done to the best of their ability. So, if Government -(Member timed out.)

3.06
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (NRM, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to join colleagues in thanking hon. Asamo for moving this motion. 

I want to congratulate the Government of Uganda and Parliament for the certificates that we have received; we have done well; we need to congratulate ourselves. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, as a country we have done so well in putting both the policies and laws in place; our only weaknesses relate to their implementation. As a professional teacher - I was teaching in a primary school that was just next to an attachment where these learners with disabilities were being raised – I know while these children have schools, the issue of equipment is still the major problem. That is the issue the country should address. 

We realise those who have actually got the opportunities to continue with their education have achieved, which gives hope to those others who are still in our families.

Mr Speaker, what the Government has done, in giving these people opportunities to lead, manage offices and employment in general, was actually the best way to move on this issue of disability. It is the one that has encouraged the parents who used to hide children with disabilities to come out. I think that is so good.

Mr Speaker, I sit on the Committee on Education, as we went about our oversight duties, we realised that accessibility to buildings is still a problem in most of these schools. We passed a law here that lays down the conditions for anybody intending to carry out construction of a building as far as accessibility by people with disability is concerned. We must consider accessibility -(Member timed out.)

3.08
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Aleptong):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. In supporting this motion, I would like to say that the heroes of the persons with disabilities in Uganda are the great men and women who sat in this same Parliament, around 1994/1995 and participated in the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution. I say this because these gentlemen and ladies, first of all recognised under Chapter Four – the protection of fundamental rights and freedoms of all categories of Ugandans- is the longest chapter in our Constitution. They specifically create Article 35 to deal with the rights of persons with disabilities. Sub article (1) of this Article Specifically states thus: “Persons with disabilities have a right to respect and human dignity, and the State and society shall take appropriate measures to ensure that they realise their full mental and physical potential.”

That is the reason in Uganda at every level of decision making you have persons with disabilities represented. We must also not forget to salute the Head of Government in 1995, H.E, Gen. Y.K Museveni, who spearheaded the NRM/NRA revolution, for also recognising the contribution and the role that can be played by persons with disabilities in society.

On this note, I support the motion and I would like to urge all persons with disabilities wherever they are in Uganda -(Member timed out.)

3.10
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion for this wonderful presentation. 

However, I would like to make the following observations: The People with disabilities have had a challenge in regard to employment opportunities. For example, I have a young man whose graduation I attended in some sub-county in my village. Since then, this disabled person has kept on saying that wherever he goes to get a job, it cannot be given to him because he is blind yet he graduated with a degree in counselling. This is quite a big challenge. It has demotivated many people with disabilities; they have struggled to study but cannot get jobs.

 We also have a challenge of mothers. At the time of giving birth in the hospitals, disabled mothers find it a challenge to get onto hospital beds because they are quite high from the ground. My appeal is that special beds be procured into these hospitals for such mothers to enable them give birth comfortably and/or give birth like other mothers. However, I would like to commend the good job that Government is doing to see that people with disabilities are recognised and helped in different aspects. Thank you very much.

3.12
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to thank our colleague who presented this motion. However, I would like to highlight that as much as Government has put laws in place, the extent of implementation is still limited because if it were universal, the minister for the disabled would be from those colleagues. 

Therefore, I want to say that I intend to move a motion to amend this motion to say that the ministry, which is a preserve of people with disabilities; they should be there. (Applause) That is my suggestion.  Therefore, although we appreciate, there are still some limitations which I would call upon the Government to consider revising.

Another issue is, since we are providing for the Youth Livelihood Fund and the Women Livelihood Fund now, can’t we also provide for the funds for the disabled persons?  But I also still wonder whether Government of Uganda has the statistics on how many disabled people we have in this country? Isn’t it the responsibility of Government to ascertain that? Government should do that because in some cases they have become a burden to the communities or families where they come from yet they can be trained to acquire specialized skills to contribute to employment opportunities. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to say - I have travelled to different parts of the world - but it is only in this country where you find some disabled people on the streets and government doesnot care. Why can’t Government pick up those people – because they are actually not able to care for themselves – and put them somewhere and look after them, instead of paying money to the elderly? For example, you might find that the Vice-President’s parents, if they are still alive, are being paid. (Laughter)

3.14
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have been sitting here listening very attentively and have noticed that we have a procedural issue. We are advised by our Rules of Procedure to use a language that is very parliamentary and good. In as far as I am concerned there are no disabled people but people with disabilities. Isn’t it possible to re-organise this whole House to begin referring to this category of human beings as people with disabilities? It can be in the leg, finger or eye. There is no disabled person as a mingled-up person that cannot be recognised. That is the procedural concern I would like to raise.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, those of you who have been reversing the order of this phrase, please take note. It is “people with disabilities” not any other way.

MR MAGANDA: I would like to thank hon. Helen Asamo, moving this motion. But I also would like to appreciate the members who spoke in support this motion. However, I only would like to bring to the House that the issue of people with disabilities is something that we should all engage in to sensitise the masses to appreciate. We have very many people with disabilities from our constituencies; but sometimes you wonder whether Government is aware of the existence of these people. This is because sometimes you would realise that the whole mandate of supporting people with disabilities still comes back to a Member of Parliament as a person but not as Government. In Busia, I have 290 people with disabilities – unable to walk; they are crippled. But getting finances to provide tri-cycles and wheelchairs for these people; there is completely nowhere you can find a budget, even within the districts that can buy even one wheelchair for these people. We have problems on how to move on with these people and we may resort to getting into our pockets to provide for them as part of our voters. 

Mr Speaker, I sit on the Committee of Education. One time, I got the chance to visit Gulu, where we have a school for the disabled children. We have got very bright but blind students there who have no facilities to help them get the required education knowledge. Yes, we have facilities in terms of institutions, but where are the equipment? These are some of the things we should be talking about as we ponder on how to help our brothers and sisters living with this problem.

3.18
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. However, I want to make an observation that of the 16 per cent of the people with disabilities talked about here, more than 4.5 million people need orthopaedic services. 

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, you will agree with me that even Government does not treat this matter seriously despite it being pertinent. When you go to the Department of Orthopaedic Services at Mulago National Referral Hospital, you realise it is treated under Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, instead of it being under the Ministry of Health. 

The other time, Mr Speaker, when we were passing the budget, I remember saying that we were passing a budget with no provision for the people with disabilities.

Mr Speaker, I want to invite this House to make it a point in our next budget cycle to consider this as an area where we should task Government to come with a comprehensive plan on how to deal with the issues of people with disabilities.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I have not seen any law, which addresses intellectual disability. We have addressed very many kinds of disabilities, but intellectual disability has not been given a lot of attention yet when you look at our education system - Government has been posing of having enrolment of 2.5 million people yet when it comes to completion of P7, we have 500,000 and only 100,000 at senior six. This means that from the time UPE was introduced we have lost 16 million people due to the intellectual disability I am talking about.  We want to see Government come up with a policy to address intellectual disability because it also affects the human resource development in the country. 

3.20
MRS LILY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join the House in thanking hon. Helen Asamo, for moving this motion to appreciate Government for what it has so far done, in legislation and other programmes for persons with disabilities in this country.

Mr Speaker, my concern mainly goes to the community. Government is doing a lot, but there are others that are supposed to do, particularly on the women with disabilities. When you go to the villages - and I particularly sound a warning to men who take advantage of these disabled women - most of them are women with disabilities. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker and honourable members, you will bear witness with me colleagues – and I am speaking with a lot of pain because I see it - that men take advantage of these women. They even produce children with them but don’t take own their responsibilities. 

Sometimes last year, I read a story about a woman in Buliisa - I shed tears. The woman is dumb and deaf but there was this man who has produced children with her. The woman could not ably describe this man because she was dump and she has six children with him. But can you imagine these are normal men but cannot be identified with the children? Therefore, I urge Government and this House to come up with some legislation to help the women with disabilities -(Member timed out.)

3.22
MRS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to follow on what my sister has just advanced. I call this the group of extreme disabilities. They include women who cannot walk and those who have missed education. How do we help them? I know the government gives some little money, but which is inadequate. This money does not reach the deprived persons with disability. 

I would like to appeal to the local governments that receive this money - can we redefine the way we support the persons with disabilities and begin to give specific support to the kind of people who cannot walk and talk and may have missed school? 

I have come across some of these women – there is a girl of age 27 years who has never walked in her life. She eats, menstruates and eases herself in bed. She has no one to help her. It is even becoming increasingly difficult for the families of such people to support them. What social support programme can we give for these specifically and extreme persons with disabilities? 

I would like to request Government to redefine what type of support - not just persons with disabilities – can be given to specific persons with extreme disability conditions. I can see the elderly being paid some money by Government - how can we support this category of people?

MRS NYAKECHO: Thank you, my sister for giving me the chance to give the information. Mr Speaker and colleagues, the information I want to share with this august is in regard to my journey yesterday. As we cerebrated Women’s Day in in Otuke yesterday one of the councillors representing people with disabilities at the district made some specific call, which was in regards to what my sister is raising now. 

He said that time and again, women with disabilities especially the lame, those who crawl get impregnated but when they cannot point at the men responsible for those pregnancies.  And if they try to do so, all the men will scatter for their dear lives. No man will stand up to own such a pregnancy. That is still a challenge because on the other hand there are a number of disabled men who get married to very able women normally and without any challenges

Therefore, the information I would like to give to this House is that women with disabilities need to be given special attention. We need to accord them that special attention and empower them economically.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MRS KWIYUCWINY: Mr Speaker, my point is that we have to identify those critically and extreme persons with disabilities and support them individually instead of grouping them as women, youth or PWDs. In this case of funding or any other support, categorise them as -(Member timed out.)

3.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mr Sulaiman Madada): Mr Speaker, I want to thank hon. Helen Asamo for moving this motion. I also would like to thank my colleagues for the support they have given to the disability fraternity. I cannot respond to all issues raised, but I will specifically say that beyond legislation and policies Government has put in place a number of measures and programmes to address issues of persons with disabilities.

You are aware that after the 1995 Constitution, under Article 32 which addresses affirmative action and Article 35, we have a National Council for Disability Act that has put in place a council to monitor the implementation of programmes of persons with disabilities. There is also a policy on persons with disabilities to guide the planning, monitoring and implementation of programmes with sensitivity to persons with disabilities. 

Beyond this, we have talked about employment. I want to assure you that employment challenges, although everywhere –(Interjections)- under the Income Tax (Amended) Act, 2010, Government has provided for an incentive for those companies that employ persons with disability. This idea is to encourage the private sector and other sectors that are co-employing people to ensure persons with disabilities are employed.

It is clearly stated that if any company has 5 per cent of its employees as persons with disabilities, it will have a tax waver of 2 per cent. The idea is to encourage those private companies and other employers to employ persons with disabilities.

I am happy to note that some of the organisations like Standard Chartered Bank are currently employing persons with disability –(Interruption)

MR YAGUMA: Honourable minister, you are talking about incentives to encourage organisations to employ people with disabilities and I am sure you have been in this docket for some time. Can you tell us, in terms of statistics, how many have been employed as a result of these incentives? Thank you.

MR MADADA: I was mentioning one of the organisations - Standard Chartered Bank. I will come back to this House to give you valid information in regard to the statistics you are asking for. 

In terms of encouraging employment as well, we noted that the majority of persons with disabilities had not gone to school. That is why in the budget of 2009/10 Government introduced a special grant for persons with disability –(Interruption)

MR YAGUMA: When I asked for statistics, the honourable minister just told us that Standard Chartered Bank will come to this House. I wonder under what rules will this happen?  Is the minister, therefore, in order to say that Standard Chartered Bank will come to this House and tell us the statistics? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know if I heard properly, but I did not hear any statement that Standard Chartered Bank will come to this House. Did you say that the Standard Chartered Bank will come to this House? 

MR MADADA: No, Please. I am here to respect what I said. I said there are companies that are already employing persons with disabilities using this incentive. I gave an example of Standard Chartered Bank. 

I also said that I did not come with the statistics the honourable was asking for but I promised to come to this House with detailed statistics. This is what I said. I would like to continue the –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Sulaiman Madada, I would like to seek clarification from you on whether you are aware that this tax-rebut was repealed by this Parliament about two years ago. 

It is no longer in existence because companies were using it to evade taxes. They would employ persons with disabilities as messengers, receptionists but submit returns showing they were cooperation secretaries, accountants, and so forth. This House took a decision that it be repealed and a new policy initiative was adopted. Are you aware of the reform? 

MR MADADA: I am quite aware, and I want to give you correct position on this matter. On the Persons Disability Act, 2006, it had provided that any company that employs more than 10 persons with disabilities will be given a tax waver.  Having realised that companies would employ sweepers and claim that they are 10 employees, we repealed the law to to say, it should be 5 per cent of the total employees. 

In terms of areas of employment, the issue of a special grant was created in 2009/10 starting with Shs 1.5 billion. Currently we have come to Shs 3 billion in the budget, and this money goes to districts as special grants for persons with disabilities.  Out of this grant many people are generating employment for persons with disabilities. Our appeal is that we increase this funding but the fund is already in existence. 

In terms of the orthopaedic department, it is not correct that it is under the Ministry of Gender and Culture. It is under the Ministry of Health. In addition to these efforts, we have put in place what we call CBR - the Community Based Rehabilitation.  Under Community Based Rehabilitation, we get programs at the grassroots level where we encourage participation, social, and political inclusion of persons with disabilities. Busia District is one of the beneficiaries of this programme. 

I would like to let you know that currently we have a Bill before this Parliament in which Government is proposing an amendment of the Persons with Disability Act to address challenges of women who cannot easily access hospital beds. When it comes to this House - that provision has been included.

I would like to thank you for supporting the disability fraternity and to assure you that being a Minister of State for Disability and the Elderly, you do not need to have a disability. I combine both the older persons and persons with disability. You have to look for an older person but also with a disability, which may not be possible. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister and the hon. Helen Asamo, for moving this motion. I also thank the honourable members for the debate and support you have given to this motion. We truly received this certificate from that group that has recognised the contribution of Uganda. 

Honourable members, I now put the question to the motion for a Resolution of Parliament to appreciate the role played by Government in enacting legislation, which protects the rights and dignity of persons with disabilities. 
(Question put, and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE INDIGENOUS AND COMPLEMENTARY MEDICINE BILL, 2015

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY HEALTH CARE (Mrs Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Indigenous and Complementary Medicine Bill, 2015” be read for the first time. 

I beg to lay it on Table together with a certificate of financial implications, in accordance with Rule 107 of our Rules of Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This motion does not require secondment, but I see the State Minister for Finance, planning, and Economic Development rising to second it. I also see the State Minister for Energy and Minerals standing to second it as well as the member for Mbarara Municipality. 
Honourable members, this Bill is received and is accordingly committed to the Committee on Health to handle expeditiously within the rules, report to the House, and guide us on what to do with it. 

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: I am rising on a point of procedure. Rule 101 of our Rules of Procedure clearly states that Members must be in the House during sitting. If they are not going to be there, they should seek permission from the Speaker. Remember that this subject which we have just dealt with now and disposed of was supposed to have been dealt with a couple of minutes ago but the minister was not in the House. There was only one lonely minister on the Frontbench. 

I would like to know whether the Minister of Health, who has just read this Bill for the first time, had given you prior notice that she was going to be absent from the House when she knew very well that this issue was on the Order Paper. I am raising this because this House must perform and we must be seen to perform. We are not going to take the House backwards because some people do not want to come and attend to business of this nation yet they are being paid. 

Therefore, I would like to know whether this minister sought permission from you to be absent at the time when you called this particular subject. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member. The general aspect of that issue is very well received. Honourable ministers and Your Excellency, the Vice president, it is becoming a problem to this House that the House starts at 2.00 p.m. and the frontbench is empty. We begin handling business when there is no body in the frontbench. It is matter of great concern and I was preparing to make a proper complaint when the Prime Minister is sitting at Prime Minister’s question time. 

At the Prime Minister’s question time, all the ministers are here. As soon as the Prime Minister finishes, they all leave. This House is supposed to be facilitated properly by the presence of the ministers who can interact with the Members who have issues coming from the constituencies. (Applause) It is becoming an issue of big concern to the House and to the Speaker that this matter goes on like this. It is not fair. 

In respect of this particular issue on the Bill, indeed the honourable minister notified the Speaker that she had not been able to obtain the certificate of financial implication. The copy that had been delivered to the office had been misplaced somehow so she was looking for another copy. Therefore, she noticed the Speaker. 

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FISHERIES (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal for having raised this important issue. I am standing up to sincerely apologise to the Speaker and the House that probably, we are not whipping enough. I understand that the period we are in, as Members of Parliament, is not an easy one; it is quite volatile. However, I undertake to do much more and put all my energy into whipping and reminding colleagues to be in the House beginning from colleagues in Cabinet and then the entire House. I apologise on behalf of everybody.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO US $ 482,578,142.32 FROM THE EXPORT–IMPORT BANK OF CHINA TO FINANCE THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE 183 MW ISIMBA HYDROPOWER PROJECT AND THE ISIMBA–BUJAGALI INTERCONNECTION PROJECT

3.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INVESTMENT (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament on the proposal by Government to borrow up to $ 482,578,142.32 from the Export–Import Bank of China to finance the construction of the 183MW Isimba Hydro Power Project and also the Isimba–Bujagali Interconnection Project. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Minister of Energy and the Government Chief Whip. Do you want to second your own motion? Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR AJEDRA: Mr Speaker, as you are aware, the National Development Plan (NDP) 2010-2015 identifies the construction of large hydro power projects through public-private partnerships as one of the strategic interventions to unlock the most binding constraints in the economic growth and development of Uganda. NDP also sets power sector development targets of annual per capita consumption increasing from 75Kwhs/capita 674kWh/capita. 

This target requires an additional generation of about 3500MW to Uganda’s existing national grid. With the Bujagali Higher Hydro Power Projects (BHPP) now in operation, the national grid has a capacity of 850MW. The projects, which are enlisted under NDP, which had undergone feasibility studies and yet to start construction included: Karuma 600MW and Isimba 183MW, which were selected for immediate development to be followed by Ayago, which is 600MW and others. A feasibility study for Ayago Hydro Power Plant has been completed and the feasibility studies are on-going.

The key areas of Government’s focus include:

Generation 

This is after the completion of the 250MW of Bujagali Hydro Power Project. This is planned to be augmented with investments and projects such as Karuma, which, as you know, is under construction; Isimba Hydro Power Project, which is also under construction; Ayago Electric Power Project for which studies are ongoing.

Transmission Distribution

This involves rehabilitation and upgrade of the transmission systems plus the strengthening of the distribution network.

Rural electrification and renewable energy development As you know, Government has embarked on the Rural Electrification Program with donor support in energy for rural transformation to reach all district headquarters and community centres.

Rural Interconnection 

This involves interconnecting our neighbouring countries to the common East African Power Pool like the Nile surf. 

Karuma and Isimbe Hydro Projects were identified as national core projects for developments during the development plan. In addition, the associated transmission license subscriptions are critical to the evacuation of power from these hydro plants and the efficient delivery of power to the ultimate users of electricity. Work is currently on-going to develop the next generation projects, complete and upgrade the transmission lines, improve the links with export markets and continue to extend services to rural areas.

Presently, development is proceeding on many fronts with funding from both private sector and other bi-lateral and multi-lateral financial institutions, which has seen the completion of Bujagali plant and the start-up of the two major hydro power plants, Isimba and Karuma.

Government is also pursuing the development of mini hydro systems through the private sector in the transmission and expansion. In addition, strengthening of the national grid to successfully evacuate the incremental energy and distribute it throughout the country is also on-going.

On the distribution side, support is being extended to power consumers and a strategy to accelerate access to electricity, which is necessary to develop and absorb additional generation, this is being implemented.

Given that there is need to ensure the development of transmission and distribution exercises do not out pave the development of the national capacity and vice versa, the government is regularly reviewing and updating its master plans for generation and transmission of rural electrification to adapt to on-going changes such as the power demands associated with oil discovery.

Government has also been working with development partners including IDA, African Development Bank, Islamic Development Bank, the Export-Import Bank of China, AFD of France, KFW of Germany, JICA and the government of Norway plus Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa and the Saudi Fund for Development in order to develop and implement the above sector strategy and ensure development of each component of the sector that is being undertaken.

Development in the Electricity Sector 

Uganda has had rapid growth in its energy demands even during the period when the country experienced electricity supply shortages between 2005 and 2011. A key factor that led to the crisis in the energy sector was the delay in the commencement of the construction of the 250MW Bujagali Hydro Power Plant in 2003. Consequently, Government had to subsidise more expensive power from thermal power plants, which was estimated at about Shs 1.8 trillion. Government sceptics were only mitigated by the commissioning of Bujagali Hydro Power Plant in 2011. 

Faced with the recent electricity crisis, Government undertook to construct Karuma and Isimba Hydro Power Plants to mitigate future energy supply shortages. Both projects were designed to be publically funded in order to ensure the expeditious completion at affordable tariffs. Following delays in the procurement of the contractors for the Hydro Power Plant at Karuma and the associated transmission lines at Waligo, discussions with the friendly government of the Peoples’ Republic of China enabled the securing of funds for both projects under preferential and quasi-commercial terms. In addition - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to move the House?

MR AJEDRA: Mr Speaker, I beg to move the motion that the House considers the report to borrow up to $ 482,578,142.32 from the Export–Import Bank of China to finance the construction of the 183MW Isimba Hydro Power Plant and the Isimba–Bujagali Interconnection Project. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, you will recall that this particular proposal was presented in the House on 8 October last year and we referred it to the Committee on National Economy. I am now advised that the committee is ready to report on this particular proposal.

3.50 
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Xavier Kyooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker for the opportunity to present a committee report. This is the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow $ 482,578,142.32 from the Export–Import Bank of China to finance the construction of the 183MW Isimba Hydro Power Project and the Isimba–Bujagali Interconnection Project. Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay on Table the original report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay on Table the brief to Parliament by the minister, including the resolution.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Were those documents already laid by the minister in which case you do not have to lay them again? At the time of presenting the request, those two documents were already laid. 

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker, the brief was laid but these others were given to the committee. Thank you. I beg to lay on Table the bidding document for the procurement of the plant design, supply and installation for Isimba Hydro Power Project and Bujagali Inter-connection Project.

I would like to lay on Table the associated projects for the master plan study and the associated feasibility study report for the same project.

I would also like to lay the commercial contract together with addendum I and addendum II. I beg to lay on Table the minutes of the committee on the same loan request.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture all those documents relating to this proposal.

MR KYOOMA: May I therefore, with your permission, proceed to present the committee report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, the Committee on National Economy considered the request by Government to borrow $ 482,578,142.32 from the Export–Import Bank of China to finance the construction of the 183MW Isimba Hydropower Project and the Isimba–Bujagali Interconnection Line Project in accordance with Rule 166 (2)(b) of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure. 

The request was presented to this august House by the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 8 October, 2014 and accordingly referred to the committee for consideration. Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, we have considered and scrutinised the request and we now beg to report.

As part of methodology, the committee held meetings with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, the Uganda Electricity Generation Company Ltd, the Uganda Electricity Transmission Company, the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Authority, the Office of the Solicitor-General and the National Planning Authority.

In addition, the committee studied and made reference to the following documents: the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development brief to Parliament on the loan request, the feasibility study report for the development of Isimba Hydro Power Plant and Isimba-Bujagali Interconnection Project, the commercial contract for the engineering, procurement and the construction of the 183MW Isimba Hydro Power Project and the Isimba-Bujagali Interconnection Project, minutes of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development Contracts Committee meeting on consideration of the EPC contractor for the construction of the 183MW Isimba Hydro Power Plant and Isimba- Bujagali Interconnection Line, the draft financing agreement between the Republic of Uganda and the EXIM Bank of China, the memorandum of understanding between Government of Uganda and China International Water and Electric Corporation for construction of Isimba dam and Isimba-Bujagali Interconnection electric power line.

The committee also undertook a field and inspection visit to the proposed implementation site of the project in Kayunga District.

Background

Over the last 15 years, many Sub-Saharan African countries have made progress in improving their infrastructure but results have been mixed across sectors and country groups. The African infrastructural Development Index shows some overall progress between 2000 and 2010. Improvements in overall index were mostly driven by enhancement in Information Communications Technology and to a lesser extent, better access to water and sanitation.

By contrast, electricity production stagnated and transport development has been limited. While the rest of the world improved electricity supply in the last two decades, Sub-Saharan Africa’s per capita electricity production remained low and largely stagnant. 

The 48 Sub-Saharan African countries, with a population of about 1.1 billion, generated roughly the same power as with the population of 47.27 million according to the World Bank and Africa Development Bank; a report of 2013.

In the case of Uganda, the country is currently faced with an acute electricity supply shortage despite the existing substantial power resources. As a result, the total installed capacity of Uganda’s energy system was about 822MW at the end of 2013. This capacity is still inadequate, given that the need to provide reliable, cost effective electricity supply is still very low vis-à-vis the growing demands of the economy. For any country, an adequate supply of electricity is a necessary condition for continued development. 

Addressing this infrastructure bottleneck is evident in many Sub-Saharan African countries and is important for several reasons: It is needed to engender a strong supply response and raise potential growth. An added consideration for many low income developing countries is the importance of improved supply of electricity infrastructure to foster economic diversification and structural transformation. 

For example, in the absence of reliable electricity supply, it is difficult for economies to transition from low to high productivity activities. At the centre of Uganda’s growth, the development strategy is the programme of infrastructure investment in electricity projects to address electricity production and infrastructure gap as envisaged in the Vision 2040.

The NDP sets a power sector development target of annual per capita consumption increasing from 75KW per capita to 674KW per capita. This target requires an additional 3500MW to Uganda’s existing national grid. With the Bujagali Hydro Power Project now in operation, the national grid has a capacity of 850MW. In addition, the Isimba Hydro Power Project is also one of the hydro power projects earmarked under the National Development Plan (NDP1) for development by government.

Access to electricity enhances the socio-economic development of the population through better access to education, health care and personal security as it facilities development of small scale industrial and commercial enterprises hence providing an added incentive to larger scale industrial and commercial investment in the country.

Project Linkage to Country Strategy

The project is in line with the Uganda Vision 2040 and the National Development Plan 2010/11 to 2014/2015, which identifies the construction of large hydro power plants through public and private investments as one key strategic intervention to catalyse economic development. The other one is the Power Sector Investment Plan (PSIP) that examined supply options to meet demand under different economic growth scenarios and then the Hydro Power Master Plan for Large Hydro Power Plants.

Objectives of the projects
The main objective of the Isimba Hydro Power Station and the Isimba- Bujagali Transmission Line Project is to increase the hydro power generation capacity and supply locally and regionally. This will contribute to satisfying the domestic power demand, lower the cost of power to the consumer in the long run and the ability of the country to export power regionally. 

The specific objectives of these projects are as follows:

    1. To increase the country’s hydro power generation capacity.
    2. To increase the length and strength of electricity transmission and network in the country.
    3. To increase power supply locally and regionally.
    4. To increase electricity access in the country.
    5. To increase the affordability of electricity in the country.
    6. To satisfy the fast growing electricity demand in the country and the region. 
    7. To improve on transport connectivity between the districts of Kamuli and Kayunga.

Project location

Mr Speaker, with your permission, I beg to skip this because it is clearly stated.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually I was going to request you to move to what your observations are and what you recommend for this House.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I am much obliged. I now take you to page 12 where we have observations and recommendations.

Observation number one is about the loan application procedure for the funding of these projects. The committee observed that under the preferential export buyers’ line of credit, the China EXIM loan application procedure requires that a commercial contract is concluded between the borrowing country, in this case Uganda, and the Chinese contractor prior to loan negotiations. 

As a result, a Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of Uganda and China International Water and Electric Corporation dated 22 July 2013 was undertaken to facilitate the process of securing the funding for the implementation of these projects.

Procurement of the contractor for the projects

The committee learnt that His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, in a letter dated 24 July 2013, directed that the construction of Isimba Hydro Power Project and Isimba-Bujagali Transmission Line be done by China International Water and Electric Corporation.

The committee observed that the direct procurement method used to procure the contractor was in line with section 85 of the PPDA Act and at the time the committee visited the site, the work had commenced.

We recommend that the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development should take full responsibility of ensuring that the contractor delivers these projects on time.

Parliament should further ensure timely monitoring of the implementation of the projects through the relevant parliamentary committees.

The second observation is on the concessionality of the China Exim bank loan. The committee observed that this loan for the financing of these projects is non-concessional since its grant element is only 26 per cent, which is lower than the threshold of 35 per cent recommended by International Monetary Fund and World Bank.

However, it is within the threshold of the 25 per cent of non-concessional financing under the Public Debt Management Framework, 2013. The non-concessionality of this loan is further influenced by a short maturity period of 15 years and grace period of five years.

It is our recommendation that government should ensure the timely implementation of these projects to be able to achieve returns on investment in the medium term to repay the loan without eroding the ability of the end users to consume cheaper electricity. Government should also endeavour to obtain concessional loans for further similar projects. 

Debt sustainability 

The committee observed that striking an appropriate balance between scaling up public investment in infrastructure and avoiding an unsustainable build-up of public debt has become one of the main policy challenges facing government and policy makers. 

These projects will contribute to the rise in debt accumulation in the short run to medium term where external debt is projected to rise from 6.9 per cent of GDP in the Financial Year 2013/14 to 13.5 per cent of GDP in the financial year 2017/18 and as a result, the ability to repay external debt using export revenues has weakened in the short to medium term although they are projected to improve in the long run. 

While external debt indicators remain sustainable over the medium to long term, they are dependent upon realised exports, domestic revenue and GDP growth rates above the current levels.

The committee recommends that government should ensure that the borrowed resources generate high rates of both economic and financial returns to boost exports and domestic revenues to be able to repay with minimal difficulty when debts fall due. This will call for policy adjustments to boost exports in areas of value addition and improve tax administration to mobilise domestic revenues plus the need to ensure that the revenue stream from the operations of these projects is separated from other transactions of the electricity companies in order to guarantee commercial viability of this project.

Mr Speaker, another observation is on the economic spill overs of this loan. The committee observed that one of the most controversial issues affecting the Africa-China relationship is the general perception that Chinese companies drag down labour standards by bringing their own workers on overseas projects and by exploiting the local workers they hire. 

This import of their own labour limits the economic spill over effects of these projects, as observed during the committee field visit to the Isimba Hydro Power Project site in Kayunga District where most of the workers are employed as unskilled casual workers with Chinese nationals clustered in technical and management positions.

At the time of the joint parliamentary committee field visits in October 2014, the manpower strength of Isimba Hydro Power Project was about 155 Chinese and 392 Ugandans, but of course being unskilled. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Affairs should ensure that China International Water and Electric Corporation adheres to the domestic labour laws of Uganda through the existence of good working conditions for the local people that are employed for the implementation of these projects.

Overall, tense labour relations, hostile attitudes towards labour unions, various violations of workers’ rights, poor working conditions and instances of discrimination and unfair labour practices should be avoided during the implementation of these projects.

Connectivity between Kayunga and Kamuli 

The committee noted that on completion of the Isimba Hydro Power Project Plant, the access road to Isimba Hydro Power Plant will be used as an alternative to the Mbulambuti ferry connecting the districts of Kamuli to Kayunga through the provision of a bridge on top of the hydro power plant.

However, the project documents are silent on the actual cost of the bridge that will be constructed on top of the Isimba Dam as the costs are embedded within the civil works of the power plant.

It is the committee’s recommendation that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and the Ministry of Works and Transport or UNRA should ensure that the costs of the bridge are determined and subsequent approval of its designs by Ministry of Works and Transport is done.

Private sector investment and growth 

The committee notes that one of the binding constraints to private sector growth is the high cost of energy. The current rate of electricity for the end user is $ 18 cents. However, the committee is not certain of the end user tariff accrued to the construction of the Isimba Power Plant.

The committee recommends that government should assure the august House that the tariffs, as a result of this project, will decline over the medium to long term in order to promote private sector investments and growth.

Isimba Hydro Power Plant and Power Generation Tariff 

The committee noted that the cost per unit or the plant tariff of electricity for the Isimba Hydro Power Plant will be $ 4.8 cents, which is lower than that of Bujagali Hydro Power Plant, which is $ 11 cents. This is attributed to the difference in the financing modalities of the two projects.

The committee therefore welcomes the government’s initiative of financing this capital intensive hydro power plant through public ownership financing model with a view of ensuring that the end user tariff becomes cheaper and affordable in order to improve on the ease of doing business in the country in the medium to long term.

Existing operating losses of the electricity generation and transmission companies
 
The committee noted the existing electricity distribution losses (technical and commercial), especially for energy purchase from UETCL by UMEME but not billed to end users that is still very high (26.1 per cent as at June 2014). As a result, these losses will continue to negatively affect the revenue projections for these projects if concerted efforts to bring these losses down by the government and all stakeholders are not undertaken.

The committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development should ensure immediate interventions to drastically bring down operating losses of the electricity generation, and transmission companies and report to Parliament the output from the interventions within two months of adoption of this report.

The ministry should also expedite efforts of amending the Electricity Act, 1999 to provide for more punitive measures against commercial losses of energy largely caused by vandalism of public electricity infrastructure and power theft.

The Ministry of Energy should further explore the option of creation of a performance-oriented special unit within UEGCL and UETCL to manage these projects and ensure their viability.

Roll out strategy of planned infrastructure investment plans 

The committee observed that Uganda’s infrastructure investment needs to remain considerable. Government plans to boost these investments amid stepped up efforts towards regional integration, the coming on stream of oil production and actions to improve the business environment.

We, therefore, recommend that government should ensure that the strategy to implement other pipeline investment projects need to include projects selection on the basis of strong feasibility studies, and commercial viability analysis and sequencing that takes into account the impact on debt sustainability, the ability of the economy to absorb investment without generating inflation or crowding out the private sector and the implementation capacity.

Mr Speaker, another observation was on the impact of the Isimba Hydro Power Project and other projects on the Kalagala white water rafters.

The committee noted that the white water rafters at Kalagala were concerned about the effect of the Isimba Hydro Power Project on the environment, specifically white water rafting, which is a popular tourism activity in the area.

The committee was further informed that the Isimba Hydro Dam would be constructed 20km away from Kalagala and in the event of any negative effect, the white water rafters would be compensated for the loss of business.

The committee recommends that the implementation of the Kalagala Sustainable Management Plan around the Isimba Project area should be expedited. New tourism activities should be created at the stretch of the river rapids that shall not be affected by the reservoir. Thorough assessment should be done to ensure that the compensation to be awarded would be commensurate to the loss.

Compensation

The committee observed that 85 per cent of the project affected persons had been compensated. 

We recommend that the ministry expedites the compensation of the remaining 15 per cent of the project affected persons before the closure of the project.

Conclusion

The committee recommends that the request by government to borrow $482,578,142.32 from the Export Import Bank of China to finance the construction of Isimba Hydro Power Project and Isimba - Bujagali Interconnection Project be approved. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I beg to move. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you very much. Honourable members, I now propose this motion for your debate. The motion is for a resolution of Parliament on the proposal by government to borrow up to $482,578,142.32 from the Export Import Bank of China to finance the construction of the 183 MW Isimba Hydropower Project and the Isimba – Bujagali Interconnection Project. Debate starts now. Procedure -

MR MWIRU: I thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I had the benefit of listening to the motion by the minister and the report. It is a fact from the President’s letter that we had earlier on brought in these companies talked about in this loan – they were procured directly with procurement under the assumption that the President had directed that this is a turnkey project where there would be engineering, procurement, construction and financing basis.

So where we are now is that we are borrowing and the equity financiers who came in to do equity financing are no longer equity financiers. The Government of Uganda got 15 per cent of the tax payer’s money and passed it on as our contribution. We are now borrowing to pass on to these companies to do the construction. The chairperson did not even lay a Power Purchasing Agreement on Table and the minister in his motion did not in a subtle way, give us the background that we actually shifted from equity financing to borrowing under a Power Purchasing Agreement with the contractor. 

My question is whether it is procedurally right for us to proceed with considering this loan without the minister giving us a background about these companies. I see that the President’s directive is now being abused because he allowed the selectiveness on condition that they met these conditions. 

The chairperson refers to the President’s directive but does not explain to us how we shifted to the equity financiers to borrowing and financing a project yet our 15 per cent worth over US$200 million was already advanced to this company. I thank you.

4.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Mr Speaker, if you recall, the government had all along said that it was going to finance Karuma and Isimba and this had to be done through collaboration with development partners such as Exim Bank, the World Bank or whichever financier was willing to co-finance the project.

The government decided that because of the favourable terms offered by Exim Bank of China, it will borrow from Exim Bank of China. The condition was that the Government of Uganda had to put down 15 per cent and Exim Bank would finance 85 per cent. So what we are borrowing is the 85 per cent which is co-financing with the Government of Uganda –(Interjection)- our contribution to this project is 15 per cent and the 85 per cent is what is coming from Exim Bank of China. That was the request presented here before Parliament last year for which we require authorisation from Parliament.

MS OGWAL: I have listened to both the minister and chairperson of the committee. I think that for us to proceed with this request for the loan, there are certain things that this Parliament must demand: 

The first is the loan agreement as mentioned in Paragraph 7. It must be laid on Table because we want to have a look at the terms and conditions of the loan agreement.

Secondly, we need to look at the bilateral agreements between the two countries.

Thirdly, we need the Power Purchase Agreement laid on Table and then we can debate from an informed position. Right now, everything is being assumed and I find it very difficult for us to debate something that is being assumed.

More importantly, the committee has not laid on Table these Power Purchasing Agreements which are so crucial for this Parliament before we commit the county.  A letter of clearance for the Isimba Hydro Power Project is not available. If anything, the committee must confess because they are using the Karuma Project clearance.  

With all this, you cause confusion and will make Parliament commit itself to something that will make us appear as if we are fraudsters. There is so much confusion and the committee and the minister need to clarify and give us those specific and important documents that can make us move forward.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, can you guide the House on those documents?

4.26
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Xavier Kyooma): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the concerns raised by the colleagues. 

On the one raised by hon. Mwiru - this is actually borrowing and not equity financing. The fact is that the contractor was picked and will be paid by the Government of Uganda. The option now is whether the Government of Uganda will use the money through appropriation or borrowing – (Interjection) - of course the 15 per cent. When you refer to the projects that we have had, on virtually all of them, you find that the financier tops up 80 or 90 per cent and the government meets the other. I will remind you that in most cases, our concern as a committee has been the delay by the government to provide its portion of the counter funding and is the same as this one. 

I have noted hon. Cecilia Ogwal’s concerns. She noted that there was no letter of clearance and that we should confess as a committee. I would like to assure this august House that there is a letter of clearance. 

First of all on Karuma, it is not a subject of discussion but let me use it because you said it. On Karuma, the Contracts Committee wrote to the Executive Director PPDA seeking her clearance. In reference, the letter which we have, the Executive Director PPDA, said that since they had used the direct procurement method, it was not within her powers to grant the clearance but rather to revert to the Solicitor-General. In turn, they went to the Solicitor-General and got a clearance for this project - (Interjections)- I can look for it because I have it –(Interjections)- I beg to lay on Table the clearance. 

I would even request to read the heading. It is addressed to the Minister, Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. The heading is: “Request for clearance of the draft negotiated commercial contract between the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and China International Water and Electric Corporation for the construction of the 183 megawatts Isimba hydro power plant and Isimba-Bujagali Interconnection Line.” 

It is here, and with you permission - if they want me to read the entire content, I will do it. I want to assure colleagues that it was also our concern, because we thought we had to seek permission from PPDA, but on reading the Executive Director’s opinion, we now asked for clearance from the Solicitor-General which they gave. 

And maybe for emphasis, we also called the Solicitor-General to come and ascertain that actually this is a clearance from his office, which he did. 

Mr Speaker, should I read it –(Interjections)- with your permission for the satisfaction of members. I beg to read it verbatim. I have already read the subject matter, now I proceed to read verbatim: “Reference is made to the letter by the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, addressed to the Solicitor-General under reference dated 5 September 2013, concerning the above subject. 

The engineering procurement and construction plus financing contract between Government of Uganda and M/S China International Water and Electric Corporation priced at $567, 378,990.96 is here by cleared for signature. Please ensure that a signed copy is sent to this office for our records”.
Mr Speaker, I have read verbatim. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture that letter. What date is it?

MR XAVIER KYOOMA: It is dated 6 September 2013.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture that.

MR XAVIER KYOOMA: Mr Speaker, about the financing agreement, we have actually laid it; it is one of the documents we have laid with the big documents. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we proceed on this debate. I propose the question for your debate - honourable minister you will respond at the end.

4.29
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you, very much Mr Speaker. There are technical procedural issues. The PPDA Act is categorical in Section IV, that procurement of any transaction which involves bilateral agreement must be availed and the bilateral agreement shall prevail if there is a conflict between the agreement and the PPDA Act Section IV. I have contacted the chairperson of the committee on whether he managed to obtain a copy of the bilateral agreement. To this date, I have not been availed with the bilateral agreement which was signed between the Government of Uganda and the Exim Bank on this project. That raises very serious technical issues.

Secondly, the procurement Act, to the best of my knowledge, is categorical. You seek clearance from the Attorney-General or Solicitor-General as regards signing the agreement. But it does not take away the authority of the PPDA Act with regard to bidding and procurement. My friend hon. Oboth Oboth is very much versed with this.

Thirdly, when this advert was being made, it was made for a contractor and later on, a contractor and a financier and with me I have a copy of a letter from the President to the Ministry of Energy, dated 24 July 2013. I beg to read. It is written to hon. Irene Muloni, Ministry of Energy; Ms Maria Kiwanuka, Ministry of Finance; hon. Peter Nyombi, Attorney General, Ministry of Justice. 

With your permission, Mr Speaker, I will read it: “But the most important aspect under the National Development Plan is that Government of Uganda established electricity development targets which should be met. Failure to meet this target will heavily affect national economic growth. I have already noticed major delays in the procurement of contractors. This is not acceptable. Fortunately, our friends from China are ready to help us build this hydro plant. At the meeting held on 27 June 2013, at State House Entebbe with the Chinese ambassador, it was agreed that Karuma Isimba and Ayago be built by the following Chinese contractors under bilateral agreement with the Government of Uganda -” That is why we need the bilateral agreement. He continues:
“
    i. Karuma 600 megawatts by Sinohydro Corporation Ltd.
    ii. Isimba 180 megawatts by China International Water and Electric Corporation.
    iii. Ayago 600 megawatts.

The three hydro plants are to be built as a public project on engineering, procurement and construction plus financing”. What does this mean? That the company was supposed to design the engineering, they get involved in procurement based on the bilateral agreement, do the construction and bring the money; that was the advertisement and the financing. Today, we have a loan request. Let me lay this letter on the Table. 

Secondly, there is a shift. If there is shift, we have no problem; we want to pass this. However, Mr Speaker, what we want to avoid is that a contracting company did not enter into a power purchase agreement and then today, we pass a loan to give a private company, then tomorrow, it will get unitary payment. As we speak, within the agreement which I have here, which was laid in this House, Government -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you said that there was a shift. What is the shift?

MR EKANYA: The shift was from engineering, procurement including financing, now to a loan being financed by the Government of Uganda; the tax payer is now financing 100 per cent. Secondly -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us follow these things.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, let me read the last one under the bilateral agreement to the People’s Republic of China: “This is, therefore, to direct you to conclude the required negotiation and documentation with the Chinese companies and the Chinese Government so as to apply concessional loan facility to finance the programme from the Exim Bank.” I have read it. It is signed by Yoweri K. Museveni, President. It is copied to the Vice-President, the Speaker, Permanent Secretary and Solicitor-General. Within the agreement, which was laid to us in this House - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to listen to this thing, clear these issues and we move. Please, if you start points of order, procedure - no, no. If he is raising it, let him raise it, we respond to it and move forward.

MR EKANYA: Within the terms and conditions of the loan - I beg to read. The conditions of financing include: 

“Provision to Exim Bank of China of the legal opinion of the Attorney-General on legal validity of the loan documents to the Republic of Uganda and on lending by Government to Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited and Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited”.

Mr Speaker, this raises another legal problem; these companies are limited liabilities companies. The Committee of National Economy should have got authorities of the boards of these institutions. This is because the government has now entered into agreement - on the entire proceeds and financing - including the financing and the resource of UMEME. The terms and conditions are very clear.

I asked the Chairman of the Committee on National Economy and the members whether they were able to get this agreement with Uganda Electricity Generation Company – the resolutions of the board with Uganda Electricity Transmission and UMEME. They were not availed; including the bilateral agreement. These are fundamental documents which the committee needed to analyse and knowing which bank the Escrow account has been opened. 

This is because UMEME has been conditioned to open Escrow account – that all the proceeds of all the generation of power not only from Isimba, but from Owens Falls Dam and Bujagali - the one that we will build in future, Ayago, is also attached to this law! It raises very serious legal issues.

Mr Speaker, we want this project, but we need to analyse it so that we do not mortgage the entire energy sector of this country to this financing. The committee and Parliament needs to analyse this. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Attorney-General, are you in a position to explain or is it the Minister of Finance?

4.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (INVESTMENT) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Mr Speaker, I thank my colleague here for the concerns. In terms of the financing arrangement, the Government of Uganda had bilateral discussions at the highest level with the President of China. It was agreed that China, through the Exim Bank of China, would co-fund this project. 

The total cost of the project is about $567 million. The condition for China Exim Bank to give the money was that Government of Uganda must raise 15 per cent of that amount. That is what has been raised. That is what the contractor is currently using to undertake the construction. 

The loan component, which is 85 per cent, is what the government is requesting Parliament to authorise for us to borrow so that the project can be concluded. Therefore, there is nothing like a PPA because UEGCL is a government entity. Generation will generate electricity and sell it to the transmission company. The transmission company will in turn sell it to the distributer – UMEME. 

Therefore, for you to require a PPA, it requires that you as an investor, you are putting your money for which you need a guarantee that when you produce electricity, it is going to be bought. In this particular case here, it is the cost of financing that will inform the tariff. Therefore, we do not need explicit PPA.

Mr Speaker, I just wanted to respond to that aspect of the PPA. The request that we are making here is for Parliament to authorise the government to borrow $482 million which will now be the 85 per cent as required by the loan agreement between the Government of China and Government of Uganda. I thought I should give that clarification. As for the terms and conditions, I believe the chairman should have captured that –(Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, the bigger picture here is, do we want as a country to own the dam or we want it to be owned by the person who you are saying is a contractor and is going to finance it? I think the bigger picture here is, the country has decided to own the dam. That is why we are getting a loan. Therefore, the contractor will not fund it. The Government of Uganda is funding and that is why we are getting a loan.

The contractor, under PPP, would require the power purchase agreement as a guarantee plus a first priority guarantee and other contingency liability for recovery. However, now that Government of Uganda is borrowing, we do not need a PPP. Therefore, Parliament should be happy that government wants to own a dam.

Secondly, it is this Parliament which put in place the Energy Fund; we finance the Energy Fund. Therefore, the 15 per cent did not have to wait for a loan to be procured because we are spending from an energy fund where Parliament appropriates. Therefore, it is the money already appropriated by Parliament. That is why we have managed to start the work at Isimba and Karuma using the money from the Energy Fund.

Therefore, the need for the counterpart funding, which normally comes after procuring a loan, is not required because we have used our own money in the Energy Fund. I thought I should give that information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is that clearer now? Honourable minister, can we debate this matter now? I think it is clear, we can debate now.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, following what hon. Ekanya raised – the issue where we are bringing UMEME on board. In April last year, I happened to be one of the members on a committee that investigated the energy sector. Our chairman was hon. Oboth. I remember in April we adopted resolutions of that report and government was supposed to implement and give a progress report. I remember at that time the Leader of Government Business, hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi, promised that the progress report would be given every three months. 

Therefore, the first progress report on the status of implementation was supposed to be in July last year. However, up to today, there is no progress report for the implementation of the recommendations of the committee, which this House adopted.

We are now here in disagreement – UMEME being mentioned. This is because among the recommendations was the nationalisation of UMEME. Therefore, are we really proceeding right with this type of agreement - we adopted a resolution in this House and a progress report on the implementation was supposed to be presented, but it has never come. If there was a change by government, it should have been brought to this House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the issues are clearer now from the preliminary discussions we have had. At first, there was a framework that was going to require a kind of PPP arrangement with the contractor. That is the change that the honourable member for Tororo County called a shift. If he had gone the first time the first way through a PPP, all these other agreements would have been required including the power purchase agreement. However, there was a shift and what was the shift? That shift was negotiated bilaterally between the Government of Uganda and the Chinese Government, not a bank.

The next level is; the shift now meant the Government of Uganda would fund the project 100 per cent and own it. However, Government of Uganda does not have 100 per cent of the total funding of the project. Therefore, it needs money from a bank and that bank is Exim Bank. For Exim Bank to lend this money, they require the government to counter fund 15 per cent so that they can only contribute 85 per cent as a part of commitment from the government to show that we are interested in the project.

That is their demand that for you to show that you really are interested in this project, pay 15 per cent of the cost. This is what we are following from the discussion here. If this is the arrangement which I have followed from the discussion, then there would be no requirement to involve UMEME or other smaller institutions.

Therefore, all these indications of UMEME, I think we are trying to make a point by bringing two scenarios, but merged our submission on two scenarios and yet we have separated them already. We are using the argument which could have been used in the first situation of PPP to undermine the new situation which I think is not very fair for the House. 

Procedurally, we are proceeding correctly if this is the framework that we agreed and I need a confirmation from the minister and the Attorney-General that this is the position we are proceeding in which case we would then proceed with the debate and conclude this matter.

MR AJEDRA: Mr Speaker, I think that is the right position that in terms of agreement between the Government of Uganda and Government of China, it is required that the Government of Uganda raises 15 per cent of the total cost of the project and Government of China raises the 85 for which we are here in Parliament requesting authorisation to borrow as you have rightly put it – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can I have the confirmation of the legal position on this matter?

MR AJEDRA: Yes, Mr Speaker, much obliged; that is the correct position.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Learned Attorney-General.

4.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, your summary which has put in clear perspective the submission of hon. Birahwa is I think the true reflection of the government – (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, when this whole project started, the understanding was that the Chinese company will be the one to borrow. The Uganda Government would provide the 15 per cent counter funding. That is the arrangement under which this company accessed the site and started the construction. 

In fact, this will go down in history as a very unique case of counter funding coming ahead of the borrowing. This will go ahead in history that counter funding was the first to be given to the Chinese company and then we came to process –(Interjection)- the point of order I am raising, is the Attorney-General therefore in order to mislead this Parliament that the arrangement was that money will come from the Energy Fund and go towards the first phase of the construction to Chinese company, well aware that by the President, through the bilateral arrangement, agreeing that there will be no competition for the contractor, this contractor was to bring money - there are letters to this effect. Minister Muloni knows that there are letters from this company telling her that they cannot raise the money. Therefore, the decision to give them the 15 per cent was because of their failure to access money to start this project.

Is the Attorney-General therefore in order to mislead this Parliament since he knows there are letters and hon. Muloni knows it as well? You went to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to collect the 15 per cent, as a result of this Chinese company failing to convince the bank to lend them money. 

Therefore, all the understanding you had at the beginning, you are now shifting. They were supposed to get the funding themselves, but they failed and you went to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to ask for the 15 per cent counter funding. It went there. 

Now, you come to Parliament and say this whole thing is ours. Is the Attorney-General in order to mislead Parliament, well aware that all these things have come as a result of the failure of the first understanding? There was no agreement that money will come from the Energy Fund.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think that is exactly what we have just said. Had the situation remained as in the previous instance, that point of order would be very valid. However, realising that the other contractor did not have the capacity to finance this project, there was a shift that since the government is very interested in this project, it would now find a way of financing it 100 per cent. In that case, the Attorney-General is in order.

Can we debate this matter? Can those concerns come in the debate now?

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, you have made a very beautiful and handsome analysis and guidance because in this House, we have –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You do not have to be very romantic about your description. (Laughter)

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I want to say that some of us wanted this project yesterday but, based on your guidance, we must ensure that those agreements which had been signed before the shift were cancelled. This is to ensure that some years to come, we do not have Peter or Simon coming up with an agreement and putting it on the throat of our children and our grandchildren. That is the agreement that has not been given to this House and to this country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Learned Attorney-General, do we have two subsisting agreements?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, no.

MR EKANYA: Pardon me, Mr Speaker. This is a brief to Parliament; a letter which was signed by Keith Muhakanizi dated 2 October 2014. It still attaches Uganda Electricity Generation Company and Uganda Electricity Transmission Company of the entire proceeds of the financing terms and condition acceptable. It says: “Establishment of an escrow account. Establishing an escrow account in a commercial bank in Uganda accepted to Exim Bank of China to which the revenues generated from the project are deposited to the direct stream of serving the debt. 

The government to ensure that Uganda Electricity Transmission Company and Uganda Electricity Generation Company conclude a power purchase agreement on take-pay basis for the project. And generation and transmission company, UMEME or its successors in title or a signee concludes power sale agreement to take on pay basis in which success obligation to make deposit of revenue generated from the project to escrow account”. 

What we wanted the Attorney-General to do, and I respect hon. Fred Ruhindi - The committee demanded that these agreements, including the bilateral and the cancellations, be tabled to this House. We have not only tied transmission generation, Umeme; they are not only involved in power distribution from Isimba, they are also involved in thermal dams - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please help this House. That is a loan servicing arrangement for the loan we are about to borrow. It is not a construction agreement for the dam. This is about how we are going to finance. Just like when you go to borrow money from the bank, they ask you “what is your source of revenue for paying the debt?” 

Please, let us not mix up these issues. They sound very good, but they are misleading. This is a debt servicing arrangement. They want to know how you are going to pay back - what revenue do you have, what sources do you have to pay if we give you this 85 per cent that you are seeking? That is what that letter is about. 

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I clearly listened to the minister and the Attorney-General. When you ask for confirmation from them as to whether the analysis and the guidance you had given the House was the correct position, both of them used two words, “I think”. 

I have known the Attorney-General to be a man of clarity and one who chooses words with intention. Now -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that should apply to all of us.

MR KARUHANGA: Yes. The procedural point I am raising is: is it that the minister and the Attorney-General do not clearly appreciate the position, or are they leaving room so that just in case anybody was to refer to the Hansard in future, they would appear not to be confirming the real position? What are they actually saying? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is what is before this House: a proposal to borrow US$ 483 million. We have been informed by the committee that it constitutes 85 per cent to make the 100 per cent financing by the Government of Uganda of that project. That is the request that is before us, nothing more nothing less. Can we debate it? Each member will be given three minutes each.  

5.01
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work they have done. 

My observation is that borrowing this money is going to generate 183 megawatts, which I think is going to contribute to economic growth and have a multiplier effect in the country, which has been a challenge in this country. If industries have been lacking more megawatts, this loan is going to help. The employment, which is going to be provided, is going to be got by these megawatts being added to our industries. 

According to what I have read from the committee report, I think even the tariff rates for the industries are going to be cheaper. I have seen that the internal rate of return is going to be realised within 15 years because the terms and conditions are favourable. The interest rate is below what Government has been borrowing from the World Bank. We are getting it at 15 per cent per annum yet World Bank was giving us these loans at 25 per cent. So, this is cheaper for someone who is investing. This is to better -(Interruption)

MR OKOT-OGONG: Mr Speaker, we have very clear information. I have been in Parliament for a long time and interest rates from the World Bank are always 0.75 per cent per annum. You can check everywhere. You can even Google right now. The interest rates for various projects that we have approved from Parliament here have always been 0.75 per cent with a maturity rate of 40 years and a grace period of 10 years.

The loan we are getting today is at a rate of two per cent. That means we are borrowing at a higher percentage. It is only 15 years of payment and five years grace period. However, I am not saying we should not borrow because we need power today. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

MR OKOT-OGONG: Is it therefore in order for a Member of Parliament, my brother, hon. James Kakooza, to misinform Parliament that we have been borrowing at 25 per cent from the World Bank and yet the clear information is that we have generally been borrowing at 0.75 per cent per annum? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member for Kabula might have forgotten to put the points before –(Laughter) Now you know that it is important to put the zero point before you mention it. (Laughter) 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you for your wise ruling, Mr Speaker. When you read point 7.2, this loan is a non-concession. It says, “…since its grant element (26 per cent) is lower than the threshold of 35 per cent recommended by the IMF/World Bank. However, it is within the threshold of 25 per cent…” That means this loan is lower in percentage and in costing -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that is not about interest rates. 

5.05
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is on page 15, on the bridge connecting Kayunga to Kamuli. 

We need power and I support this motion so that we get this loan. However, I wonder if we have technical people who look at these contracts article by article, or unit by unit. When we were at the site, the contractor informed us about the bridge between Kayunga and Kamuli. It was news to almost everybody. The people in Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), and the Ministry of Works did not have information about it. 

The Ministry of Works has spent a lot of money on the ferry. They are putting up infrastructure for the ferry between Kayunga and Kamuli and yet there is a bridge in the offing. I would expect that in this report, the committee would have observed that mistake and urged the ministries to coordinate. In this case, the Ministry of Energy and Minerals did not have time to inform the Ministry of Works that there is a bridge. 

In the recommendation, they suggest that the Minister of Energy and Minerals and the Minister of Works and Transport should determine the cost of the bridge and ensure that the bridge is approved. I think we risk being cheated by the contractors. The first thing we should ask for is for the design to be given to the Ministry of Works and Transport for approval so that we are able to determine the cost. I thank you.

5.08
DR JEREMIAH TWA-TWA (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. Colleagues are aware that we have got Vision 2040. In order for us to realise Vision 2040, we have got to maximise on the opportunities and work on the fundamentals. One of the fundamental issues that we need to work on under infrastructure is energy. 

Today, we have got shortage of power and because of this we cannot have industries spread across the country to create employment for our people. Due to the shortage of power, we cannot have lighting for the health units in order to have safe deliveries and much more. We cannot have light in the households and therefore, we cannot control the population. (Laughter) When there is lack of light, people engage in population productivity. However, if we can provide energy and power, people will get out of idleness and engage in more productive activities.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you mean to say that electricity cannot be switched off? (Laughter)

DR TWA-TWA: Mr Speaker, I know it can be switched off but when it is available in the house, it is unlikely that somebody will switch it off. Instead, they may engage in other activities like watching TV. Therefore, I support the motion that we should enable Government to borrow money and actually construct –(Member timed out.)

5.11
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support this motion. 

Like others have said, energy is part of the critical aspects we need for development. However, I am little concerned. Today, we are asking for Parliament’s approval of a loan of up US$ 483 million. I would like to ask: how prepared are we in terms of our technical people to utilise and absorb this money? I am saying this because just a year ago, we approved a loan of US$ 120 million for the construction of the Tirinyi– Pallisa-Kumi/Pallisa-Kamonkoli Road. To date, there is no sign of that loan ever having been approved by the Parliament. No works are going on and yet we are asking for more loans.

It is not doubtable that we need power but as we ask for this loan, can we deploy so that as a population, we utilise the loan funds and are able to move our country to another level? My question remains: do we have the appropriate or enough absorptive capacity? Do we have serious and capable people to manage these loans? Are we prepared to utilise the loan so that as taxpayers today and the future generation, we pay for a loan whose investment we are benefiting from. 

Can we urge the Executive, through the technical arm, to make sure that whenever these loan requests come, we are prepared to utilise the funds from the loans. I support the loan request and I stand by the committee and the minister and urge that we utilise these funds. Thank you very much.

5.13
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin by thanking the committee for the work. 

When you look at pages 9 and 10 of the report, I am convinced that our duty as Parliament is to look at the terms and conditions of this loan. I am also convinced that we are also supposed to look at the possible implications of this loan, which the committee has laid before us. The terms, as stated in paragraph 7.0, are the best we could get. Other conditions under paragraph 7.1 are standard provisions. 

Under paragraph 7.2 - the implication of financing conditionality - the problem we had was at the beginning. Mr Speaker, you clearly guided the debate on this well, which led one Member from Tororo County to refer to your guidance as both female and male, as beautiful and handsome.(Laughter) This country is not about to stop borrowing, but what are we borrowing for. Is there need for electricity? Can we say that we are now rich enough not to borrow? If the answer to the first one is positive and to the second is negative, this is the justification for this borrowing. I have heard members ask, “Who is not borrowing?” We can pretend but we need this money and we needed it the other year. 

I believe that the committee did a good job. When I looked at the inclusion of the terms and conditions and the implications, they even went ahead to tell us the implications of this financing. They told us this is non-concessional. They told us the implications of this in the long run. What else would we expect from this committee? The decision is before us to either keep Ugandans in darkness, as according to the Member from Iki-Iki, which I do not believe is true, or we have some light to provide to Tororo County, Idudi and other places in this country. 

5.17
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for this opportunity. I am going to talk about two things and the first is the issue of costs. Secondly, I will talk about the issue of harnessing energy but effectively. 

To be specific to this very report, we are seemingly borrowing US$ 483 million but in essence, we are actually borrowing US$ 567 million. That is the exact cost, according to the minister, for the construction of the dam and the extension between Isimba and Bujagali. 

We do not want a repeat of what happened in Bujagali. All of us know that the international standard for this construction is US$ 1.2 million per megawatt. If that is true, when we were constructing Bujagali we spent US$ 3.6 million per megawatt and this is the same mistake we are going to make here. If the cost of this project is US$ 567 million at our borrowing of US$ 483 million, which stands at exactly US$ 85 million, if we are to pay back to the Chinese on the US$ 483 million, we will be paying back US$ 511 million. I stand be corrected. Therefore, we have excess of US$ 28 million which, if you add to the US$ 567 million, we are going to US$ 595 million for the cost of construction and also amount in interest. Divide that by 183 megawatts and this dam is going to be constructed at US$ 3.2 million per megawatt. That is daytime robbery. 

We could say that some of the money is going for the transmission lines; that is okay. Let us just do simple mathematics by multiplying 183 megawatts by US$ 1.2 million as the international standard and we see how much is going to the dam. It should be US$ 220 million. The committee should convince me that constructing that line alone between Isimba and Bujagali will take the excess of US$ 375 million. If that is not clear, I will not support this motion.

In conclusion, we have very excellent ministers. Minister D’ujanga is well-educated in matters of electricity engineering, hon. Muloni and my brother, hon. Ajedra, is one of the most brilliant Ugandans I have ever seen. How on earth do we do piecemeal generation of power? Why -(Member timed out.)

5.20
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. With your guidance, I would like to support this loan request on condition that Uganda owns this dam 100 per cent as clarified in this House. 

Secondly, I would like to set a condition for my support to this loan request. I have a letter before me, signed on 12 May 2014, by Mr Deng, the Chief Representative of Sinohydro in Uganda. It is addressed to engineer Mubiru, the accounting officer of the Ministry of Energy and Minerals. While he asked for the 15 per cent which we received, this is what he said: “Please, advance the 15 per cent worth US$ 253,173,269 before 30 June 2014. In the unlikely event that the current financing process with China EXIM Bank was to be unsuccessful and the financial closure with China EXIM Bank is not achieved, Sinohydro confirmed that they will proceed with the Karuma project on a PPP basis with the Government of Uganda on terms that will deliver affordable tariffs.”

This means that even before, Sinohydro knew that there were no approved financiers but there were connected people in this sector. That is why they the first got an impression that they were going to help us secure the 85 per cent but they shifted to receiving 15 per cent.

Mr Speaker, I support this loan request but the condition I am setting is that Government should first carry out a value-for-money audit on the 15 per cent so far advanced, because it is US$ 253 million which is not a very small amount of money. If you went on site, will you find works worth the amount of money so far advanced? This is because of the way the contractor we are talking about was picked; the President wrote under assumption that this contractor was going to do a turnkey project where he was even going to finance. I do not know whether the President is now aware that Sinohydro, in whom he had confidence, have no capacity to finance and are now the contractors. We are borrowing and they are the ones in charge of the execution of our work.

I conclude by supporting the loan request. However, I set a condition that a value-for-money audit be carried out to see whether the works so far executed out of the 15 per cent so far advanced is worth the money, so that when we borrow the 85 per cent we can easily pass on to the same people this work. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.23
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the work done in regard to this report. 

All of us here are aware of the importance of power and we do not need to spend much time on it. We needed it yesterday. I am particularly happy because all along I had mixed feelings in regard to this particular loan request. However, with the guidance you gave and the information from colleagues and the honourable minister, I am really comfortable with the whole process. It gives Ugandans the authority, mandate and ownership of this project. I am very convinced that we need this money so that we do a good job for this country.

Mr Speaker, my only concern is about the timeliness. I sit on the natural resources committee, which is mandated to supervise the energy sector. My concern has always been that as we get all this money, how possible is it for this company - We have seen the delays in the road sector and other projects in this country; we need to prevail over the company as a ministry and as Government to make sure they finish this job on time. 

I support hon. Mwiru on the issue of auditing. We need to see how much these people have done so far with the 15 per cent. That can give us a basis of determining whether they are in position to accomplish the job with the remaining monies which we are about to receive.

Mr Speaker, I visited Karuma, which is also going to be taken on by the Chinese. I have seen the behaviour of these Chinese companies especially when it comes to economies of scale in Uganda regarding employment. These people come with quite a number of people, including cooks. I do not know how the ministry is going to prevail over this. I feel, as a Ugandan, with the pressures we have from the youth as a result of unemployment, we need to request the Ministry of Energy and Minerals to make sure that these people employ our youth in ensuring that we benefit through some -(Member timed out.)

5.26 
MR AMOS	LUGOLOOBI	(NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am the area Member of Parliament where this project located. I would like to begin by commending the People’s Republic of China for coming in at a time when we had almost lost hope. You all recall that this project had almost collapsed at the procurement level and we were going to experience a delay of two years. However, our friends, the Chinese, stepped in at the right time and helped to save a very difficult and precarious situation. They really deserve to be applauded for that. (Applause)

I would like to thank the Government of Uganda, particularly His Excellency the President, for being very innovative and for going for this arrangement at a time of need. By this time in this country, I do not know where we would be. In two years’ time we would be back to the darkness and load-shedding that we experienced a few years ago and this economy would have gone to the dogs, honourable colleagues.

Mr Speaker, I also would like to thank the ministry for providing timely compensation to the people affected by this project. I must report that my people that I represent in this House are happy. There are no serious concerns with regard to the compensation of their properties that were lost as a result of this project.

Having said that, in the environmental impact assessment report, there were certain negative effects that were envisaged in this project and one of them was the issue of the damming of the waters of the Nile and the consequence of having an influx of mosquitos and therefore the resultant malaria infestation within the region. That problem is already happening. Yesterday, I asked the Prime Minister a question, calling upon Government to step in quickly, otherwise this problem could have devastating effects on the population in this area.

Secondly, we have raised the issue of the road that is being used to ferry the cargo that is used to construct this dam. This is all heavy equipment but the road that we have is very narrow and on many occasions, people survive accidents as -(Member timed out.)

5.30
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support the loan request. However, I envisage a situation of having another Bujagali. On what basis did they come up with this price? Was procurement done such that we get to know the basis of the pricing that we have? We already see that the prices are too high, after calculation. What basis did we rely on to know that this is the best value for money that we have? 

Secondly, we are building, but are we going to have this dam at a price that the population will not be constrained to use the power? Right now we have constrained demand for power and we believe we have enough power but we cannot afford to use it because of the price. I think we need to make sure that the cost escalations never come up like Bujagali turned out so high and we are now constrained. It is like we are using HFO. Therefore, we need to put that at the back of our mind.

On page 10 of the agreement, they say UETCL, UEDCL and Umeme will be the ones to guarantee our loans to make sure there is payment. How does Umeme come in yet it is a private company? It is like saying Baryayanga; how do I come in? Why isn’t it UEDCL alone to be the one to come in and guarantee that indeed our money is Uganda’s money? Why bring in a private company which this Parliament asked to go. Suppose the Executive agrees with the report that Umeme should go, what do we do next? Why do we guarantee ourselves with a private company on having such a loan? 

I believe we should look at Government alone; even if the other companies are working on behalf of UEDCL, let UEDCL give the guarantee and do not bring in Umeme into the agreement. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.33
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have been reminding myself about the legal regime that governs this House on the approval of loans and I am grappling with one issue. A contract has been identified, a financial institution, in this case the Exim Bank, has been identified, negotiations have taken place, the contractor is on the site already executing 15 per cent of the work and Government is here seeking authority to borrow. What options do we have at this point? It is like a patient on an operating table to whom they have already administered anaesthesia and then you ask him whether to operate on him or not. The whole process is at the tail end. 

My proposal is that we need to re-examine this constitutional provision and we divide it into two aspects: one, where Government can come up with just principles; for example, we may need to borrow money to finance the energy sector. Once we have done that, then we can have another process of looking at the details of the proposed loan. Otherwise, we are just involved in an academic exercise. We stand a risk of somebody who is not honest saying we sabotaged because it has happened before.

I would like to take my job seriously like I always do. If somebody is supposed to seek authority, I need to be given an option. We have no option, colleagues. To refuse the loan request now has disastrous consequences, both economic and on the entire project itself. Therefore, we are wasting time and I would like to urge colleagues that unless – 

Mr Speaker, this is not the first time that Government is doing these things up to the end and then they come here. We need to address this weakness such that Government takes us seriously. We should have a healthy debate and we should also have an option that where we can say, “we do not want to borrow money for this sector but instead Government should be looking at this sector because it has to be addressed immediately”. We need those options but we do not have them now and the Government seems to be enjoying. They just come here and tell us that the contractor is on site and they have already paid 15 per cent and here we are. I do not want to be a voting machine. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, after that submission shouldn’t we take a decision on this matter? Can I put the question on this matter? Oh, I had already called up the member from Obongi and then I will put the question.

5.37
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I am picking up from where my colleague, hon. Abdu Katuntu, ended. I would like to address myself to other conditions stated under paragraph 7.1, particularly bullet No. 3, which states, “Government to ensure that UETCL and UEDCL conclude a power purchase agreement on take or pay basis for the project, and that UETCL and UEDCL and Umeme, or its successors in title or assignees, conclude a power sale agreement…” 

Here again it says that where there is a shortfall in the collection by Umeme, Government should come in and pay the deficit. Government is given a responsibility. What about the responsibility of Umeme in this case? How does Umeme come in since it is a private company? This question has been asked time and again. I see a situation where Ugandans, especially those who live off the grid, those who live in areas which are not even connected to the power lines like the people of Obongi, will be forced to pay for a loan yet a private company is being used as conduit to take away money from the government coffers. 

I do not agree with the point that Government will be coming in to pay if there is a shortfall in collection. Stating only the responsibility of Government without restating the responsibility of the private company, Umeme, is the question that I have.  Why bring in Umeme here? I would like to request that as you put the question, the report should be edited. What is out should be removed and what is in should be left so that we know what we are voting for. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion for a resolution of Parliament on the proposal by Government to borrow up to US$ 482,578,142.32 –

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, this is a very important loan request that we are going to pass. Can we check to see whether we have the numbers?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I checked just a moment ago. Would you need to check again? I had checked and I have the document from the clerk. Clerk, can you confirm for me the numbers, please.

We need to take a decision on this matter. Before the honourable Member for Kaberamaido, the Member for Toroma and the Member for Bugweri entered, there were 110 Members. The honourable Member for Kiboga now makes 114. Honourable Members, you are going to force the Speaker to start taking roll call because I think the members who have entered the chambers are many more than the ones who have been inside right now. We came here to do business. I am going to be doing roll call now to confirm the Members who are supposed to be in but have decided to leave. Can you bring me the list and we do the roll call. This time some sanctions will- Can you proceed with the counting? Please, honourable members, have your seats. Sit down so that we can have stability in the House. 

Honourable Members, I now have 125 Members. (Applause) I now put the question that the motion for a resolution of Parliament on the proposal by Government to borrow up to US$ 482,578,142.32 from the Export–Import Bank of China to finance the construction of the 183 megawatts Isimba Hydropower Project and the Isimba–Bujagali Interconnection Project be adopted. I put the question to that motion.
  
(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES ON THE PERFORMANCE OF UGANDA COFFEE DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY FOR FINANCIAL YEARS 2009 – 2012 AND THE 2008 SPECIAL AUDIT REPORT ON UCDA JOINT VENTURE OPERATIONS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that we concluded debate on this item and what is left was for us to adopt this with the recommendations from the committee. 

I will now put the question that the report of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises on the performance of Uganda Coffee Development Authority for financial years 2009–2012 and the 2008 special audit report on UCDA joint venture operations be adopted. Should I put the question or are there any amendments on the recommendations? I put the question to this motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S FINDINGS ON THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND MULAGO REFERRAL HOSPITAL FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2010

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had already put the question to this motion for the adoption of the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the Auditor-General’s findings on the Ministry of Health and Mulago Referral Hospital for the year ended 30 June 2010. If there are any issues of amending the recommendations, this will be the proper time. However, if none, I put the question to that motion for adoption. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE SPECIAL AUDIT BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE PRESIDENTIAL INITIATIVES ON MARKET VENDORS AND SMALL BUSINESSES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had already put the question to this particular motion for adoption of the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the special audit by the Auditor-General on the presidential initiative on market vendors and small businesses. If there are any changes to the recommendations, this would be the time to bring them up. If there are no changes, I will put the question on the motion for adoption of the report. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thank you very much for being able to complete today’s business - several very important items. This House is adjourned, unless of course the Prime Minister wishes to say something; if not, this House stands adjourned to Tuesday, 2 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 5.50 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 17 March 2015 at 2.00 p.m.)

