

Thursday, 12 March 2020

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I just have one small communication concerning the continued impact of the Coronavirus. We have just been informed that our meeting of the Inter-Parliamentary Union for April has been cancelled. 

The meeting in Saint Petersburg for the first week of June organised by the Russian Federation Parliament has also been cancelled. Therefore, I would like to urge Members to desist from non-essential travels because things are happening, unless it is really necessary. Let us stay put in our country because even on the plane, you can sit with sick people. Thank you. 

There are two matters of national importance. Let us start with hon. Wakabi. Two minutes, please. 

2.44
MR PIUS WAKABI (NRM, Bughaya County, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to raise a matter of national importance regarding the non-payment of tobacco farmers in Bunyoro sub region. 

His Excellency, the President, while in Hoima, promised to intervene in the payment of tobacco farmers; they will be paid within two months. That was last year in September and now, we are in March but the tobacco farmers have received nothing.

This has caused a lot of distress, untold poverty and suffering among my people in my constituency, some of whom acquired loans to venture into tobacco growing. Others were excited after the President promising them that they were going to be paid within two months. They celebrated and went to the banks but now, banks are on their necks. Others are not sleeping since they cannot afford to pay fees for their children. It is disastrous in my constituency. 

I pray that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, which authorised these companies, which include Continental Tobacco Uganda Limited and Agamwe Leaf Tobacco Limited to operate without due diligence, be held accountable. The real owners of these companies should be investigated because we do not know them. We would like to know who they. They took tobacco from farmers for two years and failed to pay. (Interruption) 

MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME: Thank you, my honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the member of Parliament for Bughaya is my neighbour and we do similar business, which is tobacco growing. 

I raised a similar issue here last year. The challenge we have now is that these tobacco farmers are a big number and they are totally frustrated. I am paying school fees for 56 students from primary up to university and it could be due to that problem. 

The information I am giving is that, last year, when there were low prices for maize, Government released Shs 100 billion. Why doesn’t Government release a similar amount of money to help these tobacco farmers, since it is Government that authorised these companies to go and deal with our people?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, why don’t we allow the member to finish his submission?

MR WAKABI: Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has been saying that they do not have money but if they can send some money to Beijing in error, why can’t we start with this money so that we pay these farmers? 

I also pray that the Ministry for the Presidency also comes out clearly and follows up on the promise the President made about these payments while he was in Hoima. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from West Nile. I know there is a member of Parliament for tobacco farmers there. 

2.47
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am very happy that hon. Wakabi has raised this matter. It is not new. We started following up this matter in the Ninth Parliament. It is so disheartening that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives has not come clear on the promises they made to the tobacco farmers. 

In West Nile, a number of verifications have been undertaken. Even as we talk, back in West Nile, they are purporting to verify the tobacco farmers so that they can be paid but this has happened over time. Can the minister come on record with a clear date when these tobacco farmers will be paid? 

We also implore the ministry to pay these farmers with interest because, first of all, some of them borrowed money. The banks are continuing to add onto the interest. Therefore, that interest for the delayed period should also be calculated and put on Government. 

Madam Speaker, my appeal is for the ministry to come clear on the date when this money will be paid so that the farmers can rest at peace. Otherwise, it has dragged on since the last Parliament. We are about to conclude this Parliament and we really do not know when these farmers will be paid. Like hon. Wakabi said, these are licensed companies known to the ministry.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, ever since the Seventh Parliament, Members have been complaining on the Floor of this House about these tobacco companies. I am really surprised that for over 15 years, the Government has not paid attention to this complaint. We want answers from Government. Why do you continue licensing companies that do not pay, when you know them? The complaints are here. Please, Chairperson of the Committee on Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, there are petitions before you; tell us what has happened. 

2.50
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nasana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In fact, I was standing to inform the House that we have authored a report ready for debate and I think all the conclusions are that Government must come in to help the farmers.

Secondly, the President went public and assured the people that they are only waiting for this report to be read and recommendations therein shall be considered and the people will be paid.

THE SPEAKER: Is he waiting for our report? No, it cannot be.

2.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, it is true the issue of tobacco has been on for a very long time. When some of us joined the ministry, we found these challenges in place. However, we have been engaging various companies that were licensed before and even those which are operating now. Some companies have actually made serious attempts to pay. There are those that have perennially failed to pay. The law is very clear; if you do not pay, you are not licensed again. We have been confronting these companies.

However, Government has decided that it is our responsibility to meet the obligation of paying these farmers. Therefore, we are working together with those companies. I will bring the details because I cannot tell you when off the cuff. However, if you allow me, Madam Speaker, I could bring a comprehensive submission next week.

THE SPEAKER: I think it is urgent that we get that submission because it is long overdue.
Honourable members join me in welcoming a delegation from Bugahya County in Hoima, represented by hon. Pius Wakabi and hon. Harriet Busingye. You are welcome.

2.53
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been watching different television stations including NBS, CNN, BBC and Aljazeera. They show a lot about coronavirus. However, when you watch NBS, there is a match organised by the French Embassy between the Ugandan legends versus some African stars, which shall be on 22nd March. 

Madam Speaker, the major concerns is that most of these African stars are based in Europe and some in Italy; yet, some of the stadia in those countries have been closed.

We do not have a case of coronavirus. However, I am now worried and wondering whether we shall be safe. I would like the ministry in charge to tell the country whether the visit of those very powerful players like Didier Drogba, Samuel Eto’o and others may not affect and escalate the spread of coronavirus in Uganda. 

I want the ministries of Education and Sports and Health to tell me and other Ugandans who are going to watch that match in Namboole on 22nd March, whether we shall be safe after the match or even before. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members. Of course, we would be happy to have Eto’o and Didier Drogba and I believe they will be screened but maybe the Ministry for Health can say something.

2.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of coronavirus is an international pandemic. We as a ministry are putting in place a number of measures. Nobody comes into the country without being screened at our entry points including these other peripheral points like Busia and Malaba.

These ones definitely will come through the international airport. They will be screened and after being screamed, if we find -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What rule are you basing on?

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, I came back from South Korea on 14th February -(Interjections) - 

THE SPEAKER: Order. 

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, I travelled to South Africa and came back on 5th March.

THE SPEAKER: South Africa or South Korea?

MR AKOL: South Africa. The first travel was to South Korea and then I went to South Africa and came back on 5th March. The point of order I am raising is that when I travel, every airport you move in, they are testing the people who come to their country. However, every time I arrive in Uganda, there is nothing like testing the people who are entering Uganda. Even on 5th March when I came back, there was no screening as we arrived at the airport. 

When you are at the airport in Nairobi, there is a screen that measures the temperature and everything. However, when you come to Entebbe Airport, there is nothing of that kind taking place. Is the minister in order to tell the house that they are doing enough to screen the people coming into Uganda? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: The minister has been assuring us that they have set measures. However, on Friday, I flew to Arua. They checked me as soon I got off the plane; a small man with a sanitiser and a gadget before I could walk. He said, “Madam, I have got you.” Honourable minister, what is at the airport?

MS NABBANJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. Sometimes, they do not even use that gadget. We have scanners, which can even scan you from a distance of as far as 100 metres. So, by the time you reach, they have already known your temperature and everything.

Testing means getting a blood sample and then you take to the laboratory and test. Madam Speaker, we are advanced and I want to assure Members that whoever comes from those other countries, which have the scourge, is usually quarantined for 14 days. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let me invite the Minister for Sports. However, join me in welcoming the Guild Speaker, Deputy Speaker and Minister of Justice of Bishop Stuart University. You are welcome.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, hon. Akol has just told us that he returned on 5th March. It is not 14 days since that time because people at the airport are told to do self-isolation. Is it in order for us to continue having him in the House when the mandatory 14 days have not elapsed; moreover, he came from South Korea which is highly affected?

Is he in order to continue being in the House?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, South Korea is one of those countries where there has been a big epidemic. Hon. Akol, if you have been there, please, exit the chamber now. Please, go into self-quarantine. (Interjections) You said you went to South Korea, came back and then you went to South Africa. You said that and it is on the Hansard. (Interjections) No, honourable member, you first go and then we shall establish from the Clerk how you moved.

[Whereupon hon. Anthony Akol took leave of the Chamber.]

MR MUNYAGWA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. You will remember very well that yesterday, you directed the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, to present a statement to this honourable House regarding the breed cows that were slaughtered.

THE SPEAKER: We are not yet there. Allow me to run my Order Paper.

3.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, I would like to confirm that the attention of the Ministry of Education and Sports has been drawn through a programme called Uganda-France Friendship. This is an annual event that is organised by the Office of the French Ambassador based in Kampala and it takes one week. 

For this year, it is scheduled to run from 22 to 28 March 2020. A number of activities have been scheduled; among them is a football match, as stated by hon. Abala, where they intend to have the ex-internationals of Uganda and some other stars from within the continent of Africa who played in Europe. The likes of Eto’o, Didier Drogba, to mention but a few, on 22 March 2020. Part of the week will also have the Fashion Day at the residence of the ambassador; there is Defence Day where we have military cooperation with France; there is the Business Day and also plans to have a rugby game.

Madam Speaker, it is a fact beyond any reasonable doubt that all the list of countries under category one, there is France but this particular activity would call for our competent authority on the issues of health. I personally took the initiative this morning and called the French Ambassador based in Uganda. He informed me that he has always had engagements with the senior Minister of Health, including this morning; they had a meeting in order for them to agree on activities that will not have people who will be flown from outside Uganda to participate. If there is any decision to stop any of the activities earmarked for the one week under this programme, in my very honest opinion, whether most of the activities are falling under sports, we would act under the advice of the competent authority and the competent authority on issues of health is the Ministry of Health of the Republic of Uganda. 

If we are advised that the French Embassy must go ahead and cancel or postpone all these activities, this in my opinion should be coming from the competent authority, after monitoring and assessing the situation one by one on the planned activities for the whole week.

The Ministry of Health should be able to advise us whether all these planned activities can proceed. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I hope there is no presumption that everybody who lives in France is sick. I think France has had 11 cases.

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, we shall use our inter-ministerial committee and come up with a clear guidance for the nation. We cannot put our lives at a risk because France is category number one.

THE SPEAKER: Unless you are saying that Ugandans should not assemble in Namboole.

3.07
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let us reflect on what we were told last week in this very august House. We were told by none other than the Minister of Health that this virus is very dangerous and contagious. One of the measures she advised us to take was to avoid big public gatherings. Here we are preparing for big gatherings. Certainly, I would love to see Eto’o play and many other former big football personalities. I would love to be there but we were discouraged in this very august House that we should as much as possible avoid them. We are here trying to prepare to receive such a big delegation of high calibre personalities from France, which is a country under category number one. 

Madam Speaker, are we moving properly to go ahead and try to hide behind the curtains? We may as well meet them because they are very big personalities. Today, we have just been told that America has cancelled all flights and nobody from the entire Europe for the next 30 days should travel, while for us we are saying, “Please come.” In today’s newspapers, we are told in no uncertain terms that the Minister of Health of United Kingdom (UK) is already infected; possibly even the entire Executive of UK are infected. 

Are we proceedings well to continuously insist and encourage people from those risky countries to come to this country?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have been told that there is an inter-ministerial committee. This is an international invitation. Please, look at it and evaluate it, whether thousands of Bakiga should sit in Namboole and watch Eto’o, let us know next week.

3.10
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to first of all, on behalf of the Bunyoro Parliamentary Caucus and the people of Buliisa appreciate you on behalf of hon. Norah Bigirwa and the former member of Parliament, hon. Nyendwoha Mutiti.

We have received your message and the body is now moving to Masindi. We would like to thank you, honourable colleagues, for the support and we wish you journey mercies to Masindi for the burial.

The matter of national importance I am raising is to the effect that the mother Kingdom of Bunyoro is not at peace. The spirit of Kabalega is not resting –(Laughter)– until the attempt to delete the history of the mother kingdom in our education curriculum is settled. 

Madam Speaker, you have a copy of this concern from the kingdom and all of us, leaders from the kingdom, including the kingdoms of Tooro, Buganda and Busoga, which came from Bunyoro Kingdom are concerned that their history is being distorted. 

To say that you do not include the history of the nation state called Bunyoro into the history of Uganda when you are talking about culture and ethnic groups in East Africa is really – that the state formation in East Africa, starting from senior one you exclude the Bunyoro-Kitara Kingdom, which stretched up to Karagwe – deep in DRC. The colonialists changed the border to the lake but the border is actually much deeper. For example, Kabalega’s mother came from Bulega in Congo. 

We are concerned and we would like to request that, as a matter of urgency, a comprehensive report be brought to the Floor of Parliament. 

We are not convinced by the verbal explanation received from National Curriculum Development Centre (NCDC) that because Bunyoro was so- historical, they are proposing to give it as a research paper. If it is a foundation, then it should be given out as a primary material before you even consider others.

No wonder, in the recent past, we have had environmental impact study findings on oil and gas, claiming that there are no indigenous people in Bunyoro. No wonder, even the roads we have got after 57 years of independence are being called oil roads as if we are not people. 

This issue of the history of Bunyoro is very important and so, we would like to request that it is immediately addressed by having a comprehensive proposal brought on the Floor of Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter is extremely serious. Two days ago, I read in the press that the Kingdom of Buganda is equally complaining about the content of the curriculum. This House expressed its concerns about the speed at which the curriculum was moving, but the Government was prepared willy-nilly. Now, see what is coming out. What is the content of this curriculum? Is it about erasing our history? Ministry of Education and Sports –

3.14
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable colleague from Bunyoro has raised very pertinent issues. 

It is very true that the Katikiro of Buganda has officially written to the Ministry of Education and Sports about the content of the curriculum and particularly, raised matters on three critical subjects: Agriculture, History and our local languages. 

When we were reviewing the prototype booklets that were laid in Parliament by the minister, we questioned the disclaimers that were therein implying that even the authors were at some point not very certain as to what they wanted to deliver to the country. 

I believe that hon. Mukitale, having raised this matter, offers us an opportunity to inquire further into the intentions of the content of our curriculum in particular subjects. 

There are some Ugandans who believe that this country is only 35 years and therefore, its history begins from there. There are those who actually believe that this country is yet to start and those who are trying to manufacture history. 

It is a very serious matter. The ministry should, in no uncertain terms, come out to explain the particular issues being raised. People are concerned and when we raise the red flag, perhaps they are not concerned. This is an opportunity for us to re-examine the contents and where we can go from here. 

The minister promised then that the process is on-going to revisit some of these challenged areas. We have a beginning on this. 

3.16
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, another concern is about the Luo migration. As the minister comes to explain, we want a full coverage about the issue of the Nilotics, the Nilo-Hamites and the Luo Migration because we were told these are also being pushed aside. 

We need a full explanation regarding our entire historical aspects including the migration of the Karamojong, the Itesot, the Rwenzururu; all those. It is not only limited to Bunyoro Kitara. This was part and parcel of our history and our children must know. 

3.17
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Madam Speaker, during our times in school, particularly post primary, secondary to the university, we kept reading about two branches of political theory and history. One was about Euro-centric writers and the other about the Afro-centric writers. 

One of the condemnations of colonialism was the attempt to reenact and create history; to show that Africa was dark and had no history. They claimed that the discoveries were made because Africans could not discover themselves. 

One of the ills of colonialism was colonization of the mind. This starts when you deny people their own true history. Fortunately, we have a full front bench – and I hope you will continue whipping them. Can they tell us who allowed them to recreate the history of this country? 

We have come through different stages. We have had the NRM for the last 35 years –(Interjections)– I had wanted that information. 

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, honourable, for giving way. The information I want to give you is that let nobody deceive this country that this curriculum was designed for this country. This programme is being piloted by World Bank. It is not only in Uganda. It is in Kenya and somebody has mentioned Australia. It is in Malawi. That is why the vital information about the history of Uganda is missing. 

THE SPEAKER: I am told Ankole has a problem.  (Laughter)

[Mr Thomas Tayebwa’s contribution was expunged on the Speaker’s directive.]

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude by offering this humble information to the hon. Tayebwa’s of this world. For you to know where you are and where you are going, you must know where you came from. If hon. Tayebwa is happy to have come from some laboratory in Europe, then he is very lucky. (Laughter) For those of us who have lineages, who are proud of what we are and who are looking forward to a future, we certainly need our history to be fully recorded for posterity of this country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the kingdom of Toro, otherwise, I will be chased. (Laughter)

3.22
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me this time. First of all, I think my friend, hon. Tayebwa found us in the middle of the discussion and he did not know the background. Actually, he has behaved like these people who have designed the curriculum. (Laughter) They do not have the background of the country.

The President of Uganda and the king of Tooro are inviting world monarchs to Uganda in September. We hope that by that time, coronavirus will have gone. Every nation has got a culture and identity that backs it up. Even in the Constitution, these are well embedded. I cannot imagine – and this is the crisis we have; you have decided to deny your children the chance of learning their local languages. When you die, they begin speaking in English and making excuses that, “Sorry, I cannot speak this local language.” 

Can you imagine how we have been indoctrinated? These Europeans have indoctrinated us to the point that people begin hating their black skin colour. This is something we should condemn very strongly. We need the Ministry of Education and Sports to return our culture into the curriculum; nothing more, nothing less.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from Busoga kingdom. (Laughter)

3.24
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am from the Baise Igaga clan and I am a Musoga. We cannot take what is being done by the Government lightly. I am an indigenous Ugandan. 

If you went today to fill a passport form, it has been designed in such a way that they have deleted being a Ugandan by descent. (Interjections) Yes and I was concerned. The courtesy of accommodating everybody because the world is becoming a global village has been abused. They have now even got the courage to stand on the Floor of Parliament to say, these kingdoms do not matter.

I know for a fact that the promulgators of the 1995 Constitution accepted all tribes and even gave them space within the Constitution. The courtesy of Uganda should not be abused. That is why, when you look at the tribes of Uganda, we are very accommodative. We even accept Ugandan-Banyarwanda who are included in the Constitution. That courtesy should not be abused to the extent that we distort history and what we are. 

The ministers might not know what they are riding. They may be religiously supporting Government but this goes to the core of what we are as a people. They need to take this matter seriously. (Interruption) 

MR ACIDRI: Thank you, hon. Mwiru, for giving way. It is not about having kingdoms; this is a national matter. The information I would like to given to the House is that there seems to be a deliberate trend.

In my opinion, the idea of removing kingdoms and our history from the curriculum is a way of sabotaging revolutionalism because when you teach the history of people like Kabalega, you instil revolutionary ideas into Ugandans and I think the idea is to get rid of revolutionalism so that Ugandans just observe the status quo as it is. Thank you.

MR MWIRU: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I move that the statement of my brother, hon. Tayebwa, be expunged from the record of Parliament. I submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you remember the people of South Africa, in order to get back their identity, they tried to go back to their old names. Pretoria is called Tshwane. It has failed to stick but they actually sat in Parliament and said, “let us go back to our old names.” That is their identity.

Recently, I was visiting my counterpart, the Speaker of Turkey. He asked me about the lakes of Uganda. I gave Victoria, Albert. He said, “Do you have local names of those lakes?” I said, “Yes.” He said, “Why don’t you use them?” I had no answers. Lake Albert is Mwitanzige and Lake Victoria is Nalubale. 

Honourable Minister of Education and Sports, as you come, do you know why the British have left the European Union? It is because their identity was getting lost.

3.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Government of Uganda values and respects each and every tribe’s values and cultures. There is no intention whatsoever to destroy anyone’s culture or history. I have listened very attentively to the concerns of the Members. I have read and studied the curriculum and there is nowhere where Government intends to destroy anybody’s history. 

Allow me to go back and study the concerns further and report back. Give me two weeks, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Receive that petition from the ancient kingdom of Bunyoro Kitara. They have written to me three times on that issue. Please, receive the petition.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I lay on the Table two of the letters from the Prime Minister of Bunyoro Kitara and all are copied to you. One letter is addressed to the NCDC and another is to the Prime Minster seeking urgent interface.

Madam Speaker, high-end tourism is actually promoting our culture. Uganda is one of the best tourist destinations and has been named as such for the last three years. However, in the education curriculum, the issues of coronation of a king and the shrine where Kabalega was buried were left out. Those are the places where the high-end tourists are now visiting. I thought it was very important that we also look at it. For those who think it is just about making money in life, it is also important for tourism. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table the two letters from the kingdom singed by the Prime Minister. One letter is requesting for an immediate meeting following the omission of this very important history in our secondary school curriculum. The second is to the Director, National Curriculum Development Centre. I beg to lay on the Table copies of these letters. 

We look forward to having immediate attention, not only for Bunyoro, even though Bunyoro mothers most of these other kingdoms; you are also aware of our relations with the Luo. Therefore, we want every matter handled comprehensively. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. For the record, I told you that Pretoria in South Africa is called Tshwane; Johannesburg is called eGoli and Durban is eThekwini. Those are their original names. 

Can we now go to the next item?  Honourable minister, did you say you will come back to us in two weeks?

MR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, within two weeks, I will be ready to come back to this House.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Let us go to item No.3. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON HARMONISING WITH THE ELECTORAL COMMISSION TO REOPEN THE UPDATE OF THE NATIONAL VOTERS’ REGISTER TO ALLOW UGANDAN CITIZENS WHO WILL BE TURNING 18 YEARS OF AGE TO REGISTER AS VOTERS FOR THE FORTHCOMING GENERAL ELECTIONS

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

3.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is not around. We beg that this statement is made on Tuesday.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I was in this House yesterday and the Attorney-General gave assurance to this House that today, the statement would be presented.

Madam Speaker, this statement has a big implication on the ongoing electoral roadmap. It is critical that the pronouncement from the Chair about one million disenfranchised voters be brought to light. We are the Parliament of the people of Uganda but we are looking on as the Front Bench is shifting goalposts with regard to the eligible voters that are being left out, yet time is ticking. 

Just this week, the display of the register was concluded. We have also read in the newspapers that the Electoral Commission is trying to downplay the concern of the one million disenfranchised Ugandans. The ministry is not coming on the Floor of this House to tell the people what is happening.  Madam Speaker, enough is enough; must we sit back and look on? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are asking where the minister is.

MR SSEKIKUBO: It is not only that. Can we demand that the minister be given an hour from now to appear, since today is Thursday, unless there is an undertaking that tomorrow there will be a special sitting for us to receive the statement? 

Time is not on our side. The minister can make a call if the statement is ready. Hon. Rukutana is here with us and he is very competent; he can present the statement. Otherwise, enough is enough. We cannot afford to wait for another week to receive that statement.

THE SPEAKER: Can you arrange to find out where the minister is before the close of business? Okay. Let us go to item No. 4.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me first invite the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development to lay on the Table the certificate of compliance of the ministries.

3.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, in accordance with the Public Finance Management Act, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development shall, in consultation with the Equal Opportunities Commission, issue a certificate together with ministerial policy statements, and also specify the measures to equalise opportunities for men, women, persons with disabilities, and marginalised groups.  

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Certificate of Compliance for Equity and Gender for all the Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) that complied with those requirements. I beg to lay. –(Interjections)– It is a long list.

Madam Speaker, I will read the list of the MDAs that have complied with the requirements. We have the following:

    1. Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development
    2. Equal Opportunities Commission 
    3. Kyambogo University 
    4. Ministry of Water and Environment
    5. Ministry of Education and Sports
    6. Mbarara Referral Hospital 
    7. Kabale University 
    8. Lira Referral Hospital 
    9. Kampala Capital City Authority
    10. Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development
    11. Busitema University 
    12. Uganda Prisons Service
    13. Soroti Referral Hospital
    14. Uganda Human Rights Commission 
    15. Ministry of Health
    16. Ministry of ICT and National Guidance
    17. Uganda Police Force
    18. Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives
    19. Law Development Centre
    20. Uganda Coffee Development Authority 
    21. Uganda Embassy in Algiers, Algeria
    22. Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs
    23. Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development
    24. Ministry of Public Service
    25. Public Service Commission 
    26. Local Government Finance Commission 
    27. Parliamentary Commission
    28. Ministry of Local Government
    29. Kabale Referral Hospital 
    30. Health Service Commission 
    31. Lira University 
    32. Uganda Cotton Development Organisation 
    33. Mission in Iran 
    34. Mission in Ankara, Turkey 
    35. Office of the President 
    36. National Information Technology Authority 
    37. Uganda National Cultural Centre
    38. National Environmental Management Authority 
    39. Naguru Referral Hospital 
    40. Ministry of Foreign Affairs
    41. National Citizenship and Immigration Control
    42. Gulu University 
    43. National Agricultural Research Organisation 
    44. Mubende Referral Hospital
    45. Uganda National Roads Authority 
    46. Law Reform Commission 
    47. Ministry of Works and Transport
    48. Diary Development Authority 
    49. Mbale Referral Hospital 
    50. Mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC)
    51. Makerere University 
    52. Mission in Canada
    53. Moroto Referral Hospital 
    54. Consulate in Guangzhou
    55. Arua Referral Hospital 
    56. Directorate of Ethics and Integrity 
    57. Fort Portal Referral Hospital
    58. National Planning Authority
    59. State House
    60. National Forestry Authority 
    61. Uganda Embassy in Doha, Qatar 
    62. Mission in Ethiopia 
    63. Mission in Italy
    64. Uganda Land Commission 
    65. Financial Intelligence Authority 
    66. Uganda Aids Commission 
    67. Mission to Saudi Arabia 
    68. Uganda National Examinations Board 
    69. Uganda Industrial Research Institute
    70. The Mission in Malaysia 
    71. National Curriculum Development Centre 
    72. Uganda Heart Institute 
    73. Mission to Japan 
    74. Hoima Referral Hospital 
    75. Kiruddu Hospital 
    76. Mission in Belgium 
    77. Judicial Service Commission 
    78. Butabika Hospital 
    79. Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory
    80. Mission in Washington 
    81. Ministry of Defence 
    82. Directorate of Public Prosecutions 
    83. Mission in Canberra 
    84. Uganda National Oils Company 
    85. Mission in Geneva 
    86. Uganda Blood Transfusion Services 
    87. Mission in Abu Dhabi 
    88. Mission in New York 
    89. Entebbe Referral Hospital 
    90. Education Service Commission 
    91. Petroleum Authority of Uganda 
    92. Uganda Revenue Authority. 

I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Clerk should take note of those who have complied. They will generate a list of those who have not complied. So, let us proceed.

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES)	(Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Health for the financial year 2020/2021.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.42
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In accordance with section 13 of the Public Finance Management Act, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the financial year 2020/2021 for vote 011, Ministry of Local Government; vote 147, Local Government Finance Commission; and votes 501-850, all local governments of Uganda.

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (VETERAN AFFAIRS) (Mr Christopher Kibanzanga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is my honour and privilege to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs for the financial year 2020/2021 - vote 004. 

3.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2020/2021 for vote 008.

I also beg to lay on the Table the assets register which is an annex to the ministerial policy statement for the financial year 2020/2021.

3.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, I would like to apologise on behalf of the Ministry of Education and Sports that the ministerial policy statement from the ministry is not ready. This has been occasioned by the fact that on the 10th of March, the Ministry of Education and Sports received a letter from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which was for enhancement of salaries for lecturers of public universities. By the time I left the ministry, all public universities had not yet submitted to the Ministry of Education and Sports their budgets for inclusion in the ministerial policy statement.

The ministerial policy statement is system generated to the effect that even what we have at the moment cannot be printed without factoring in the figures from all public universities in Uganda. That is our dilemma. We plead and beg Parliament to give us some more time to factor in this because it has not been occasioned by us but by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. They communicated the good news for public universities late to the ministry.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The requirement is statutory. By my colleague standing and asking for time until they handle that, is he trying to amend the law? Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we set some time so that we are still within the confines of the law, because he has left it to the latitude of the minister?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the deadline is 15 March, which is Sunday; that is why I wanted you to bring them today because tomorrow we have no sitting.

3.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we do know that the deadline for submitting the ministerial policy statements is 15 March and we are working around the clock. If we cannot lay them today, we will ensure that they are submitted to the Clerk of Parliament within that period and then we can probably lay them after, as an alternative. However, we also beg that we first finish what we have here and then within your powers, you can see what to do with the situation. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, under the law, there is no provision for enlargement of time. So, let us first receive those which are here and then we shall decide on what to do about those who are unable to submit.

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives for the financial year 2020/2021, for votes 015, 154, 306 and 500.

3.49
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Public Service, vote 005, for the financial year 2020/2021.

I also beg to lay the annex of the assets register as at 11 March 2020 for the Ministry of Public Service. 

Madam Speaker, I also beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the financial year 2020/2021 for vote 146, the Public Service Commission. 

3.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (LABOUR) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for sector 10, the Social Development Sector, for financial year 2020/2021.

3.50
THE MINISTER OF SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Madam Speaker, I wish to apologise. We received new figures from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development yesterday, relating to the National Council for Science and Technology. We also received additional figures relating to the wages of the ministry.

We are currently reprinting and I would like to assure you that by the end of today’s meeting, we shall have got the ministerial policy statement and I will beg your indulgence to allow me to lay it on the Table. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Later in the day. Let us go to the office of the Auditor-General. The commissioners should lay that statement on the Table.

3.51
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, we have not received them. I only have the one for the Parliamentary Commission, which will come in later.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Let us go to Ministry of ICT and National Guidance.

3.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mr Peter Ogwang): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology and National Guidance, vote 020. (Applause)

3.52
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Ms Esther Mbayo): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Office of the Presidency for the financial year 2020/2021 - votes 001, 002, 107, 112 and 159. 

3.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (NORTHERN UGANDA) (Ms Grace Kwiyucwiny): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for financial year 2020/2021, Office of the Prime Minister, vote 003.

3.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, votes 012 and 156, for financial year 2020/2021.

3.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Henry Oryem): Madam Speaker, I need your protection from those who are misleading this House by calling me funny names. 

I have the distinct honour and beg to lay before this august House the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, votes 006 and votes 201-238, for financial year 2020/2021.

3.55
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for vote 104, Parliamentary Commission, for financial year 2020/2021. (Applause)

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Julius Maganda): Madam Speaker, in accordance with section 13 of the Public Finance Management Act, as amended, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of East African Community Affairs for vote 021, for financial year 2020/2021.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister for East Africa, the standard of your document – I do not know.

MR MAGANDA: Madam Speaker, we got communication from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to make amendments on the arrears for the agencies which make their submissions to the East African Community. We just completed this statement this morning and I had to beat the deadline by submitting a copy. However, the final copy will definitely be supplied later.

THE SPEAKER: We shall allow that provisionally, but you will bring the better one. 

3.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Atim): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Water and Environment, votes 019, 150, 157, 302 and 500, for the financial year 2020/2021.

3.58
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for vote 016, Ministry of Works and Transport; vote 113, Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA); vote 118, Uganda Road Fund; and vote 500, local governments, for the financial year 2020/2021. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The Inspectorate of Government, Treasury Operations, Kampala Capital City Authority -

MR OTHIENO: Madam Speaker, I would like to raise a procedural matter regarding the certificate of gender and equity, which was laid on the Table by the minister. 

According to section 13(15)(g), every policy statement is supposed to contain a certificate issued by the minister responsible for finance in consultation with the Equal Opportunities Commission. That certificate must, among others, certify that the policy statement is gender and equity responsive and two, specify measures taken to equalise opportunities for men, women, persons with disabilities and other marginalised groups.

Madam Speaker, the minister has given one general certificate for all. My concern is: how are the committees going to interrogate the requirement in (g)(2), which says they must specify measures that every entity has taken to equalise the opportunities for men, women and persons with disabilities. The other percentages of whether they are gender sensitive or not can always be given, but every sector is required by law to specify the measures they have taken, and the sectoral committees are supposed to interrogate them. Now, if we have one general certificate, how will the committees interrogate, at individual sector level, when they are reviewing these policy statements?

Madam Speaker, are we therefore, proceeding well by allowing the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to avoid doing what the law mandates him to do by issuing certificates, specifying or meeting the requirements of the law for each sector?

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hear the concern the colleague is raising. I would like to volunteer information that indeed we are complying with the provisions of the law he just read. I can give my ministry as an example, which I wanted to refer to while giving him information to -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please listen first.

MS ANYWAR: In the policy statement for my ministry, we attached the certificate of gender and equity compliance. It is signed by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The 
Document analyses the compliance. 

So, it is not true that it is all lumped up together for all of us. It is just because from the incoming information, we got this document and quickly we implemented ours. I am sure that all my colleagues have different attachments. I just wanted to clarify that. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what I have here is an assessment report issued by the Equal Opportunities Commission where these issues are contained. However, if the committees find that there is actually no certificate attached at the back, then you can come back to us and we throw away the statement. Otherwise, for now, let us accept the assessment and the certificates, which ought to be part of the record.

Honourable members, we have a problem; the law does not make a provision for enlargement of time. What do we do about the Ministry of Education and Sports and Kampala Capital City Authority; I do not know why they are not here.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The ministry causing problems is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I would like to request members - Hon. Obua has just come to the Front Bench and they gave him half-baked information but as a man of God, he accepted there is a problem.

Since lecturers have been struggling for a salary increment, I would like to request honourable members - I know lawyers may not agree with me, but we need to move together - if it is within the wisdom of this House and indeed with your guidance, that we come back tomorrow –(Interjection)– That is my proposal. We can do that or else we waive that law and they lay the statements on Tuesday. That is my view.

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give to the House is that we had a similar challenge in 2018 and I remember very well the presiding officer was Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. We had almost only 10 Members sitting here to receive the policy statements. Therefore, it is possible. We do not demand that everybody comes but those who are able can come back and we receive them. 

The deadline is 15th, so what are we going to do as a country? Are we going to neglect statements and refuse to receive them? I would like urge that we do something. Let us be national enough. Challenges exist; today is you and tomorrow may be for another. This man is the minister today but tomorrow it might be you in that docket. Challenges exist; let us receive them in good faith.

MR WALUSWAKA: With that information, Madam Speaker, I would like to request Members - We do not want to go against the law and I know hon. Mwiru and others are looking at the law. I would beg the indulgence of this House that you give time between now and 15th to let ministries come and lay policy statements on the Table. Otherwise, we shall be going against the law and we shall be caught off guard. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can we, in resolving this problem, resort to the Interpretation Act? Under the Interpretation Act, when an event falls on either a public holiday or a weekend, the next working day is the one that is authorised to be applied. That is the law, Madam Speaker.

Therefore, if we read and interpret what that section provides, we would be in order to have them laid on the Table on the next Tuesday or maybe Monday. That is the law as I understand it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, if we are to go by that, would delivery to the Clerk constitute laying on the Table? Let me look at Section 13.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is just 4.00 p.m. The Government Chief Whip is around and the Prime Minister’s Office is equally represented here. Between 4.00 p.m. and 6.00 p.m., - each ministry has more than three ministers - let the information go to their offices and at least one minister from each office comes and lays the said ministerial policy statements on the Table. That is better than bending the law to suit people’s interests.

Madam Speaker, we cannot be seen bending the law because somebody wants a given interest to be met. Tomorrow, if we come up with another law, shall we change it simply because we must make somebody happy? Therefore, let those ministers get the notifications to bring their documents here since every ministry is in Kampala.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I would like us to agree on what constitutes “submit to Parliament”. Does it mean submit on the Floor of Parliament or to the Office of the Clerk to Parliament? I am asking this because it says “…shall by the 15th of March submit to Parliament, the policy statements…” What I would like us to agree on is whether, in this context, we submit to the Clerk or on the Floor.

Mr abdu katuntu: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that the Interpretation Act provides that if an event falls on a public holiday, then it is presumed that the following working day shall be the last day to do that particular act, and there is no doubt about that. When, in this circumstance, is the next working day? It is Monday. The law does not talk about days when Parliament is sitting; it just gives days. 

Having said that, we are now looking at symptoms. The problem is: why don’t the ministries obey the deadlines set by the law? Even next financial year, we are going to have the same problem. I think we need to critically advise the Executive that this time – 

First of all, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development know that they are the implementing agency of this law. The timelines were set by the Executive and we graciously enacted the law giving you the timelines you asked for. Why aren’t you obeying the timelines?

However, the issue is that there is this challenge now. The practice has been that if you want to submit to Parliament a policy statement, you lay it on the Table. Are we going to conveniently interpret the law to suit a challenge? I think that would be wrong. 

The only correct thing to do is for us to sit on Monday to have these policy statements laid on the Table. We would then have been within the law and also given them time within which to lay the policy statements, rather than trying to interpret the law conveniently to answer a challenge.
 
Mr ssekikubo: Madam Speaker, for the last two weeks, you have been on record reminding the Front Bench about the timelines. Secondly, from the financial year 2019/2020, a process was set into motion for this very exercise of laying ministerial policy statements. As evidence of that, you can see that the Front Bench was well represented; they knew. It is not that they have been unaware of this or that they can claim they did not have the time. 

Hon. Bahati has been attending this House diligently and he has been communicating the directives of this House. Other than the communication and directives, this is the right thing to do; it is within the law for them to do so and beat the timeline of 15 March.

I would like to caution my colleagues and those I hold in high esteem - hon. Aogon and – For one who is aspiring to be the vice-chairperson of the caucus to start standing on this Floor and pleading that because this matter was not understood well, we should change, as my candidate, I feel disappointed. When we are legislating in this House, you leave your colours outside, whether yellow or blue, and legislate for our country, Uganda –(Interruption)

Mr aogon: Madam Speaker, anybody in the House, as long as you swore by the Bible or Quran, is entitled to their opinion. That was my opinion. Is it in order, therefore, for my big colleague who I treat as a very great friend, to insinuate that I am doing a wrong thing and that I am not being nationalistic? Whatever I said was within my opinion and I am entitled to it. As a Member, I am entitled to speak; I represent the people. Is he in order?

The Speaker: Any honourable member is free to speak what he wants but let us conclude this matter.

Mr ssekikubo: Madam Speaker, I belong to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and I am deeply saddened to find that the Ministry of Internal Affairs’ policy statement is not among those presented. It is very disheartening. They are the ones who are supposed to be the custodians of law and order; they now want to run the country in a disorderly manner. This is a matter that cannot be tolerated. 

Madam Speaker, it is high time you cracked the whip. We are not here to keep reminding and they disregard –

The Speaker: What do you propose?

Mr ssekikubo: Those who are caught in their own lapse should be held accountable and reprimanded accordingly. 

Mr byandala: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, the Executive should know that we are not happy with the way they are doing things. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, we are not going to allow the House you lead to go against the law. We are already in motion. We have been sitting since Tuesday. I propose that we come back tomorrow by 10 a.m. and in five minutes we will have finished this work, instead of going to Monday. It is easier when we are already in motion.

Last year I was here. We were about five to 10 people and we finished the whole issue. Thank you.

Mr mwiru: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter. I have had the benefit of reading through the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Water and Environment. Annexed to it are a certificate of compliance and a certificate by the Equal Opportunities Commission, which mentions a very pertinent issue: Out of the 19 entities, which submitted, only 11 passed the test; the rest failed. This means that whereas we are dealing with a small problem of merely submitting, there are others, which did not even comply –

The Speaker: Honourable member, you are now reading but I have not even looked at the policy statement. No, that is for the committee. 

The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to register that indeed, the figures for wage enhancement were given a bit late because we were still doing some work in terms of the revenue side.

Secondly, now that we know through the Interpretation Act that when the day falls on the weekend or a non-working day, the next day is the one that by law we should be counting - We should have done better if we did it today but now we cannot do it and we would like to do a good job. We did not delay because of anything else but to enhance the salaries of university lecturers. 

I would like to suggest and propose that we submit the remaining policy statements to your office latest Monday. They will be captured here but the Office of the Speaker will receive the document on the same day and then you can decide whether to call Parliament on Tuesday. Nevertheless, they will have reached your office, Madam Speaker, on a day that is within the law, which will be 15th. 

I do not know whether we fully understand the submission. The lawyers can help us; what does submission mean? Does it mean laying on the Floor of the House or receipt by the Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: Can we ask the honourable minister to respond? 

4.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (LABOUR, EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS) (Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, the provision that talks about submission of the ministerial statement is sub-section (13) of the Public Finance Management Act. Its wording is clear. It reads: 

“The minister responsible for the vote shall, by 15th of March, submit to Parliament the policy statements for the preceding financial year for the ministries or other votes, as the case maybe.”

It is a mandatory provision for the ministries to submit. The question is what is submission? In practise, we submit by laying on the Table. However, I want to opine that the two are different. Where the law requires that a document shall be laid on Table, it explicitly says so. There are so many provisions of the law which require to be laid on the Table of Parliament. 

However, this one is talking about submission. In my opinion, submission is different from laying on the Table. You can lay on the Table, as a mode of submission, but correspondence to Parliament is duly done if it is served to the Clerk to Parliament or directly to the Office of the Speaker; either of the two can suffice. You can submit by laying on the Table but you can also submit by forwarding the documents to the Clerk of Parliament or to the Office of the Speaker.

In support of the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, it would be proper and in order for submission to be done either electronically or in hard copy to the Office of the Clerk or the –(Interruption)

4.22	
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Bugweri): Madam Speaker, I think hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana is trading dangerous grounds. How do these policy statements get to the committees? Is it through the Office of the Clerk? How do they get to the House? Are they sneaked into the House? 

The policy statements are laid on the Table and they are referred from the House to the various sectoral committees. That is how we work. There is no reason why we should reinvent the wheel because we want to beat a challenge. It is not correct. 

What I expect the Executive to do is to say, “We have time until Monday. Let us have these policy statements laid on Table on Monday” and they be referred to the committee. Why do you want to cause a controversy where there should be none? 

I sometimes do not understand these things. We have two days. You can request the Rt Hon. Speaker at her pleasure to convene the House tomorrow or Monday and she forwards these statements formally to the committees, as we always do.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, ordinarily, it would be proper for the documents to be laid on the Table so that the Speaker can refer them to the respective committees. However, even when there has been a submission to the Clerk or the Speaker, which I submit is legal and recognised, the Speaker can, at an opportune time, come to the House and say that the documents were submitted to Parliament and she refers them to the respective committees. 

4.24
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Madam Speaker, I would not really want to weigh in, particularly where my seniors have already made a submission. 

What the honourable minister is not being honest about is that he knows what “submission” means; ejusdem generis. It means in a particular category. Submission in a particular category of Parliament means laying on the Table. That is basically what the primary intention is. By submitting, you are laying on Table for it to be captured on the Hansard and taken accordingly. 

Therefore, I think it is very unfair for him to try to make the Speaker be the one to bear responsibility. I would rather he goes by the guidance of hon. Katuntu. That is the only way out of this matter. 

4.25
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. From the fact, it is clear that there is a crisis but we should not interpret the law differently, simply because we want to deal with the challenge. 

When the law says “submitting to Parliament”, it means this House. If the days are expiring on Sunday, the minister should seek for indulgence of this House or the Speaker to ensure the House either sits on Sunday or we borrow the Interpretation Act and sit on Monday, which will be the next day after the weekend. 

Otherwise, I do not agree that the provision of the law says that submitting can be done to the Clerk or the Speaker. The honourable minister is about to tell us that we can even submit to the Sergeant at Arms or the security guards, simply because they are working at Parliament.

My submission is that the minister should seek to benefit from the provisions of the Interpretation Act and we have – if it may please – thank you. 

4.26
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Madam Speaker, in view of what counsel Akamba said, just like what hon. Katuntu said, that you are travelling on bad grounds. Court may nullify such submissions, honourable minister. 

I believe members – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Musumba, what is the section of the Interpretation Act relating to the time?  

4.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, the Interpretation Act states that when an event falls on a public holiday, that event will now be dealt with on the next working day. 

THE SPEAKER: I think this is Section 34 of the Interpretation Act which says, in computing time for purpose of any Act, if the last day of the period is a Sunday or a public holiday, weekdays in this section are referred to as excluded days, the period shall include the next following day not being an excluded. That is why we move to Monday; 15th now falls on Monday, for purposes of this Act. Then what we have to decide is what do we do on the 15th? Do we sit?

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, we have two options as a House, the Speaker can direct to convene the Parliament on Monday or since the Speaker has powers to determine the sittings of Parliament, the Speaker can direct the next working day for Parliament and it would still be in order, in my understanding, which would mean Tuesday. However, Madam Speaker, we are prepared to be here on Monday if you so please.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we shall take a decision later, but now we know that we can move to Monday for the purpose of Sunday. Okay. The following ministries must produce their statements:

    i. Ministry of Agriculture
    ii. Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs
    iii. Ministry of Internal Affairs
    iv. Ministry of Education 
    v. Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities
    vi. Office of the Auditor-General
    vii. Inspectorate of Government
    viii. Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development
    ix. Treasury Operations 
    x. Kampala Capital City Authority 

They must produce them by the 15th which will fall on a Monday. Then we shall determine what time to sit or not to sit. Those that have complied I refer them to the sectoral committees for perusal and report back. Let us continue now with next part of the Order Paper. Item No.5.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER TO ISSUES RAISED ON PLANS BY GOVERNMENT TO AMELIORATE THE SITUATION IN SIRONKO AND RELOCATE THE AT RISK POPULATION TO SAFER PLACES

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Prime Minister; let us go to 5(b)

4.32
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala): Madam Speaker, I have a myriad of questions to respond to, but I want to apologise that questions (i)-(iv) and question (xiv), came in a few days ago and I am still getting the answers to those questions. I seek the indulgence of the Speaker that I bring the answers next week on Tuesday. With that, allow me to respond to the following questions:

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER TO ISSUES RAISED ON FAILURE BY THE MINISTRY OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT TO HONOUR THEIR UNDERTAKING TO REHABILITATE SEVERAL ROADS AFFECTED BY RAINS IN AGAGO DISTRICT

4.33
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala): Madam Speaker, this statement is presented in response to a matter raised on the 11th Sitting of the Second Meeting of Fourth Session of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda by hon. Akello Judith Franca, Woman Representative, Agago District. It was on the failure by the Ministry of Works and Transport to honour their undertaking to rehabilitate several roads affected by the heavy rains in Agago District. Madam Speaker, I would like to respond as follows: 

The national roads in Agago have not been worked on because as other roads, on the national network, we are still facing a challenge of lack of funds to handle the emergencies which were occasioned by the heavy rains.

We have already made our correspondence with the Prime Minister, requesting for intervention in terms of additional funds but up to now, no funds have been released for emergence intervention, and therefore Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) is unable as of now, to handle those critical sections which have been affected by the rains. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: You have a series of other questions, are you also responding to them?

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: Yes, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER TO ISSUES RAISED ON FLOODS THAT HAVE DESTROYED ISINGIRO-RUGAGA-NTANTAMUKI ROAD AND KITYAZA-BUGANGO ROAD AND DELAYS BY GOVERNMENT TO RELEASE FUNDS TO UGANDA NATIONAL ROADS AUTHORITY TO PAY CONTRACTORS

4.35
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala): This is a question in response to a statement that was presented in response to a matter raised by hon. Kangwagye Stephen, Member of Parliament for Bukanga on floods that have destroyed Isingiro-Rugaga-Ntantamuki Road and Kityaza-Bugango Road and the delays by Government to release funds to UNRA to pay the contractor. Madam Speaker, I would like to respond as follows: 

That we have a framework contractor who was already working on that section of the roads and he has been given a call-off order in quarter three, this financial year, to undertake the maintenance works but he has not yet commenced works due to UNRA’s non-payment of the works executed earlier.

In the interim, the Mbarara station of UNRA is to undertake some interventions on the bottlenecks on the road section as we await funds to pay the contractor to continue with the framework contract.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER TO ISSUES RAISED ON THE CUTTING OFF OF WEST NILE DUE TO THE BURSTING OF THE BANKS OF THE RIVER NILE AT PAKWACH AND THE NEED FOR A SUSTAINABLE SOLUTION TO FORESTALL ANY FUTURE REOCCURRENCES

4.37
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala): Madam Speaker, The next statement is a response to a matter raised by hon. Adong Lilly, Nwoya Woman Representative on the cutting off of West Nile due to the bursting of the banks of the River Nile at Pakwach and need for a sustainable solution to stop any future reoccurrence.

Madam Speaker, this was a temporary situation, which was occasioned by the papyrus and sand, which had blocked the water flow. However, the clearance of the papyrus and sand was carried out and the road was opened within 12 hours of blockade. This was partially because of the movement of River Tangi Bridge due to the construction site. The channel is now very clear, the water is now flowing normally, and the road is open for use.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER TO ISSUES RAISED ON DELAYS IN LAND ACQUISITION FOR THE STANDARD GAUGE RAILWAY PROJECT ESPECIALLY IN TORORO DISTRICT

4.38
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala): Madam Speaker, this is in response to a statement raised by hon. Yeri Apollo Ofwono, Member of Parliament for Tororo Municipality concerning delays in land acquisition for the Standard Gauge Railway project especially in Tororo.

While this matter was raised by hon. Ofwono, I think it affects many people along the Standard Gauge Railway lines. This includes areas of Iganga, Busembatya and other areas.

Madam Speaker, below are the responses to the specific questions raised by the honourable member: 

One was disclosing the value of some properties that were assessed in the selected project areas particularly in Tororo Municipality.

The response is that the entire Malaba-Kampala route has been set out and assessment has been done for 97 per cent of the route. The remaining three per cent comprises of assessment for sugarcane and tea plantation, fishponds and Kampala stations. The assessment for sugarcane and tea plantation is being done together with experts from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries while engagements with Uganda Railways Corporation (URC) are ongoing for the Kampala station.

The total land to be acquired is approximately 1963.039 hectares and this include public land belonging to URC, road reserves, land belonging to NEMA, NFA and Uganda Land Commission.

The total land compensation cost estimates for the whole corridor of the Standard Gauge Railway is Shs 534.2 billion. 

The valuation report for the districts of Tororo, Butaleja, Namutumba, Luuka, Iganga and Mayuge, worth Shs 137 billion have been approved by the Chief Government Valuer (CGV). 

The valuation reports for Mukono corridor and station, Kasoli Housing Estate, Jinja corridor and station, Wakiso and Kampala, worth Shs 397 billion were submitted to the Chief Government Valuer for approval.

Out of the total compensation estimate of Shs 534.2 billion, and approved reports of Shs l37 billion, only Shs 65.929 billion has been paid to 3,584 Project-Affected Persons (PAPs) over the last four years due to limited and non-performing budgets.

The details of Tororo District corridor station and Nagongera station

The total assessment value is Shs 68.447 billion and the total number of PAPs is 1,624.

Total land to be acquired is 375.86 hectares out of which, 238.773 hectares is private land and the balance of l37.09 hectares is public land, belonging to URC, NEMA and NFA. 

The total amount paid out in Tororo so far, is Shs 40.045 billion. 

Total private land acquired in Tororo to-date is 464.67 acres.

The balance to be paid in Tororo is Shs 28.429 billion.

He asked about reasons for delay in disclosing the values of some of the properties that were assessed in the selected project areas, particularly Tororo Municipality. Madam Speaker, in Tororo there is a place called “Water Village”. In this area, both Uganda Land Commission (ULC) and Tororo District Land Board (TDLB) claim ownership of the affected land and each separately issued out freehold offers or leases to different persons for the same plots of land. The Ministry of Works has engaged both of them and in a bid to resolve the impasse, ULC recalled the lease/freehold offers and undertook to identify alternative land for the affected persons to pave way for SGR development. In addition, ULC requested the District Land Board to also recall the leases/freehold offers because the land is not under their mandate as provided for under the Land Act of l998, as amended. The District Land Board has not yet acted as per the advice of the ULC. The Ministry of Works continues to engage the stakeholders to resolve the impasse.

Kasoli Housing Project: The Government of Uganda (GOU) through the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development (MLHUD), in partnership with UN-Habitat, DFCU Bank, Kasoli Housing Association and Tororo Municipality, agreed to construct 250 low-cost houses in two phases aimed at benefiting a total of 250 households dwelling in the slum of Kasoli village, Tororo District, at a cost of $2,381,650. However, the housing project is affected by the SGR right of way. The land is registered in ULC for MLHUD-Kasoli Housing Project.

The assessment of the area was made and the draft report was submitted to the Chief Government Valuer for approval. However, he returned the same with a comment that the SGR should clearly indicate the Project-Affected Persons. The Kasoli Tenants’ SACCO claims that the project was meant to benefit them and therefore, they are the rightful PAPs. Given that the land ownership and the housing project were under management of MoLHUD, this created an impasse. Several engagements have been made with the MoLHUD, the SACCO, Attorney-General and the Office of the Auditor-General to resolve the impasse to no conclusion yet. The ministry continues to engage the stakeholders to resolve the issue.

Therefore, until this matter is resolved, we cannot pay the affected people in Kasoli Housing Estate. 
The issue concerning the hospital and other public health institutions and school - these have been handled together with the respective district local governments with full blessing of the line ministries. 

The other question was about evaluation of all project-affected persons’ properties. Madam Speaker, the entire route has been set out and assessment has already been done - as I said - for 97 per cent of the project. 

About the payment, I have already said how much is supposed to be paid and how much is due, what has been approved by the Chief Government Valuer and what we have been able to pay according to the funds we get.

He also asked about the size of the right of way and the measures we have put in place to continue operations and how are we securing the right of way, which we have now paid for. 

A 60-metre right of way from Tororo District to Mukono District and 30 metres wide in Wakiso and Kampala districts is being acquired. When deciding on the alignment, keen interest was taken to ensure minimal disruption of socio-economic activities while ensuring adherence to the required technical standards. So, the right of way will affect 48 schools out which six are government schools, four health centres and one government hospital. Out of the health centres, one is government-owned and three are privately-owned. 

These schools and health centres have been assessed and the ministry is working hand-in-hand with the Ministry of Education and Sports and Ministry of Health to ensure minimal disruption. For private schools and health centres, the proprietors are being compensated directly.

For the hospital and health centres, modalities of compensation and relocation have already been guided by the Ministry of Health. For public schools, we are discussing with the Ministry of Education and Sports.

The plan is that compensation will be effected and the affected public institutions are given sometime to relocate before vacation notices are issued out so that the affected institutions/persons have ample time to relocate their schools and health centres. 

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Have you completed for your ministry? There is one from hon. Acidri.

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: Yes, I still have more.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. 

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER TO ISSUES RAISED ON THE DEPLORABLE STATE OF ROADS IN MADI OKOLLO PARTICULARLY IN THE VICINITY OF THE RHINO CAMP REFUGEE SETTLEMENT, ATTRIBUTED MAINLY TO INCREASED TRAFFIC DUE TO THE INFLUX OF REFUGEES

4.43
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala): Madam Speaker, this statement is presented in response to a matter raised during the 35th Sitting of the First Meeting of the Fourth Session of the 10th Parliament by hon. Ismail Ogama, on the deplorable state of roads in Madi Okollo, particularly in the vicinity of the Rhino Camp Refugee settlement, attributed mainly to increased traffic due to the influx of refugees.

I would like to respond as follows:

We have a framework contract in the area but the call-off order had not been issued due to lack of funds. We expect to do that in quarter four when we have got the release for quarter four.

However, the Government, together with the development partners, is formulating a more sustainable development programme to ease movement in the refugee areas. Maybe I can also take this opportunity to inform the House that one of the roads, which will be done soon, is the Koboko-Yumbe-Moyo Road under a grant from the World Bank. We are moving at a fast pace to ensure the works start soon. That is in support of the refugee-stressed areas.
 
RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER TO ISSUES RAISED ON THE POOR ROAD DESIGN AND INTERSECTION AT ABAYITA ABABIRI JUNCTION, THE RECURRING CASES OF ROBBERY AND THE REDUNDANT ROAD TOLL ON THE EXPRESSWAY

4.44
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala): Madam Speaker, this statement is presented in response to a matter raised during the 30th Sitting of the 1st Meeting of the 4th Session of the 10th Parliament of Uganda, by hon. Odongo Otto, Member of Parliament for Aruu County, on the poor road design and intersection of Abayita Ababiri road junction, the recurring cases of robbery and the redundant road toll on the Entebbe Expressway. 

I would like to respond as follows: With respect to functionality, the design meets the required standards. However, sensitisation about safety on the expressway continues by the Ministry of Works and Transport, UNRA and Uganda Police. 

We will also make sure that Uganda Police enforces discipline on that road. Most of the accidents have been due to indiscipline and people over speeding – maybe enjoying the smoothness of the road too much.

With respect to security, Uganda Police has increased patrols on the road. The procurement of the operations and maintenance service provider is in advanced stages as we expect to start tolling by July 2020. The road will be handed over to the contractor to do the operations and maintenance and we expect the tolling to be done by July 2020. 

Among the other things to be done by the contractor are: to put lighting on the road and reinforce the protection, including the chain link to avoid people violating the expressway.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER TO ISSUES RAISED ON THE DEPLORABLE STATE OF BUKWO-SUAM ROAD

4.46
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala): Madam Speaker, this statement is presented in response to a question raised by hon. Chemutai Evelyn, District Woman Representative Bukwo, on the deplorable state of Bukwo-Suam Road. 

I would like to respond as follows: This road is under construction to upgrade it to a bituminous surface from Kapchorwa to Suam. 

The contractor is already on site and carrying out forward maintenance to keep the sections of the road, which have not been worked on in fairly motorable condition. 

I would like you to appreciate that this is a very difficult terrain and the speed of the contractor is highly determined by the kind of terrain he is working on. The progress is, however, on. 

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER TO ISSUES RAISED ON THE DEPLORABLE STATE OF THE KUMI-NGORA-SOROTI-SERERE ROAD

4.47
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala): Madam Speaker, this is in respect to a question, which was raised by hon. Abala David, Member of Parliament, Ngora County, on the deplorable state of the Kumi-Ngora-Soroti-Serere Road. 

I would like to respond as follows: The road is not highly deteriorated; is in a fair condition after grading by UNRA and the in-house maintenance teams in quarter three of this financial year around January 2020. I wish hon. Abala was here, he would have confirmed this. There is improved performance on that road.

However, due to the persistent rains, the interventions can only be sustained with availability of adequate funding, which we do not have right now.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER TO ISSUES RAISED ON SHS 60 BILLION COMPENSATION PACKAGE TO PROJECT AFFECTED PERSONS (PAPS) OF THE ACHOLIBUR-GULU-OLWIYO ROAD CONSTRUCTION WHICH WAS GIVEN TO THE CONTRACTOR INSTEAD OF THE PAPS AND THE WRONG TAGGING/NAMING OF ROADS AND ABSENCE OF CONSTRUCTION WORKS ON THE RWEKUNYE-APAC-LIRA-ACHOLIBUR-KITGUM-MUSINGO ROAD WHOSE LOAN WAS PASSED BY PARLIAMENT

4.48
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala): Madam Speaker, this is a response to a question raised by hon. Lucy Achiro Otim, Aruu North. This was a question on the Shs 60 billion compensation package for Project Affected Persons (PAPs) of the Acholibur-Gulu-Olwiyo Road construction, which was given to the contractor instead of the PAPs and additionally, on the wrong tagging/naming of roads, and the absence of construction works on the Rwekunye-Apac-Lira-Acholibur-Kitgum-Musingo Road whose loan was passed by Parliament. 

I would like to respond as follows: Rwenkunye-Apac-Lira-Puranga (191 km) - the civil works contract was cleared by the Solicitor-General and the financier, Islamic Development Bank (IsDB) gave a no-objection to the contract in January 2020. 

The signing and implementation of the contract awaits effectiveness of the financing agreement, which is yet to be signed by the Government, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Islamic Development Bank.

With respect to Olwiyo-Gulu Road (70km), the project was substantially completed in November 2018 and the Gulu town roads were completed in November 2019. 

In regard to Acholibur-Kitgum-Musingo Road (86.4km), I would like to report that the project was completed in March 2018, and the status of RAP implementation for the above project is shown in the table below. I will submit this to the Clerk.

As for Olwiyo-Gulu Road, I would like to report that the amount of payable valuation is Shs 13.2 billion. We have already paid 11.1 billion. The total number of PAPs are 1,418. The total number of PAPs who have been paid so far is 1,286. This gives a 91 per cent clearance. 

With regard to Gulu-Acholibur Road, the value was 13.1 billion. The amount we have paid out is Shs 10.5 billion. The number of PAPs was 1,538; we have so far paid 1,380, giving a percentage of 90 clearance.

On Acholibur-Musingo Road, the total valuation was Shs 23.9 billion. We have paid Shs 21 billion. The total number of PAPs was 2,269. We have paid 2,023. 

The failure to pay l00 per cent for the land on the above projects is due to the following constraints: 

    a) Absentee Project Affected Persons who never turn up for verification exercises;
    b) Project Affected Persons with missing documents; 
    c) Land ownership disputes and conflict among those to be compensated; and
    d)  Inadequate funds for land acquisition - not enough to pay all PAPs in a given financial year. This is being addressed now with ministry of finance. We have found a way to go around this.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER TO ISSUES RAISED ON A FATAL MOTOR ACCIDENT THAT CLAIMED EIGHT LIVES ON SATURDAY 22ND FEBRUARY 2020 AT THE SAAKA BRIDGE, WHICH HAD BROKEN DOWN OVER EIGHT MONTHS EARLIER 

4.50
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala): Madam Speaker, my next statement is presented in response to a matter raised by hon. Margaret Mbeiza, Woman Representative Kaliro District at the 17th Sitting of this Parliament. 

Her concern was about a fatal accident that claimed eight lives on 22 February at Saaka Swamp that connects the Kaliro to Pallisa District, which had been damaged and made impassable by the recent floods that the country has experienced over the last two months and where, unfortunately, some lives were lost when a vehicle fell into the swamp waters.

Permit me to first of all acknowledge and send my sincere condolences to the bereaved families for the lives lost in that fatal accident. 

Permit me also to inform the Parliament that five people perished in the accident and not eight as stated. These were: Mr Daza Franco of Naiwakoke, Mr John Kabweru of Naiwakoke, Ms Madina Kafuko of Namungalwe, Sylvia, who was a bride of Gogonyo, Angela of Irundu, Buyende.

Saaka Bridge swamp crossing was constructed by the Ministry of Works and Transport, largely using Force Account Mechanisms and the swamp was opened for traffic about two years ago. The bridge works though had commenced in 2011 but these experienced delays due to financial constraints. 

The heavy rains that the country experienced last year seriously affected and caused damage on this 3.6km swamp. These rains were quite unprecedented and were a result of climate change, which is now a worldwide phenomenon. 

It is worth noting that this swamp lies downstream of the Tirinyi Swamp on Nakalama-Tirinyi-Mbale Highway. It is a swamp that is crossed by River Mpologomoa, whose catchment area includes the Mt Elgon area. The damage to the swamp was not only caused by the heavy flood waters but was aggravated by the many papyrus suds that were carried by the torrents of the flood waters. These covered and blocked the culverts, causing the water levels to rise and subsequently overtop the embankment of the swamp. 

The fast flowing waters then rapidly washed out the gravel material and subsequently washed away the culverts, particularly in the locations where the Mpologoma waters traverse the swamp.

In view of the above, the ministry is planning for interventions to restore connectivity as soon as the water levels reduce. It is anticipated to undertake short-term interventions as plans are made for more permanent ones due to the high costs associated with the latter as provision has to be made for enhanced hydraulic capacity to accommodate the high flood waters. A span bridge and some box culverts are envisaged and the costs of these are high. Therefore, an appropriate budget will be required.

The unfortunate accident

During the time when the heavy rains were being experienced, the ministry advised road administrations in all districts, in writing, to ensure that the public was made aware of any disruptions and also carry out emergency interventions, where possible, at critical locations where road infrastructure was damaged. We also advised that roads, which were not passable, should be closed to the public.

In the case of Saaka Swamp, the districts of Kaliro and Pallisa were duly informed. As restitution was not possible at the time, the public was informed that the swamp was impassable. Notices were placed before the swamp to this effect. Some stones had also been placed across the road.

Unfortunately, on 22 February 2020, it is understood that the driver ignored advice from the local community not to proceed along this road and even circumvented the stones that had been placed across the road and very regrettably ended up falling in the water, causing the death of those five people.

To avoid such disastrous incidents from occurring again, murram stacks have been dumped across the road so that no vehicle can access the swamp.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the ministry is having a challenge with restoring connectivity over many crossings that suffered damage due to the recent heavy rains. The ministry has compiled and made submissions to the Prime Minister, requesting him to come up with a special financing arrangement to enable us address the challenges on our road network. Unfortunately, to date, we have not received any funds and this is possibly understandable because of the other emergencies like the issue of coronavirus and the locust swarms. 

However, we are still pressing for funds to be able to intervene. We highly regret losing those lives and again, we want to encourage and inform everybody that they should not try to be heroes, especially where there is running water.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWERS

QUESTION 87/04/01

4.54
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): To ask the Hon. Minister of Works and Transport the following: 

“The Vurra, Arua, Koboko and Oraba Highway, which is a distance of approximately 92 kilometers is full of bends and bridges making it unsafe particularly for pedestrians. For the period January to October 2019, there have been 12 fatal accidents, 35 serious accidents and 13 minor accidents on this road. 

The road does not have any humps and although it has numerous speed limit signposts particularly at trading centres, schools and hospitals, the Uganda Police Force does not have any equipment to enforce speed limits on this road.

    (i) When will the ministry construct humps on this road?
    (ii) When will the Uganda Police Force be equipped with speed guns in order to regulate speed along this road?”

4.55
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala): Madam Speaker, my last submission is a statement in response to a matter raised by hon. James Acidri concerning lack of humps and speed limit posts along Vurra-Arua-Koboko-Oraba Highway.

Madam Speaker, hon. Acidri raised a concern about many bends and bridges that make the road unsafe. The ministry has worked collaboratively with Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) to analyse the matter. I would like to submit that the curves along the Vurra-Arua-Koboko-Oraba Highway are for a safe design speed indicated on the speed limits. The problem is that people never observe these limits. The road is safe once these limits are adhered to but people rarely look at those speed limit signs. 

All the bridges have a pedestrian walkway, demarcated from the carriageway with guardrails and these are safe for pedestrians. The country is currently facing challenges of vandalism of road furniture and signposts. Such forms of illegality compromise our road safety and increase the risks of accidents. This is happening on nearly all roads in the country.

We have given our research and development department the task to find another possible material to use for road signs because every time we put any sign made of steel, it takes just a few days and the road signs are gone. The research and development department is trying to investigate what other materials we can use, which does not attract vandalism.

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Works and Transport is working with UNRA, Uganda Police Force, Directorate of Traffic and Road Safety and other stakeholders to promote road safety measures. I commend this honourable Parliament for being committed on matters of road safety. Recently, you passed the Traffic and Road Safety Bill, which will soon become law and we think some of those provisions will be able to bring sanity on our roads.

I still request that all of us get concerned about the increasing road accidents and loss of lives on our roads and make road safety the responsibility of each one of us.

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. You have substantially reduced your list of questions. However, there is one from Kazo. I think you started with the one of hon. Franca Akello but there was the one of Kazo about the collapsed bridge. There was also another bridge in Kachumbala and vandalism on chain-link fence. Are you ready with them as well?

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: Madam Speaker, as I said, there are four questions, which came in just a few days ago. I promise to bring the answers to them next week.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Let us hear supplementary questions from hon. Okupa, hon. Aogon and hon. Acidri.

4.57
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for having come to reduce the backlog of questions.

I think I was the first person to raise the issue of Saaka Bridge the day it collapsed. The member from Ngora told me because he was not in the House and I raised that matter. If Government had acted at that time, possibly we would not have lost the people we lost. 

On the issue of financing – hon. Bahati is here – we had the Contingency Fund. This bridge is the main connector of Busoga and Bukedi regions. When we met UNRA and the Ministry of Works and Transport, they said they had submitted their request to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. It was very disturbing that up to that time – let me say up to now, as you have heard from the minister – the ministry responsible for finance has not released the funds. 

What happened to the Contingency Fund, which we provided to cater for this kind of emergency? They were able to act very fast to handle the issue of Kazinga Channel but for Saaka Bridge, they have not provided money for it yet it is the main connection to those two regions. In fact, some of us use it as a shortcut to cross to Pallisa, Ngorongoro, Ngora and Serere.

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should tell us what is happening since the Ministry of Works and Transport submitted a request to the finance ministry and yet up to now, nothing has happened. I hope the minister of finance will respond since my question was directly addressed to him; it was relating to the finances.

The other issue, honourable minister, is under equipment for Soroti station especially during rainy season. Soroti station covers Teso and Karamoja regions and they only have one unit and yet there are regions that have more than three units of equipment.

Madam Speaker, we have continuously raised this matter. Recently when in a meeting, I also raised this issue. Why should Soroti station that covers the whole of Teso and Karamoja regions have one unit?

The road you are talking about; Kumi-Ngora-Serere connects to Kasilo. If I showed you the pictures of the road that I sent to Madam Kagina - in fact, hon. Abala and hon. Aogon had to mobilise people for a demonstration and that was when some remedial work was done, although it was done halfway. 

Madam Speaker, that road is supposed to cover 95 kilometers but it has not been done yet the rains are coming. The issue of the equipment has been raised to the UNRA Soroti office. Honourable minister, I understand you bought new equipment for Soroti office that covers Karamoja and Teso region.

Madam Speaker that is a low-lying area. As a region, we need equipment. We also need you to provide money to work on this road. Otherwise, this is the main road.

Madam Speaker, Kamuli-Bukungu Road, where the ferry connects to Kagoro and Kumi-Ngora-Serere road - If we are going to tarmac this side and then land on a very bad road, how will you connect? In fact, I am going to write a letter to the Minister of Works and Transport about this road, which was pledged by the President in 2011 and 2016 for tarmacking, to enable good connection to Jinja-Kamuli-Bukungu-Kagwara-Soroti-Moroto. Thank you.

5.11
MR SILAS AOGON	(Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, the Minister of Works and Transport has been answering questions and he is one of the minister’s I trust. He is a trusted general. He can answer questions and he is a hard working person.

The road section between Pallisa and Kumi is coming to a conclusion. The Arab Contractors are doing a good job. However, an issue is being raised by my constituents that some people have not been compensated to date and they are worried since the work is coming to a conclusion. What are you going to do about this? Madam Speaker, I need an answer that I will give to my people.

Madam Speaker, on nearly every road construction that passes through a major town, they provide a bypass. What went wrong? We have not seen any signs of a bypass via Kumi Town to Soroti-Mbale Highway. If we do not have a bypass, all the big trucks will be passing in the middle of the town and this will be dangerous. What are you doing about this? Thank you.

5.12
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County Ngora): Madam Speaker, thank you very much, for giving me the opportunity. I would like to also thank the minister. The general is a very good man and smart. What he tells people is that you should confirm.

What I would like to say is that on the Kumi-Ngora-Serere-Soroti Road, the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) only attempted to do the work; they did not do real work. Where there were potholes, they just covered them and in some areas, they just left them. That is basically what I wanted to confirm. The work was done but it was just an attempt.

Secondly, I have seen a team of UNRA officials who have met people from Kumi telling them that they are going to sign an agreement to begin the process of working on the Kumi-Ngora-Serere Road. I do not have the details. Madam Speaker, sometimes when doing their job, they do not communicate to the members of Parliament. We just see things going on. 

I also would like to inquire from the minister - we passed about Shs 22 billion to fix roads that had been destroyed by floods. On 23rd December, Dr Eng. Naimanye, the Acting Executive Director of the Uganda Road Fund, asked districts to look for money to fix the roads that had been affected by floods. Honourable minister, where did you put the money that Parliament approved before we broke for Christmas? It was passed on 23rd December 2019, two days two Christmas.

Madam Speaker, a letter has come from the Uganda Road Fund asking districts including Ngora, Kumi, Serere, to look for the money to fix roads affected by floods. Honourable minister, kindly answer that question.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thought the Uganda Road Fund sends to us quarterly information about money that has gone to the districts. Don’t you get it? They sent information to all of us to say we have sent so much money to the districts. 

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, I agree with you and it is very true. However, this letter is different from the other one. I have a copy of the letter here. I can actually print it and lay it on the Table. The letter is completely different from what we normally get. This is why I want the minister to –

THE SPEAKER: Has the minister seen it? The minister has not seen the letter and yet you want him to answer. Let us have hon. Acidri.

5.51
MR JAMES	ACIDIRI (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Thank you. Honourable minister, it took me pen and paper to write to you about the situation of the Vurra-Arua–Koboko Road. Indeed, you have explained very well that, that road is in very good condition but you have not answered my question.

Our problem is not lack of road signs. There is no vandalism and the road signs are there. Our problem is that there is no one enforcing speed limits to guarantee road safety. That was why I was able to attach the statistics of the loss of lives on that road.

Honourable minister, the question I asked was: now that the Ministry of Internal Affairs has failed to provide speed guns for the Uganda Police Force to enforce speed limits, when are you going to put humps on that highway?

When you look at Karuma–Olwiyo–Purongo-Pakwach–Nebbi–Arua Road, there are humps everywhere. Even that same road Vurra-Arua-Koboko just before you enter Koboko has humps. Why haven’t you put for us humps, where we have schools, hospitals, trading centers? Madam Speaker, this road passes through these major settlements. When are you putting these humps since we do not have speed guns? 

The Ministry of Internal Affairs has told us that they have no money to buy speed guns. Madam Speaker, I discussed this matter with hon. Obiga Kania but he said they have no money. The police have also told us that they cannot enforce safety without speed guns. So, when will you provide the speed guns, if you cannot afford the speed guns? Thank you.

5.18
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My submission is in relation to what hon. Okupa talked about.

When the districts where given road units, all regions - equipment in the category of heavy machinery were very insufficient. At times, you sympathise with the ministry and the districts when it comes to dealing with the serious problems on the roads. It is something that we need to think about as we go through the next budget process; an assessment should be made of the real needs of the Ministry of Works in terms of heavy equipment.

When you look at the Central Region, it runs all the way from Nakasongola to Buvuma and all those are expected to use the few units of the equipment that is available. Therefore, supplementing the usage of the tractors that are available at the districts is almost impossible.

They end up doing haphazard work, especially at the districts because such machinery cannot be got at the right time and money is usually appropriated in the same period, so the demand for this equipment is always conflicting. We seriously need to look at this and task the ministry to make needs assessment so that such things are taken care of. 

5.19
MR GORDON BAFAKI (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will not wait for a written response since the minister is here. The matter in question was about a washed away bridge in Kazo and that is Rushango Bridge.

You know the challenges that the newly created districts go through and apparently in Kazo, there is no equipment that can be used to remedy such calamities.
I went with my community leaders and tried to gather stones to sustain it. We have managed to sustain that bridge and people can now cross but with the current rains, everything will be washed away.

I know that some of these issues can be long-term but can’t we have a temporary measure for Kazo District now? I request the minister to liaise with the regional office in Mbarara.

People should rush and save the situation before we begin saying that people have perished in the river. If we are to wait for a written response, we are not doing any service to the people who are using that bridge.

Madam Speaker, you were in Kazo; the only grader that we shared with Kiruhura - when it comes to plans and budgeting, everybody wants to use it. As we wait for the districts to get their equipment, can we have intervention on that bridge? Thank you.

5.22
MR FRED ANGELLA (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The shortest route to Karamoja is through Muyembe- Nakapiripirit - and this has been raised several times on the Floor of Parliament.

Sometime back in the Ninth Parliament, we passed a loan concerning that road. However, up to now, it is six to seven years but it has not been worked on.

Last year, I read somewhere that the Executive Director of UNRA was signing a contract for the same road but up to now, nothing has taken place. May I know from the Minister of Works and Transport what is going on? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Just that we have covered many things but it is supposed to be supplementary to what was asked; but anyway, the road is important.

5.23
MR APOLLO MASIKA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Government of Uganda and the Ministry of Works and Transport for the road connecting Mbale to Lwakhakha. Good progress on the works has been going on, only that they left a certain auxiliary, which goes from Kufu-Bukhawekha, Nambwala and connects the headquarters of Namisindwa District, Bumbo and Magale.

These are very productive areas where many people grow onions, carrots, Irish potatoes and tomatoes. You can stand on the mountains and see a good road glittering from very far. On top of that, the road connecting Magale to the headquarters - there were cracks which developed and there are many bridges on that road. So when people bring their goods from up the hills, they cannot connect.

They can only use the Kenya side because getting to the other road is almost 10 to 20 kilometres. We have a problem; people are pointing fingers at us, the members of Parliament; that we are not doing any work.

The President promised to work on that road but it is full of rocks. It is impassable; even the donkeys, which have been helping can no longer do any work. I would like to request the Ministry of Works Transport to come and look into this issue. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us stick to the issues which have been answered because that is what was prepared for.

5.25
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, honourable minister, for the response although this is late because I raised this matter some time back. Now that you have said that there is no money, I would like to know the way forward because all the central government roads in Agago District are in a very poor state.

The rains have started again; I am very sure that in the next few weeks, all the central government roads in Agago except the section from Pader to Kalongo will be cut off completely. I wish that you could send a team from the ministry to go and confirm that I am telling the truth.

We have a few of the central government roads that I am talking about; the one from Luke Bridge through Kalongo Hospital to Buluji - and that is the main road that we use for the only hospital we have. The section from Corner Kilak to Adilang through Patongo is also very bad and completely broken. Then the section from Adilang through Lira-Kato, Lapono up to Omiyapachwa is equally bad.

These are the three major central government roads, which are completely cut-off and the moment it states raining again, we shall be in trouble. I asked the question quite some time ago if there was no money; but now I know there is a release for this quarter. Would you like to consider working on those roads? Thank you.

5.27
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the minister for his response for the concerns of Members in relation to the roads and broken bridges in the country. My concern is on the Bukwo-Suam Road. 

Like Members are aware, a loan was procured to finance that road and the minister gave us some of the reasons, which have delayed the construction on that road and one of them was the terrain, which I concur with because much of Sebei sub-region is mountainous. However, what did not come out clearly is the issue of the absentee land owners, which has made compensation difficult. When do you think this can be handled to avoid delay of the project? 

The people of Sebei and indeed their neighbours - the people from Amudat - would wish to have that road worked on as soon as possible so as to fast-track people’s movement and transaction of business. I thank you.

5.28
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka County North, Luuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the responses. However, I would like to remind him that whereas I sympathise with the challenges that his ministry is facing, I would like to make one commitment when it comes to Luuka-Kamuli-Iganga Road, especially the issue of the Namadope Bridge, which is always down.

Honourable minister, that road is one of the most important roads in Busoga because it is used by the Speaker of Parliament when she is traveling from Kamuli –(Laughter)– to her home area via Luuka. That very road is used by the Minister for the Presidency when she is coming from Kampala going to her home in Luuka and her residence is just near Walugogo. That road is a very important because it leads the gallant Member of Parliament for Luuka North –(Laughter)– when he is moving from Iganga going to his home.

In his submission, hon. Silas Aogon raised an issue about his people who are demanding for compensation. My promise, honourable minister, is that in case you promise me that that road will be worked on soon, I will move from home to home, right from Iganga, Luuka to Kamuli, pleading with people not to claim for compensation. Please, honourable minister, assure me. I will immediately set off my campaign and my people will not ask for compensation. I would like to thank you.

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me try to answer some of the concerns raised. On the issue of the additional equipment to UNRA stations; this is really a challenging situation. It is not only to UNRA stations but even our regional stations. We are trying to gradually equip them – again, going by the availability of funds in the budget.

For example, this year, we have only managed to buy a set of units for 13 of the new districts. They will get a full unit of road equipment within this financial year or by close of this year. Orders have already been made.

On the municipalities, we are investigating and – again working with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – looking at an option of reassembling the Chinese equipment and we refurbish it because 85 per cent of that equipment is refurbishable and is working. The municipalities’ work is not as heavy as the districts.

For the little maintenance within the municipality for now, we think that refurbished Chinese equipment will work, instead of leaving them to rot out there. So, that is the plan. If funds allow, then we shall be able to buy more equipment.

On the Project-Affected Persons on Pallisa-Kumi Road who have not yet been paid; if I could get the list, then we shall see how to fast-track that. However, they should not be worried; they will be paid. It is good to hear that you are commending the contractor for doing a good job and so, we hope he will continue doing the same all throughout –(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Colleagues, two years ago, we in the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises were faced with the issue of Project-Affected Persons and the compensations. You remember very well that we recovered close to $30 million, money which your contractors had taken and actually banked in China. 

Have you stopped that practice – where you get Project-Affected Persons’ monies and give them to the contractors, who actually start trading in the said monies and you have this sort of crisis?

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: Thank you very much, honourable member. Well, it was a bitter lesson and I do not think it will be done again. As I speak, one of the things we have done is that money for land for compensation is now ring-fenced in the finance ministry. I mean they give it to us as a lump sum for Project-Affected Persons.

Originally, money was being tagged to a project; so, you would find that maybe the project is not progressive but aother project is yet you cannot take the money from project X to pay for PAPs in project Y. We have now sorted that out with the finance ministry and the money for land compensation is now in one vote. So, we can pay PAPs on any of the ongoing projects and so, that kind of practice will not happen again. I assure you that it will not happen again.

On the issue of the bypass in Soroti Town because of the Northern Corridor road; that is a matter to which I may not be able to give a straight answer because I think it is being investigated. How much would be spent in terms of compensating people if we are to create a bypass? It is being investigated and we will see how practical it will be. I cannot give a promise now that it will be done.

On the issue of the humps on highways; again, this is a matter of debate. Some people are saying highways are supposed to be highways and we are killing them with humps. You sometimes find that even these humps, wherever they are put, destroy the road. 

Actually, what we are doing now is that we have a team from the Ministry of Works and Transport and UNRA trying to consider what kind of humps we should have if we are to have them on a highway. There are various types; there are those rumbles but then there are also the other smooth ride-overs.

We are going to come up with a design, which we can use without injuring the passengers or people using the road but at the same time, achieving improvement on safety on the road. Otherwise, there is a lot of complaints, especially from the regional transporters, about humps on our highways. Our highways are not highways because of the number of humps on them. I think what we need to do is to enforce discipline but also to drum a lot about the safe use of the road. 

On the bridge in Kazo; actually, I talked to the honourable member this afternoon and promised him that I am contacting my regional manager in Mbarara so that he can go and respond to that bridge situation before it becomes a problem.

On Muyembe-Nakapiripirit; as I speak – actually this week, the Minister of State for Works is taking a contractor along the stretch of the road. So, very soon, work on that road will start. The Minister of Works and Transport is actually acquainting the contractor with the stretch of the road from Muyembe to Nakapiripirit. So, that is a done deal; the work on the road will soon start.

About the demand for more roads in the Lwakhakha sector, of course this is a big demand. Everybody wants to see a tarmac road. However, again, we cannot do - right now I can say – and I am saying this with a lot of firmness - that we have decided not to take on new projects before we complete the on-going projects. It does not make sense to take on new projects before we complete the old ones.

Strategically, we are going to also address and finish the oil roads to enable the oil industry to kick off. We are going to do the tourism roads, which again have a bearing on the tourism industry, in terms of creating more income to that industry. Among the projects, which we are taking on, of course will be Kie, Rwenkunya-Apac, Muyembe-Nakapiripirit and those that are already programmed.

Those which are already on going will have to be finished. Otherwise we shall not - we are going to do a number of designs - we are designing a number of roads just to have them ready for implementation. One of them is the constituency for the honourable member from Agago. We are doing the Gulu-OPit-Pajure and Pajule-Patong-Adilang roads all through to Abim. Actually, they have already put in the papers for designing. So, we will progressively handle these roads.

On absentee landlords - this is a difficult one but we may have to work with you, the leadership in the area. We may have to deposit this money in the court for security so that if those people appear, they can be able to - but allow the project to proceed. What we have done in some areas –(Interruption)

MS NAUWAT: I am the Member of Parliament from Amudat District but Bukwo-Aswam Road is in the Sebei Sub region. I was just supplementing because they are my neighbours. Otherwise, you can get in touch with my colleagues from that sub region.

MR ANGELLA: You have just said that Muyembe-Nakapiriprit Road is a done deal but again, you said that you are not going to undertake new roads. How are you going to treat the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road? Is it going to be an old or new road?

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: No, Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road is already on and in the pipeline. Such projects will continue. What I am saying is that the demand said by the honourable member that the ones in the mountains and those which we have not even designed yet - we are not going to take on new ones.

However, for Muyembe-Nakapiriprit Road, the contract has already been signed and the loan approved already. The KJE loan has also already been approved and those ones whose loans have been already approved are going to go on.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please. We cannot go on like this. Minister, please answer the original issues. We need to go to other ministers who are waiting. Have you finished?

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: I am done.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us hear from the Minister of Foreign Affairs. They are absent? Okay, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, you have a number of questions.

5.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we have nine questions. Out of the nine, we are still working on one and half questions. However, 4(d)(2) on the non-payment honorary for local council chairpersons, raised by hon. Kafuuzi Karugaba, now the Deputy Attorney-General, we answered this question and said-

THE SPEAKER: It was already done.

MR BAHATI: Yes, we answered it and said we are programing it for next year. In regard to No.3, we said that for those that have not been created, we are planning to operationalise them. 

In regard to No.4, we requested URA to do an audit on Africa Gold Refinery Limited regarding the allegations of dubious importation and export of Gold and tax evasion. They will be ready at the end of the month and in the first week of April, we shall give a report of their audit.

On the status of extra-gratia payment, this issue was sorted and we informed hon. Rose Ayaka. The third question was on the delayed response by Government to offset the standing arrears owed by 18 presidential advisors. Madam Speaker, on Monday next week, we are discussing this matter in the context of the budget for next financial year and we hope that this will be handled in the next financial year.

Madam Speaker, question No.7 has been answered by the Minister of Works and Transport and he has already submitted a request for a supplementary, which is under consideration. 

On the delayed payment to the contractor of Isimba Dam, we are working with the Ministry of Energy and Minerals who will come here to - because this is implemented by the Ministry of Energy and Minerals. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development only disperses money; they are the implementing agencies. We request you, Madam Speaker, that next week, they give a status report on the payments for Isimba because on our side, we only disperse but the implementers are the ones who actually pay.

Madam Speaker, we do not have -

THE SPEAKER: Please note that they are almost coming to a standstill because of the stalemate among the ministry, UDCL and the contractors. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the last question is on the delayed compensation of persons who lost their properties during the insurgency in some parts of Lira District. We have a programme for Northern Uganda, which looks comprehensively at these issues. However, we do not have a specific one for compensating persons who lost their properties. I request, with your permission, Madam Speaker, the Minister of State for Northern Uganda to shed some light on the work that we are doing on the programmes to support the communities in Northern Uganda.

Regarding the dairy cooperatives, we will come back next week. That is the only question that remains and we will come back next week and respond. However, I would like to allow the Minister for Northern Uganda to shed some light on some of the –(Interjection)– maybe after the Minister of Northern Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Let them complete that answer then you can ask for clarification.
 
MR BAHATI: I leave the Floor to the Minister for Northern Uganda. 

THE SPEAKER: You have done 1,2,3,4 and 5. You have answered 5 questions. You have not yet done these.

5.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR NORTHERN UGANDA (Ms Grace Kwiyucwiny): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to agree with what hon. Bahati has just said; there is no specific compensation for persons who lost their properties. However, there are programmes set to support those communities. For example, the Government constructed some technical schools in Atiak and Abia in Lango where massacres took place. There are number of massacre sites and so, we have plans to come up with other programmes instead but not necessarily compensation to those who lost their properties.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because we are all interested in the condition of roads in our areas. 

We have already been warned by the scientists who normally guide us on the issue of climate change that we are likely to experience Elnino. That therefore, means that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development must be ready with some funds to help us deal with the crises that tend to come with Elnino.

Listening to the Minister for Works and Transport, it seems the minister would want to do some work for us and they are ready. That ministry is very organised but it is always being frustrated by lack of funds yet we keep budgeting every year. Therefore, can the minister clarify to us because all these things we are talking about - compensation and fixing roads - border on availability of funds. We would like to know why the ministry cannot use money, which was put aside for this kind of work. Thank you.

The Speaker: The supplementary question should arise from what the minister has answered.

Ms franca Akello: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the Minister for Northern Uganda, arising from her statement about construction of some technical institutes or schools at sites of massacres.

His Excellency the President, on one of his visits to Agago, pledged to the communities of Wang lobo, Gang Aculu, which is in Omot sub-county where, if most of you can remember, over 28 Ugandans were butchered and cooked in pots and given to people to eat. It was a very bad sight. When His Excellency the President visited, he promised that a technical school would be constructed there.

In your response, you said that the plan is there. I would like to know whether that is also thereabout in the plans that you have for implementation. Thank you.

Mr nambeshe: Thank you. Mine is in relation to the outstanding arrears owed to Presidential Advisors. Madam Speaker, it is not only 18 advisors that have outstanding arrears. The minister ought to comprehensively come up with a list of all the Presidential Advisors –

The Speaker: Honourable member, the question was raised by hon. Okupa and he said they were 18. That is what he was responding to.

Mr nambeshe: The 18 were appointed way back in 2019 -

The Speaker: But he is answering what hon. Okupa asked. You ask your own question with your numbers. He is answering what hon. Okupa asked.

Mr angura: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also wanted to raise concern on the Presidential Advisors. The minister said that they will discuss next week and come up with a final position but he should have also told us a final position to cover all the arrears and emoluments they have been expecting. Are they going to discuss to see how to manage them going forward since he has said they are trying to capture it in the next financial year? Thank you.

5.51
Mr Elijah okupa (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, I raised this question. This is the fourth time that this matter has come up. During the last time, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development told us that by the end of January, they would have been paid and that he had sent the money. 

I started raising this matter in April last year. The first commitment made was that when the 2019/2020 Financial Year started, by the end of July, they would be paid. I waited until September and raised this matter again. The minister said he would get back to me. 

Come October, the minister said, “We have passed the money.” Come 19th December, as we went for Christmas, I raised the matter again. The honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development said, come end of January, they will be paid including arrears. We can get the Hansards to attest to this.

It perturbs me today when the Minister for Presidency comes and says, “We are going to budget for it.” We started in the Financial Year 2018/2019. Now we are in Financial Year 2019/2020 and they are promising us in Financial Year 2020/2021.

Hon. Okori Moe, the Chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries was a Presidential Advisor. She has just sent me a message and she also told me that up to today, she has not been paid for being a Presidential Advisor – (Interjections) – Can I clarify because hon. Mawanda is asking? 

In the Ninth Parliament, she was not a Member of Parliament. She was a Presidential Advisor.

The Speaker: You said you are concluding the process; why don’t we allow the minister to get an answer so that we do not speculate anymore?

Mr okupa: Madam Speaker, we are pressing this issue because of the uncoordinated statements we are getting from the ministers. They should guarantee because one of them, the lady from Bunyoro, has even passed on before getting this. It is so embarrassing. It is good that today, both ministers are here. They should tell us when these people will get the money. Thank you.

5.53
Mr amos lugoloobi (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Isn’t this a very unnecessary cost that we have in the Budget? One of our biggest problems is the cost of public administration, especially emanating from jobs like this one whose deliverables are not very clear. 

I am surprised that it is hon. Elijah Okupa who is pushing for this. It is a very unnecessary cost – (Interruption)

Mr okupa: Madam Speaker, I am disturbed that this comes from the ruling party. The person who issued the instrument is the Chairman of the ruling party and the President of this country and he is the one being advised. Is it in order for the Chairperson, Committee on Budget to ridicule the person of the President who issues the appointments?

The Speaker: Honourable members, the President is the Fountain of Honour. I think that we should not casually question his judgment. You are out of order. 

Did you say that you are going to discuss the issue of advisors in Cabinet and come back with an answer?

MR Bahati: Madam Speaker, we will conclude this issue next week and come back to inform the House. 

On the issue of hon. Cecilia Ogwal about the Contingency Fund, it is true that we have a number of emergencies including Coronavirus, locusts, landslides and food shortage. There are quite a number of plans for these yet our Contingency Fund is only Shs 70 billion.

Therefore, where need arises, we shall have to beef up the contingency or go through the supplementary route with the approval of Parliament. Thank you.

Ms kwiyucwiny: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Regarding what hon. Franca Akello raised, I request that we follow this up together. She can write a reminder to me regarding the pledge of Wanglobo Gang Aculu where the President pledged a technical school so that I can take it up. I beg to move.

The Speaker: Honourable members, I think the bulk of the questions, which had been set for the Order Paper, have been handled. Others will be reflected in next week’s Order Paper.

5.57
The minister for the presidency (Ms Esther Mbayo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that there has been delay in paying the 18 Presidential Advisors. What I would like to state here is that my honourable colleague has made it clear; it is also an issue that has disturbed my ministry in the – I brought it to the attention of the Appointing Authority and he directed that he will also further guide on the modalities of paying these arrears. 

Madam Speaker, it is a big sum of money because right from the time they were appointed, they have never got anything. The concern is the 18; so, I am responding in regard to the 18. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has committed it off. Give us time to work on the modalities of paying these presidential advisors and then we will update this House. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we have got a few more policy statements.
 
MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

MINISTRY OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES

5.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, I beg to lay the ministerial policy statement for Votes 022 and 117. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister of Internal Affairs?

MINISTRY OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS

5.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the ministerial policy statement for Financial Year 2020/2021 for the Ministry of Internal Affairs, Votes 009, 120, 144, 145, 305 and 309.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister of Science and technology?

MINISTRY FOR SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION

5.59
THE MINISTER FOR SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation, Votes 023 and 110 for the Financial Year 2020/2021. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Ministries of Agriculture, Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Education and Sports, Auditor-General, Kampala Capital City Authority, Energy and Mineral Development, Inspector General of Government and the Treasury Operations are the ones still outstanding. 

We are proposing to convene the House on Monday at 10 O’clock for purposes of receiving the policy statements. I hope the Ministry of Education and Sports will be ready. 

6.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Hamson Obua): Madam Speaker, Monday is legally the last day and I would like to commit that even by the fact that Monday is a Cabinet day, the Ministry of Education and Sports will be ready to lay on Table its ministerial policy statement. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is still not here; so, they will be here on Monday.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we have sent a message to all the ministries that you have read and they will be here on Monday without fail. 

THE SPEAKER: Let me just remind the Members of the Cabinet about Section 78 of the Public Finance Management Act, which provides that:

    1)  Where any institution or department of Government, which receives public money and does not meet the requirements of the Act or contravenes this Act, Parliament may request the minister responsible for the institution or department to make a report to Parliament with an explanation on the matter.

    2)   Where it is established that the institution or department did not meet the requirements of this Act, or contravened the Act due to negligence or misconduct of a public officer of the institution or department, the public officer shall be held personally liable in accordance with Section 79 or Section 80 of this Act.

Therefore, it is not a joking matter. We shall complete that on Monday. 

The honourable Minister for Public Service is inviting Members to go to Nakasongola on Saturday. He has something he has prepared there. You can spend the whole day there and dance with him and so on. You are welcome to assist the minister.

I think we have done quite a lot of work today. The House is adjourned to Monday at 10 O’clock for submission of policy statements. 

(The House rose at 6.02 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 16 March 2020 at 10.00 a.m.) 

