
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Tuesday, 1 March 2022

Parliament met at 2.04 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you back from the short holiday. On Saturday, 26 February 2022, H.E. the President of the Republic of Uganda launched the Parish Development Model in Kibuku District. This programme is meant to eradicate poverty through the execution of development activities in parishes.

The Parish Development Model is an extension of the approach on development that has been envisaged in the National Development Plan III, with the parish as the lowest administrative unit, and as an operational hub for delivering services to our people at the grassroots and improve their economic activities.

I urge the honourable Members of Parliament, as people’s representatives and the voice of the voiceless, to ensure that you take part in whatever is going to happen with the Parish Development Model; be party to it; be a change agent of your people and do your oversight role in whatever is happening in the area.

The relevant ministries must also follow up whatever is happening. The Ministry of Information and Communication Technology must ensure that the firm that is going to offer the software guarantees and the cyber security is very efficient. Let us not have a firm like the one that gave out the COVID-19 relief of Shs 100,000; it credited some people several times. 

In addition, the Ministry of Local Government should also ensure that the right people get this money at the right time and in the right place. Let us make use of this money to change the lives of our people.

We must ensure we champion the mindset change of our people towards this project. You will go to an area and people will say, “We are not farmers.” It is upon all of us to ensure that we change the mindset of the people because that is why we are here, as the people’s representatives.

Under Section 13(13) of the Public Finance Management Act, every minister or head of an institution responsible for a vote is required to submit to Parliament, by 15 March, a ministerial policy statement for the preceding year.

On that note, therefore, I ask Government to ensure that all ministries present those statements to Parliament by the 10th of this month for onward transmission to the sectoral committees. 

Therefore, we want all the reports in the House by the 10th for us to transmit them to the sectoral committees and later on to the Committee on Budget, as per the requirements of the law.

I have noted, with concern, something that has been happening on social media, left, right, and centre on the issue of the Nagaru-Nakawa land. I have also received a petition in my office about the fights that are gohappening in the ministry and all that is happening with that land.

As a House, I do not think we should just go quiet. Based on that, under rule 191, I hereby nominate Members to an ad hoc committee to investigate the Nakawa-Naguru land and report to this House in two weeks time, so that we can put this issue to rest.

The Members on the ad hoc committee include:

i.	Hon Dan Kimosho (Chairperson);
ii.	Hon. Agnes Atim; 
iii.	Hon. Anthony Akol; 
iv.	Hon. Aisha Kabanda;
v.	Hon. Asuman Basalirwa;
vi.	Hon. Jonathan Ebwalu;
vii.	Hon. Dickson Kateshumbwa;
viii.	Hon. Sarah Opendi; 
ix.	Hon. Rita Atukwasa.
 
I now put the question that the above names be approved by this House to investigate this matter on our behalf. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Leader of the Opposition has a statement to make -

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure arising from your communication. You talked about the Parish Development Model.

As we speak, there has been a procurement process to secure an IT system that is going to manage the disbursement of the money for the Parish Development Model; honourable members, I am talking about Shs 1 trillion because it is Shs 100 million per parish and this is about $285 million.

They went ahead and started the procurement process to get an IT system and this, allegedly, is Post Bank Uganda. However, Madam Speaker, the procedures were not followed. 

Section 71(2) of the PPDA Act provides that the bidding documents shall fully and comprehensively detail evaluation methods and the criterion, which applies to Section 71(3), which says that no other evaluation criteria other than those that were stated in the bidding document shall be taken into account. What these people did was to bring in new criteria to suit their interests. 

Madam Speaker, Government is going to lose a lot of money if we do not look at this. Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally right if we stopped this procurement process so that we follow the laws of the land and independently tell these people to do procurement and the minister explains to us that there is procurement process so that Government does not lose any money? This is the Minister of Local Government, Hon. Raphael Magyezi, where the Parish Development Model falls - so that the minister explains to us and we halt the whole process to avoid Government losing money in the Parish Development Model? 

Madam Speaker, whenever these big projects come, there are people who are just out there waiting to get money out of them. This time round, as Parliament, we should stand to defend the Parish Development Model so that Ugandans benefit 100 per cent. 

Wouldn’t it, therefore, be procedurally right to stop the process so that we know the details?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I thought it was a procedural matter and we ought to get a response. Thank you, Commissioner of Parliament. As Parliament, let us make sure that we do not lose any money in this process. Let us do our oversight role and ensure there is no mischarge, no wastage and no corruption in the process. 

The Minister of Local Government should come and report to the House. In the meantime, Post Bank should discontinue with whatever they are doing. However, we need a report from the Minister of Local Government. 

2.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we wait for the Minister of Local Government to give a comprehensive statement, I wish to give this information to the House. The Parish Development Model funds, particularly the Shs 100 million, which will go to the parishes beginning next financial year, will be sent directly from the Ministry of Finance to the beneficiary accounts. I am wondering where this idea of Post Bank comes in because as far as we are concerned, we will be sending money to the accounts and there is no intermediary in between. 

Maybe, if we could enhance the automation so that we get to know what to respond to – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information is power. You may think that it is going direct whereas he has other information that shows contrary to what you know. You may look at the Shs 100,000 cash bonanza, which was given; they said the money was going direct to the beneficiaries, but it was sent through Housing Finance Bank. 

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, I would like to give the minister information that there was procurement with reference No. PBU/2021/002. This is procurement for installation and commissioning of an e-wallet solution for the Parish Development Model. This was Government procurement and the honourable minister should be aware.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have heard. It is better you get that information and use it. 

2.19
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to warn the minister in advance that this Parish Development Model will burn your fingers, if you are not careful. Take this from me, from the bottom of my heart and with all sincerity that when the Parish Development Model comes out, let us take the normal course: the Ministry of Local Government should come to the mother committee and raise all issues before it such that they are given suggestions in order for Parliament to get a report. 

At the right time, I will give the corrrect information and lay papers here. Five people have already been selected who are going to work in these parishes, yet they do not come from our places. Each of them is going to earn Shs 3 million per month. If you multiply Shs 3 million per month by a year, that is Shs 36 million, multiplied by five people for five years: that will compute to almost Shs 800 million. You clearly stated that you are going to give Shs 100 million, but you are now starting with Shs 17 million.

Madam Speaker, these Members of Parliament can give Shs 17 million at once in a constituency because of the pressure they get from their voters. If you promised Shs 100 million and you are saying you are going to give Shs 17 million –(Hon. Musasizi rose_)– Honourable minister, I am not going to take your information because I am trying to save you. 

The procedural matter I am raising is that with this Parish Development Model and with all the experience you have acquired from Emyooga, Bona Baggaggawale and Entandikwa, haven’t you noticed that the issues end up becoming political? However, let Parliament do its oversight function; to sit and examine how it is going to run under the mother committee and then, let a report be brought to Parliament and we debate it. 

This money is not coming from Gen. Museveni: it is coming from the taxpayers and it is going back to promote development. Once you go the way you are planning – Madam Speaker, at the National Social Security Fund building here, there are people working under the Parish Development Model who are earning Shs 45 million and they have posh cars. They are even better off than the permanent secretaries in ministries. How do you expect this Parish Development Model to be of any value to us other than creating lies?

There are other areas, where you have to create more parishes. For example, you find a parish with over 100 or 200 people and then, there is a parish with 2,000 people. These are all the issues we must look into. However, the honourable minister, who is a fellow Catholic, is saying money will go direct to the beneficiaries. Can you give us the accounts you have opened for those parishes? Come to my parish; I will face you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please, sit down. 

MR SSEWUNGU: I am going to get all your information and I am the one to allow you. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, he is fond of denying me an opportunity to give information on this side and now he wants me to allow him. (Laughter) Okay, give me the information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, it is not a joke; money for the Parish Development Model must reach the people. What Hon. Ssewungu is saying is true. The other day, my district coordinators had a meeting. Why can’t I be a coordinator when I am the Woman Member of Parliament? How do you bring people who even do not speak my language to be coordinators of a parish development model in a certain area? I would also want to feel that I am part of the system because I need to come back to Parliament. 

Therefore, why are you pushing away the Members of Parliament? Let us have the Members of Parliament to coordinate this process in their districts. We are not going to – 

2.23
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Jim Muhwezi): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Of course, this is a Government programme and it is for all the people: it is nonpartisan and it is going to be implemented –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, let hon. Muhwezi finish.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I am raising a point of order. The honourable minister is saying that this programme is nonpartisan, but when it came to invitation, I did not see mine and he was supposed to bring it to me himself –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When it came to what? 

MR SSEWUNGU: To the launch of the Parish Development Model. Therefore, is the honourable minister in order to say that this function –? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, let us not take this as a joke. This is a very serious matter and it is nonpartisan. Secondly, we need the Members of Parliament to do their oversight role in their constituencies. We need full involvement of the Members of Parliament. (Applause)

If the money is going to be in Kanungu – if you want me to close the House and Members go to the constituency, I will close. Let Members go and monitor. (Applause) Let us all go and get involved in this; it is about our people on the ground. 

2.25
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Parish Development Model  programme has moved across the country like a wildfire. Every parish is waiting for this money. This is going to be the flagship project that the Government is rolling out. 

Madam Speaker, you will recall that you sent us to our constituencies when the Emyooga was threatening to become a problem. In the consultations that we have had, I remember we agreed that the role of Members of Parliament should be well pronounced before we roll out the Parish Development Model . 

We would like to avoid a similar situation that was with Emyooga. It is only proper that the secretariat - that has been constituted now, running the Parish Development Model  - pronounces itself on what the role of the Members of Parliament is going to be. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Angura, do not allow the secretariat to pronounce your role; your role is already defined. You are the one to do the oversight role in your constituency. How can someone come to your constituency without your knowledge? 

MR ANGURA: Madam Speaker, you remember what happened to Emyooga. When we went to the constituencies, we were being challenged by those who were managing the Emyooga at the district level that we did not have a role there, but they still wanted us to answer to the queries being raised. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, my Members of Parliament must be involved in every activity that takes place in the Parish Development Model. They do not need money, but they need involvement. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, indeed, I agree with you that the Members of Parliament must be involved in the Parish Development Model implementation and also in the planning. 

I was longing to give my brother, Hon. Ssewungu information. The information I would like to give him and the House is that at every parish, we shall have a parish development committee. This committee will be chaired by the LCII chairperson of the parish. The Members shall be representatives of women, the youth etc. 

Therefore, in the preparatory activities, there could have been anomalies where people went to some places without the knowledge of Members of Parliament and also not involving the leaders. That anomaly can be addressed. 

The Parish Development Model is seeking to decentralise Government interventions at the lowest level of a parish. That is why we have even said – with due respect to what Hon. Solomon is saying – we at Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who control the major pillar of financial inclusion in this Parish Development Model arrangement, have decided that we are not sending money to anybody else other than a parish. 

The parish will be required to open an account in any commercial bank of choice. It is from this account that the money will leave the treasury and go directly to the recipient. 

I thought this information was important for the House as we also prepare to bring a comprehensive statement to the House. We have been invited by the Committee on Public Service and Local Government to share our roadmap and our preparedness with them. I believe we will eventually end up on the Floor of this Parliament. 

I would like to ask colleagues to bear with us. We are committed to ensuring that this Parish Development Model succeeds and we need the support of every stakeholder, particularly Members of Parliament, to ensure that the Parish Development Model really transforms the lives of our people. 

MR EDDIE KWIZERA: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a procedural issue. The Parish Development Model is still a presidential proclamation; it is neither by policy nor by law. It does not describe the role of the Member of Parliament and who does what. 

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for Government to present a statement on policy or legislation so that we know who does what? 

Otherwise, whatever we are now doing is in anticipation; it is hearsay. Government should come up with the statement so that we can know what the budget is. 

People are talking about money – we never appropriated any funds for the Parish Development Model. So, where did the money come from? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is asking how you will hold anybody accountable. 

MR EDDIE KWIZERA: How do you infer accountability and monitoring when the Members of Parliament do not have the information? Is there any document called the Parish Development Model? Is it there? Honourable members, do you have the documents? 

Do not handle this thing as politics. This is poverty and economics. There is no document – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, do you have the guidelines? [HON. MEMBERS: “No.”]

MR EDDIE KWIZERA: Even Cabinet does not have them. If I can add to this – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! You have spoken. Can we have a response? 

MR EDDIE KWIZERA: We used to have what was called Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture with pillars. Now we have a Parish Development Model with seven pillars, but we are only reading about them on social media – 

2.32
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Madam Speaker, I would like to encourage the honourable ministers to sit and listen and note, instead of rushing to answer the Members’ concerns. 

The challenge is that some people do not fear failure because, I think, failure is their custom. They are used to one programme failing; they pick another, give it a name and continue in the same path of failure. I would like to invite the ministers to humble themselves and listen because Members have legitimate concerns about this programme. 

For starters, just like the honourable member observed, it is very difficult to deal with a proclamation that has no legal framework or even a policy to house it. Of course you cannot have a law without a policy in place. But think about this, honourable members; the guidelines are all over the place. They were neither scrutinised by Parliament nor gazetted. 

Anything not gazetted can be denied. What stops somebody somewhere in Masaka to sit and add another page on the guidelines and they become customised to a particular area? 

If the proclamation is going to see the light of day – the President, at some stage, said it would be Shs 17 million per parish. Then at a party caucus, the proclamation changed to Shs 100 million. There is a big problem. 

It is my considered view that the minister lays the guidelines before Parliament and a committee of Parliament scrutinises these guidelines because taxpayers’ money in billions is going to be voted on this programme. We cannot work in that flimsy way as Members of Parliament. 

The guidelines should be laid before Parliament for scrutiny – and not just a matter of laying, but to go to the Committee on Local Government to be scrutinised for the input of Members of Parliament, and a report be brought to Parliament for their scrutiny. (Applause) Otherwise, I will lead the House to deny that programme a budget, without agreed upon guidelines by Parliament.

Secondly, three weeks ago or there about, Hon. Abed Bwanika raised a matter related to the project, that on the face of it, is supposed to be a community equaliser from the centre. Therefore, when you base it on a parish arrangement - the understanding is that it has a baseline called a population. The way we see it now - and his concern, was that without a clear arrangement of parishes, the programme is a pipedream. Take an example; whereas some parishes have 3,000 people, others have 30,000. 

What is the promise? The promise by the then Rt Hon. Speaker was that before the programme is rolled out, the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) was considering parishes countrywide and therefore, we would wait for them to lay a report debated, before the programme is rolled and funds voted to the parishes.

As we speak, we do not have a report of that committee. In my constituency, one of the parishes has 30,000 people. I am aware that in Wakiso, a single parish has 150,000 people. So, what is the essence of planning this programme? My sense, Madam Speaker, is that this programme is devoid of planning; it is impulsive and it will not help. Unless Parliament puts its foot down and permits the programme to be rolled out, but after proper scrutiny of the entire framework of the programme.

I do not care because the danger is that politicians fear each other. There are those that believe that the involvement of Members of Parliament will have the tendency of an overbearing effect of politicians. Probably so, but can the politicians that have a duty to account to the public, look at these guidelines and agree on them first, without having to imprint their names there?

As I end, I would like to say that there is a problem. The ministers ought to listen and slowdown; there is urgency. It is not about slogans. There is a problem - it will not get off the ground. In the circumstances, it will be a stillbirth. I submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you lay on the Table the guidelines by Thursday this week and they will be sent to the committee for scrutiny.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. We are going to communicate to the Minister of Local Government to prepare a statement to Members of Parliament, including the role Members will play in oversight, monitoring and supervision.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, we had sent a document to the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) on parishes. We will need a report from the committee, both on the guidelines and the parishes and harmonise the whole process before we roll out anything. Hon. Nsereko, I thought I was the Chairperson. Yes, we need our people to get the money, but they must get it properly. Hon. Nsereko.

2.38
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division Kampala City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am aware that you are calling the honourable minister to give us a copy of guidelines, but guidelines are not laws.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have already made a ruling that we need a policy in place. You came late. We made a ruling that we need a policy in place for accountability. That is what Hon. Kwizera said. Whom will you hold accountable? We need something.

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, I am not challenging your ruling. However, presenting us guidelines without a policy would be of less benefit to this House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Let us first get the guidelines as they work on the policy. Between policy and guidelines, which one comes first?

2.39
THE STATE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, as far as I can respond, what is available are the guidelines.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You must have developed those guidelines from a policy. 

MR MUSASIZI: We will need to consult about the steps we can make on how the guidelines - (Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for giving way. I am seeking clarification. The minister said that right now, the guidelines are ready, but I would like to know on what have you premised the guidelines? What guided you to formulate the guidelines? What informed you about the guidelines you are talking about? I think this is very important. Do you have a law or a policy framework to guide these guidelines you are talking about? This is because some of us do not understand very quickly like you. We want to move a step at a time. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, the minister needs to take care of some disabilities and I always accept my disability. I would like to understand: what is the fundamental point, upon which you are going to anchor these guidelines you are talking about? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it all zeros to one thing. Who is on the Floor? What is your procedural matter? He is going to call me “pro-poor”. (Laughter)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, as a pro-poor Member of Parliament, I would like to find out whether we are proceeding well to have a minister presenting on the Parish Development Model, which was launched a few days ago. Members are asking him about the policy, law and the guidelines, but the minister is totally green and confused. (Laughter) What did the minister launch, Madam Speaker? I should even have raised a point of order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My minister is not green; he is yellow. (Laughter)

2.43
MR HERBERT KINOBERE (NRM, Kibuku County, Kibuku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to request the minister to inform the country and the House because in Kibuku, when you were launching the parish model, the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury (PS/ST) read out groups where the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had already sent money.

We would like you to inform the country: where did you get that money? Who budgeted for that money? How do you send money without guidelines? Honourable minister, are you saying you have a lot of money that you do not know how to spend? It was a show. Minister, can you please tell the country how you are spending our money?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, can we have some order? (Mr Kibalya rose_) What is it?

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The President was very clear when he was appointing ministers. Hon. Jim Muhwezi is a Minister for Security. (Applause) Hon. Musasizi is a Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Hon. Kabanda was very clear, the issue originates from the Ministry of Finance and he asked the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to inform the House. I see the Minister for Security moving very fast to the microphone. (Laughter) Can we have these clearly spelt out, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: (Members rose_) Order! Honourable Members, I wish you could keep quiet. I got communication that Hon. Jim Muhwezi is standing in for the Government Chief Whip. (Laughter) 

MR ENOS ASIIMWE: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. Clearly, the minister has been ambushed on the issue of the Parish Development Model. I, therefore, suggest – (Interjections) - Members, you are out of order. Are we proceeding rightly to put questions to the minister, which he cannot answer now?

Madam Speaker, I suggest that we allow the minister time, as you had already instructed, to go and prepare himself and come with a proper response to the questions that people are raising.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I have Hon. Elijah Okupa.

2.47
MS LAURA KANUSHU (NRM, PWDs Representative): Thank you. We all know that guidelines emanate from policies in this House and so, when we hear about guidelines without a policy, it is absurd.

As Members of Parliament, we are aware of our oversight role. However, history has shown – especially when you sent us to go and monitor Emyooga – that we are nothing, but pathologists who come to give postmortem reports. 

We all want our people to benefit from the Parish Development Model and that is why we are insisting that as Members of Parliament, our oversight role should not be to bring postmortem reports. We have heard that Shs 17 million has already gone to some parishes. If you ask Members of Parliament here who know whether their districts have received that money, I can assure you there might be none.

Therefore, by doing this, we are already failing the same parish model that we support. Therefore, we want to ask the honourable minister – we are not being hard and we are not failing the Government programme, but we do not want to see the Parish Development Model fail, just like the past programmes did. Let us be involved – let us know so that we can guide our people –(Interjections)- I am still on the Floor, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

When these Government programmes fail, the first people to be blamed are us, the Members of Parliament. We, therefore, want to request that we stop being pathologists, but you allow us do our oversight role, as is provided in the law. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The pertinent issue is the postmortem. Let us not do the postmortem activity. Let us ensure that we define where the money is going, how it is being utilised and who the beneficiary is from the very beginning. I would like us to have an entire day of discussions on the Parish Development Model. (Applause)

On Thursday, the ministers responsible should come and give us the policies, guidelines, the criteria – everything in terms of the Parish Development Model. We will dedicate Thursday to the Parish Development Model –(Ms Sarah Opendi rose_) - not on the Parish Development Model anymore. Next item. 

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Leader of Government Business is the Prime Minister. We have the Government Chief Whip represented. The role of the Government Chief Whip is to whip Members to attend Plenary, organise party meetings – and that is in our rules here. 

It has become a habit for the Leader of Government Business, who is the Prime Minister, to absent herself from this House. She has two deputy Prime Ministers. Who is representing the Prime Minister in this House? Hon. Muhwezi is representing the Government Chief Whip. His roles are to whip us to attend and speak in this Plenary. (Interjections) Yes, the rules are here and very clear; to organise sessions. 

Rule 15 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament states,

“15. Whips

(1) 	There shall be, in Parliament, a Government Chief Whip appointed by the Government from among Members of Parliament representing the ruling party.

(2) 	The role and functions of the Government Chief Whip is to ensure due attendance, participation in proceedings and voting in Parliament of Members of the ruling party.”

Therefore, I think we have a problem for the Government Chief Whip to turn into the Leader of Government Business. This must end. I do not know whether the fishermen are going to run the Government like this. 

We have had Prime Ministers here before. The Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi used to sit here. The Rt Hon. Ruhakana Rugunda was always here and if he was not here, Gen. Ali would be here. Where are all the deputy Prime Ministers, who were appointed? 

Madam Speaker, is it in order for us to constantly see the Government Chief Whip standing up to take over the role of Leader of Government Business, when his work is to whip us and we are here. Thank you. (Applause)

2.53
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (MAJ. Gen. Jim Muhwezi): Madam Speaker, the Government is effectively represented in Parliament. (Interjections) Yes, I am here. The honourable ministers are here. The Members of the party are properly whipped. (Laughter) So, the Government is represented. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister would have loved to be here, but she is, right now, indisposed. She sent me here to represent her in Parliament –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Muhwezi, please, take your seat.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I am at pain to raise a point of order against this senior Member, who is even a lawyer by profession. Hon. Opendi has just read out the rules of this House and has defined who the Government Chief Whip is and who the Leader of Government Business is. 

All of the honourable ministers in front of us here were in Kibuku over the launch and they slept in hotels, belching because they were whipped by the Prime Minister to go for the Parish Development Model launch, but when it comes to Parliament, they are absent. 

We are now raising –(Interjection)– no I am raising matters relating to the Prime Minister. I have been in this Parliament; I know what is supposed to be done by the Prime Minister. All the issues raised here are supposed to be in her docket and she is supposed to evaluate them with the ministers. 

Therefore, is Hon. Maj. Gen. Jim Muhwezi, who is narrowly surviving my censure –(Laughter)– in order to come to this Floor and say that the House is fairly constituted, when the Rt hon. Prime Minister is not here? Even our usual suspect in this House, the Rt Hon. Gen. Moses Ali, no longer enters the Chamber. So, is he in order to continue violating our rules yet he is a lawyer, who is supposed to give more guidance? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First of all, I would like to congratulate you, Hon. Maj. Gen. Jim Muhwezi, because he said that you survived his censure. (Laughter) So, congratulations.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) JIM MUHWEZI: But it was not narrow.

2.55
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for allowing me the opportunity to raise a critical matter to our country. The whole world is witnessing the conflict between Russia and Ukraine wherein it is reported that over 100 Ugandans are trapped in Ukraine.

Reading a statement from foreign affairs, they said that the numbers are much more, bearing in mind that there are those who do not register with Government, but are living, studying and working in Ukraine.

I was perturbed last night when I saw the government forces stopping Africans and other nationals from leaving Ukraine, preferring their nationals to be the ones to exit from that war-stricken country. And whereas we may not do much as a country to stop the war, we needed two things. First of all, a position statement from Government to update us on the situation and how our Ugandans who are trapped in that conflict in the cities of Kyiv, Lviv and other areas, can be evacuated. 

Secondly, as an Orthodox Christian, I witnessed the carnage, the destruction of the Orthodox cathedrals and the civilisation as a result of that war. Since Uganda and the government have been well known for giving guidance, even this time round, we thought, if there is a way, Government can step in to guide the warring parties not to destroy the civilisation of this world and to take care of the churches and other monuments of historical importance, to spare the Orthodox Catholic groups from being destroyed. These two are brethren; they are Orthodox countries. What has happened this time round? Government needs to tell us how to get our people.

MR OKUPA: We would also want to know Uganda’s position - which side does it fall because we have some people tweeting that they are taking sides. Can we have a position from the Minister of Foreign Affairs?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not correct. We shall not want to know Uganda’s side.

2.58
MR MUWADA NKUNYINGI (NUP, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise as the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs on the same matter of national importance regarding Ugandan citizens caught up in the Russia-Ukraine conflict. 

Madam Speaker, for a while there has been tension between Ukraine and Russia that have now -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have known the facts. Do you have same prayers? Just give us the prayers.

MR NKUNYINGI: Madam Speaker, I pray that Government, especially through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, briefs Parliament on the total number of Ugandans trapped in Ukraine and Russia, and the measures being undertaken by the Government to ensure the safety and evacuation of Ugandans caught up in that conflict. 

I am privy to information that a number of African nationals escaping the crisis in Ukraine, including Ugandans, are being pulled out of the passenger trains. We need a clear Government response on the safety of our nationals. I beg to move.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) JIM MUHWEZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Minister of Foreign Affairs will come to Parliament and give a statement -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him give us a report on Tuesday because he needs to get all the data. I am saying the report should come on Tuesday because he needs to get all the data/information. It is not something that you can get in a minute. So, let him not come with haphazard information because he will say he was not given enough time - Tuesday is Women’s Day.

Honourable members, Tuesday is International Women’s Day. In that case, we can have the statement this Thursday, not next Thursday. 

3.01
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a matter of national importance, I would like to report that everywhere we pass at the moment, people are throwing their hands towards us, seeking our views on the rising prices of goods and services.

We have sat in this House a number of times - and I seek your wise counsel, Madam Speaker – and what started as fuel inflation has now shifted to commodities, etc. People are reading that basic commodities they use at home are now at runaway prices.

The price of a bar of soap is now at between Shs 9,000 and Shs 10,000 depending on where one may be. That has moved to prices of basic items like sugar, salt and all other commodities. What started as a small pimple has turned into a boil. 

When we talked about the rising fuel prices, we were given confidence from the bench that side, that they would come up with a conclusive report on the monitoring mechanism they have used on fuel dealers, about those soaring prices. However, up to now – and it is a month now - we see nothing. What started small has translated to other commodities. 

Madam Speaker, we may be here and at least we can afford it. However, the person who is being paid Shs 500,000 or 700,000, for example, a teacher, a serviceman, a doctor, and even all other people in their small spheres, have not had their incomes increased. 

Therefore, the basket of goods and services that they can afford is narrowing every single day and we also know –(Interruption)

MS OPENDI: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I am listed to raise a matter of national importance, which is exactly what he is raising. However, from the information that I have, UBOS says the price of these commodities, specifically soap and other detergents, has gone up by 85 per cent and that is extremely high.

Madam Speaker, the manufacturers are actually blaming government for imposing import duty on the raw materials that they add to produce soap and other detergents. The import duty is at 10 per cent. Previously, these raw materials were zero rated. Therefore, as the minister gets up to respond, can he tell us exactly what we can do. If the problem is the import duty, then we can do away with it. 

The experts say that the crude oil that we produce in the country is not sufficient for them to use to produce the soap and other detergents that we utilise, part of which is exported to DRC and other parts of the country. 

Madam Speaker, we need to address both the issue of fuel and the issue of import duty. . Thank you.

Mr nsereko: Thank you for the information, honourable colleague, but notwithstanding, out of courtesy –(Interruption)

Mr kibalya: Madam Speaker, I come from Busoga where farming is the only activity we have. The policy is that agricultural inputs are normally not taxed. However, the farmers in our area are failing because the price for fertilizers that are used for these agricultural inputs has not only tripled but been multiplied by four. An example is DAP that we normally use for maize. Previously, it has been at Shs 1,000, but it is now at Shs 6,000. Farmers are wondering what to do next.

The Deputy Speaker: Your prayers.

Mr nsereko: Thank you, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

Mr tinkansiimire: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, whereas the prices of essential commodities are going up, the prices of produce - that is maize and beans, which are collected from rural places from farmers - are going down. The reason is that those who buy these products first factor in the amount of money they are spending on fuel. 

Therefore, we want the government to tell us what is going to happen. You are introducing the Parish Development Model, but how are you going to deal with this problem?

Mr nsereko: Thank you for the information, honourable colleague -

The Deputy Speaker: There was a report on fuel that was brought by the Committee on Tourism and Trade. The committee had made several recommendations. I do not know why we have not implemented them. Of course, it is not only fuel that is causing that. It is also what hon. Sarah mentioned - the taxes. Can you make your prayers?

Mr nsereko: Madam Speaker, just like hon. Theodore Ssekikubo has talked about the war, we are yet to feel more impact. Aware that people are struggling with payment of loans and that interest rates have not gone down; aware that we shall have natural shortages of wheat and other imported goods and commodities as a result of war, what does the government intend to do to address this issue of inflation on basic commodities? Do we reduce taxes? What plan do you have in the short-run? 

You also know that soon, children will break off for first term holidays and the parents will be looking for money and commodities to sustain and take their children back to school –(Interruption)

Ms ogwal: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter. I have heard my colleagues struggle and I am also trying to explain this thing called inflation and how we can cure it. 

The procedure I would like from you or the government side is that we have been advised that we leave matters of Generals to the Generals. I am beginning to feel that matters of economics should be left to people who can help us with these economic, mystical issues. We have the committees on Tourism and Trade and Finance. Can the two meet and get for us experts to analyse it because this matter is becoming global, it is not only Uganda. We need to understand it better because we are going from bad to worse. 

My concern is, why don’t we get the experts - and indeed, we have them in this House? They will explain to us and guide the government appropriately. You can see how the government is represented. If we are going to rely on the government to give us the solution, we will wait until 2026. For now, since it is urgent, we need to get our own committees to do the analysis and guide us appropriately. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable Minister of Finance, tell us what is happening.

3.10
The Minister Of state for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (General Duties) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true there is a big concern especially among the lowest end of the population, who find it difficult to access these essential commodities because of the abrupt rise in their general price levels. 

However, I am of the view that considering the gravity of the matter, I go back, properly analyse it with my technical team and we come back here and make a comprehensive statement. Why do I say this? The issue of taxation has been raised. I need to show you clearly whether the tax impact is the one causing the prices to rise. Sometimes, it is yes and sometimes it can be no.

Hon. Nsereko also raised the issue of interest rates. To the best of my knowledge, we have been reducing the CBR to the lowest levels possible. Now the CBR is at 6.5 per cent, but we continue to see interest rates rising so we need to study this. For instance, my OB from Makerere, my former Guild President, Hon. Kibalya is saying that fertilisers are taxed. I need to understand which kind of tax this is because as far as I am concerned, I know that fertilisers are exempted from VAT. 

Therefore, I need time to go back, study this, come back to the House and give a comprehensive statement.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable minister, this is a very serious matter. I was actually surprised when I was told that a bar of soap is at Shs 10,000. I wondered whether a local person in the village can afford that soap.

The price of salt is up and so is that of sugar and cooking oil. This is something you need to act on very fast. You may talk of analysis, but you need to act on it very fast because it is affecting the local people. It may not affect us here, but the local person because their income does not change, like ours. At least we can be able to afford, but your voter at the grassroots needs to be rescued in this matter.

3.13
Mr dickson kateshumbwa (NRM, Sheema Municipality, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable minister, for the response. I think we need government to be very clear. 

If you compare this year, inflation has risen from 3 to 5 per cent and that is more than what we have seen in the last couple of years. We are wondering what is actually driving this inflation. Recently, I was in a supermarket and I saw a flood of people rushing to get soap because it was on a discount. We recently had a problem of fuel, which was caused by the interruption at the border.

The minister told us that once the situation has been cleared, we are going to see the prices stabilise. However, the pump prices have remained the same and in some cases, they have gone higher. We do not see any action by Government and yet it is the regulator. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, whereas the minister is asking us for time, we want to see some action. We have seen threats to the fuel companies, but none of them has been effected.

We see inflation going up yet there is food production in the country. What is driving this inflation? We need clear answers and not threats without action.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, I have not seen threats to the fuel companies. We agreed in this House that the so-called threats - the letters being written to those institutions - must be brought here as evidence, but we have not seen any. 

3.15
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. Some of the challenges we have are the global after-effects of COVID-19, which constrained the supply chain of all materials globally. In addition, because most of our industries import raw materials, there was an increase because of the labour costs and the time people were working. However, most countries and the World Bank in particular, predicted this to happen and the IMF availed resources as a stimulus to help global economies. 

Now, the question we must ask the Ministry of Finance is, what happened to and who used and how did you apply the stimulus money that should have alleviated this challenge? Most of this money, we know, was used to build structures like Akamwesi and others. We are now paying a very heavy price. 

Therefore, the information I beg the minister to avail to this Parliament is real-time information and value for money of the stimulus that was expended because we are going to incur a huge loan, which is over $1 billion that was meant to address the COVID-19 after-effects. 

As the Minister of Finance comes to the Floor, let them detail which company, agency or department has absorbed the money we have borrowed. Otherwise, there are no quick fixes, if we continue to mismanage such criteria. 

I beg you, honourable minister, as you come here, to please, give us a breakdown of who took the money for stimulus - $280 million has already been disbursed. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, we need that information.

3.18
MR ENOSI ASIIMWE (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. I have a national road going through my constituency, which stretches from Rakai District through Buyamba County and connects to Ssembabule at a place called Ntutsi. It is around 105 kilometres. 

My concern is that the stretch that goes through my constituency - from Lyantonde to Ntutsi - has been in a critical state for a while. Around July 2021, some maintenance works were done, but they were done poorly. When we followed up with UNRA at the time, they promised that they would start in December 2021. They said that they would bring the contractor to put a layer of murram and also work on the drainage channels. Thereafter, they would keep it on routine maintenance until funds are available for upgrade to tarmac - as has been promised since 2009 and specifically, under the NRM manifesto of 2021 and NDP III projections. 

Madam Speaker, this promise to have routine maintenance never came to pass because according to UNRA management, their budget for road maintenance was slashed from Shs 81 billion to Shs 31 billion during the third quarter, making it impossible for them to fulfill the promise they had made to put a layer of murram. 

This road stretch has caused my constituents considerable distress with rampant accidents that have caused death. It has equally caused motorists to avoid this route and divert to feeder roads, which has greatly damaged the meager resources of local - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are your prayers?

MR ENOSI ASIIMWE: My prayer is to compel the Ministry of Finance to find resources -(Interjections)- I will give hon. Ssekikubo chance to inform me before I make my prayers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you make your prayers?

MR ENOSI ASIIMWE: Madam Speaker, I would like to compel the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to find resources in the shortest time possible to reinstate funds for road maintenance because it is not practical to promote agriculture through PDM with impassable district road networks.

I also ask to compel Government to present to Parliament a detailed paper on pre-financing of projects as per the NBF Financial Year 2022/2023 plans. This too could resolve the financing issue of these critical roads laid out in NDP III. 

Madam Speaker, I am praying that the Ministry of Finance avails resources for road maintenance to UNRA because UNRA is saying they cannot do anything without those funds. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Of course, you know how the Ministry of Finance provides funds.

3.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I thought the Minister of Works was going to respond to this since it concerns roads. I pray that the Minister of Works responds to this. 

3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Fred Byamukama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable colleague was very direct and clear that his prayers were that the Ministry of Finance avails the money.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, this is not just about the Ministry of Finance or Works; it is on issues of roads and you are one Government. You should agree. (Laughter)

MR FRED BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In regards to the response of the honourable colleague, on behalf of Government, we apologise for the problem that they are faced with. However, due to the budget cuts across all ministries in the COVID-19 pandemic, some of our programmes were put on halt. 

The honourable colleague has contacted the Ministry of Works and Transport before and we told him we were still negotiating with the Ministry of Finance to see that they avail us the funds. Once funds are available, we shall handle the problem. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you and the Ministry of Works need to handle Hon. Asiimwe’s issue. If the money is not there, you should put it in the next budget to ensure that the road is worked on.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, we manage a budget, which is normally a 12-month calendar budget and we execute the budget based on the resources available. 

In regard to this road, I expected the Minister of Works and Transport to go into the specifics, which at the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development we cannot easily know. If this road was in the budget and funds were not released, it is because we do not have it. 

However, Madam Speaker, where we have not been able to execute some planned activities for this year because of COVID-19, which Hon. Kivumbi talked about and the poor revenue performance, we have advised the votes and sectors to plan again in the next financial year. We expect the next financial year to perform better than this one. In doing so, we should be able to fulfil some of the obligations, which we may not find easy to execute this year. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Members who have matters of national importance should come tomorrow. Let us move a little bit. Next item?

LAYING OF PAPERS

PROPOSAL TO BORROW UP TO TWENTY MILLION UNITED STATES DOLLARS (US$ 20.0M) FROM THE ARAB BANK FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN AFRICA (BADEA); THIRTY MILLION UNITED STATES DOLLARS (US$ 30.0M) FROM THE SAUDI FUND FOR DEVELOPMENT (SFD); AND TWENTY MILLION UNITED STATES DOLLARS (US$ 20.0) FROM THE OPEC FUND FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT (OPEC FUND) FOR THE CONSTRUCTION AND EQUIPPING OF THE UGANDA HEART INSTITUTE PROJECT

3.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the proposal to borrow up to US$ 20 million –(Interjections)– from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA), US$ 30 million from the Saudi Fund for development and US$ 20 million from the OPEC Fund for International Development, for the construction and equipping of the Uganda Heart Institute Project. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, procedure. Lay the paper and I am referring it to the Committee on National Economy for consideration.

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable minister for the many times he has asked for loans from this Parliament. 

In 2018, the then minister, Hon. David Bahati, came to this Parliament and requested for a loan to construct Lubowa Specialised Hospital. I remember that time I was the one mobilising Members to support the loan. The minister committed and said the Government was going to give promissory notes.

Madam Speaker, as we speak today, Lubowa Specialised Hospital that was supposed to save us medical tourism is nowhere. This is almost the fourth year. Whereas we are willing to support the Uganda Heart Institute because it touches all of us, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the ministry to first give us accountability of the previous loans that we passed in this Parliament so that we give this loan with confidence that they are actually going to do the work? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. By the way, this one has just been referred to the committee for consideration; it is not for debate. However, what Hon. Silwany has raised is very pertinent. What happened to Lubowa Specialised Hospital? The House demands to know what is happening to Lubowa Specialised Hospital. Can we have information on what is happening?

3.29
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Jim Muhwezi): Madam Speaker, I am going to make sure that the relevant minister comes here and reports on the Lubowa Specialised Hospital plan. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Christine, let the shadow member first finish. 

3.30
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, the traditional way we have been handling loans is for the Government to come here and lay a loan request. Of late, in the committees, we are realising a lot of unabsorbed ability of the loans requested. 

Government committed to come along with a full feasibility study, implementation plan and other documents to accompany loan requests that are supposed to be laid before Parliament. Without these documents - this is why we are where we are with Lubowa Specialised Hospital. They come and ask for money, which is the easiest thing to do and afterwards, they have no feasibility studies and accompanying implementation plans. This is what hit Lubowa Specialised Hospital.

My brother then was the Deputy Chief Whip and we raised the same issue on Lubowa Specialised Hospital. We said, “We do not see the feasibility study, no implementation plan and we do not see the competence of the person who was borrowing the money”. In fact, we were dealing with somebody who deals in furniture. 

The information I have is that the person now deals in coffee. This is the person we gave money to implement a project worth US$ 375 million. Therefore, Madam Speaker, my submission is that as they come to lay these papers, through your powers, request them to come along with accompanying documents.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you will need to take those documents to the committee. That is why it is going to the committee for consideration. If the committee finds it incorrect that there is no feasibility study, no design and it is not feasible enough, then the committee will reject it. Therefore, you need to provide all that information to the committee.

3.32
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Madam Speaker, I witnessed the indignity suffered by this House and Government. After this House approved US$ 1.3 trillion to Lubowa Specialised Hospital, our Committee on Health went there accompanied by the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Health, Dr Diana Atwine, together with the minister, but they were locked out and not allowed to inspect what was going on in Lubowa, having undertaken to do so. 

I would like to agree with Hon. Kivumbi that the person who was peddling the health facility at Lubowa is now transacting in coffee. I would like to inform this House that even for our own Lusalira-Kabamba-Ssembabule Road, it is the same person who has taken the contract of that very road. He is everywhere, but nowhere. That is the predicament this country has. 

Yes, you can patch up a loan request, but I am telling you that it is a bottomless pit and we look on, as Parliament. I think it is high time we put a stop to this, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, I trust the Committee on National Economy. If they are not given the relevant information, if they do not provide all that is required, the committee and the House has all the powers to reject this loan. 

Let us get a report from the committee on the loan that is being asked for. However, we also need a report on Lubowa –(Members rose_) Just a minute, Hon. Nathan Byanyima; he is presenting something. 

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I can see Hon. Nathan Byanyima trying to advise me, but he also knows that I am a senior Member in regard to – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Tell us about your loan. Do not tell us about Hon. Nathan Byanyima. (Laughter)

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for your guidance and I appreciate it. We have just laid a paper here and the paper is accompanied. 

In the paper, we define the background of the borrowing, define the project and the country strategy, define the financing arrangements, give the project description and the components, etc.

Madam Speaker, the norm has been that when we go to formally present the request in the in the Committee on National Economy, there are accompanying documents, as Hon. Kivumbi has clearly pointed out. We normally present all these documents before the committee. 

When the committee is satisfied, we proceed. When it is not satisfied, they send us back for more documents. 

Therefore, the House –(Interruption) 

MS NALUYIMA: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, you have already ruled and sent this matter to the committee. I am finding it unfair for the minister to go ahead and explain further in the House, yet you have already decided that if the committee finds it unworthy, they will come and inform us. 

Are we proceeding well, Madam Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next item. (Members rose_) Members, I know you want to talk about Lubowa, but they are bringing a report on Lubowa. You will debate Lubowa. 

REPORT OF THE UGANDA PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO THE 51ST COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY ASSOCIATION (CPA) AFRICA REGION CONFERENCE – ABUJA, NIGERIA 8–14 NOVEMBER 2021

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Enos Asiimwe, just lay the reports on the Table.

3.37
MR ENOS ASIIMWE (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a report of the Uganda Parliamentary Delegation to the 51st Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA) Africa Region Conference that was held in Abuja, Nigeria on the 8-14 November 2021. I beg to lay.

3.38
MR ENOS ASIIMWE (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Madam Speaker, I also beg to lay a report of the Uganda Parliamentary Delegation to the 17th CPA Africa Region Conference of Speakers and Presiding Officers, held in Kigali, Rwanda from 17-28 November 2021. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The reports will be available in the library. If you want, read and get some highlights on it. Thank you.

REPORT OF THE DELEGATION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY (EAC) AFFAIRS TO THE 21ST EAST AFRICAN MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES EXHIBITION – MWANZA, TANZANIA

3.39
MR KISOS CHEMASWET (NRM, Soi County, Kween): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table, a report of the delegation of the Committee on East African Community Affairs on – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of order. 

MS NAMUGGA: Madam Speaker, I am here to raise a point of order against the Member. Is he dressed well enough to be in the House today? You are in a vest and on the Floor of Parliament.  Madam Speaker, is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chemaswet, it seems you are disorganising the ladies on this side. (Laughter) So, for that reason, you will present your report tomorrow when you are well dressed. (Laughter)

MR CHEMASWET: Most obliged. I will come tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are going to the next item. Hon. Basalirwa, please, present a brief summary of your report and the highlights of the key lessons that you learnt from there as well as the recommendations for better performance, in accordance with Rule 33(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

3.41
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a report of the Parliament of Uganda Sports Club on the participation in the 11th Edition of the East African Community Inter-Parliamentary Games. 

This report is available online – I was informed that it was uploaded on our iPads. Therefore, as guided by you, I will just present brief highlights in three minutes. 

Madam Speaker, the 11th edition of the Inter-Parliamentary Games was held from 4-17 December 2021 under the theme: “Strengthening the Integration through Inter-Parliamentary Games in the COVID-19 Era”. 

The Parliamentary Commission facilitated the teams by availing training venues, security, refreshments as well as logistics. Due to limited resources, the executive committee took a decision that the teams would travel by road and transport was availed.

The Commission also provided the uniforms and truck suits to the teams. 

I would also like to mention that the teams participated in all the games with other countries, including Burundi, the East African Legislative Assembly, the National Assembly of Kenya, the National Assembly of Tanzania, the National Assembly of South Sudan and Zanzibar, as a guest team. 

There were competitions in athletics, basketball, darts (for Members with disabilities), football, golf, netball, volleyball and Tug-of-war. Madam Speaker, I would like to report on the performance and results briefly. 

Athletics 

Parliament of Uganda Athletes’ Team participated in the eight events - the 100, 200, 400, 800, 1,500, 4x100, 4x400 metres and the walking race.

The team won three gold trophies for the athletics and became the overall winner for the men’s and women’s athletics champions. Overall, the team won 36 medals for Parliament of Uganda. We also participated in a tug-of-war -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where are the medals?

MR BASALIRWA: For information purposes, I am going to –(Interruption)

MR SILWANY: Thank you, for giving way, because we all come from Bugiri. Hon. Basalirwa Asuman is talking about something that is making me very happy as a Member of Parliament. We won several medals, but which Members won the particular medals because the Members are here and we want to applaud  them. Mention the names of the Members that won for us the medals so that it is captured on the Hansard; the official record of this Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Basalirwa, you have a list of Members who won medals. Please, mention their names and we appreciate them because they did us a good job.

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are two things I am going to do towards the end of this exercise; to present the trophies, but also read out the names on the list. If you look at this document, you will realise that every detail is presented. May be Hon. Silwany, who was in JEEMA before he moved to NRM - had he been patient, he would eventually have heard the names.

Tug-of-war

We competed in the tug-of-war for both men and women categories and Uganda finished in third position in the men’s category and fourth, in the women’s category.

Football 

The Parliament of Uganda played all the games except the one with Tanzania, which was abandoned due to bad officiating by the local and unqualified referees.

Uganda being the defending champions finished fourth because the Tanzania and Uganda game was decided against Uganda having protested not to play.

Netball 

I wish to mention that Uganda, who was defending champions in netball, this time round finished in third position.

Volleyball 

The men’s team played a total of five matches, but I would like to mention that the women’s team on the other hand played four matches. Uganda finished in fourth position for both the men and women’s categories.

Basketball 

Uganda men’s basketball team finished second to Tanzania and the women’s basketball team also finished second. 

Names of the Awardees

I now come to the issue raised by hon. Silwany.

100 metres - female MPs Gold medalist - hon. Phiona Nyamutoro from Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations.

MR BASALIRWA: In that very same category, the silver medal was won by hon. Alobo Joan Achom from Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, hon. Alobo and thank you.

MR BASALIRWA: 100 metres for the male MPs, the Gold medalist is hon. Francis Zaake Butebi. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations and thank you.

MR BASALIRWA: The bronze medalist was hon. Odoi Onen from Uganda and in 200 metres for female MPs, the gold medalist was hon. Nyamutoro Phiona from Uganda and the silver medalist was hon. Alobo Joan Achom from Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, hon. Joan Alobo. Stand up because people are asking to see you. Thank you

MR BASALIRWA: 200 metres for the male MPs, the silver medal was won by hon. Bosco Okiror and in the 400 metres for the female MPs, the silver medalist was hon. Susan Mugabi. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, Hon. Mugabi. 

MR BASALIRWA: The bronze medalist was hon. Susan Abeja from Uganda.

In the 800 metres, the silver medalist was hon. Susan Mugabi, and the bronze medallist was hon. Hellen Auma Wandera.

In the 1,500 metres for female MPs, the silver medalist was hon. Susan Mugabi and the bronze medalist was hon. Adeke Anne Ebaju. In the 1,500 metres for the male MPs, the Gold medalist was hon. Mbwatekamwa Gaffa and the silver medalist was hon. Julius Acon.

In the walking race for female MPs, the gold medalist was hon. Akello Christine.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations.

MR BASALIRWA: The bronze medalist was hon. Susan Abeja. In the male MPs walking race, the gold medalist was hon. Patrick Ocan. Those were individual awards.

There were also awards that we received collectively for these competitions. In athletics, Uganda was awarded best female athletics team. (Applause)

We also received a medal as the best male athletics team and overall athletics team. In the tug-of-war, the male MPs received a bronze medal, while the female MPs received a silver medal.

In Basketball, the male MPs received a silver medal. In golf, Uganda was voted as having the best female golf team. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Judith, congratulations. Were you the best?

MR BASALIRA: We also have a medal for the best male golfer, hon. Xavier Kyooma. 

Darts, which is the newest game, was introduced specifically for persons with disabilities. The best darts players were hon. Balimwezo and hon. Mpindi Bumali. 

In netball, Uganda received a bronze medal overall. In football, Uganda received a bronze medal overall.

There are observations and challenges, but let me specifically focus on the recommendations:

1.	It is our humble recommendation that each partner State sponsors and brings at least one referee and umpire per game to officiate at the next games. We discovered that officiation was very poor especially against Team Uganda and we think that one of the ways of addressing it is if each of the participating countries produces referees and umpires. 

2. 	The second recommendation, Madam Speaker, is for adequate financial provision to the sports club to facilitate early preparation and participation in the tournament. 

3. 	We also recommend that team selection should be done at least two months to the tournament to enable service providers, especially for the uniforms, to take measurements early enough and as a consequence, supply the required quality in time. 

4. 	The Parliamentary Sports Club should be permitted and facilitated to travel with enough medical personnel to cover the various disciplines, especially where games are played concurrently. 

5. 	We recommend that the Secretariat of the Inter-Parliamentary Games should be required to devote time and come up with proper rules for the various disciplines, with the involvement of the various technical personnel in the respective disciplines. 

6. 	Members participating in each discipline should be encouraged to reside in the same hotels and stay together for coordination. 

7. 	The Parliamentary Commission should have adequate budgetary allocation for the annual event, to avoid facilitating members in bits. 

Madam Speaker, we want to thank you for your personal effort in ensuring that the team travelled to Arusha –(Applause)- but I also want to inform you that as we speak, members are still demanding for their balances. (Laughter) You do not know the amount of pressure I have, but I also want to tell them that I am putting a lot of pressure on you and you have promised that this matter will be considered. 

So, now that we are presenting it formally, we want to request Members to wait for the guidance of the Speaker. Otherwise, this is a matter that is being handled. There are colleagues who travelled and have never received a single penny. There are those who travelled and received some pay. However, Madam Speaker, we trust in your guidance on this matter. 

8. 	We recommend that training should continue far beyond the games and there should be financial provision for the same, for purposes of making us fit, but also for our own health. 

	Madam Speaker, I would like to report that various disciplines have begun training or continue to train, even beyond the normal parliamentary programme and calendar. I know that football is doing it; volleyball is doing it and so is basketball. We want this to be structured so that training is done on a continuous basis. 

9. 	Madam Speaker, we also recommend that the secretariat of these games and national parliaments should be encouraged to consider having staff games as a precursor to the Members’ tournaments, in order to avoid the conflicts and disputes that occasionally arise out of their involvement in the games. 

10. 	Petitions should be considered and disposed of as soon as possible, in order to avoid more conflicts and uncertainties. 

11. 	The secretariat should be advised not to create additional competitive disciplines, in order to avoid the overwhelming numbers of payers that have huge financial implications on national parliaments.
 
12. 	Finally, to meet the strategic objective of taking Parliament to the people, funding should be made available for regional and constituency level engagements, as the same would be taking Parliament closer to the people.

Madam Speaker, we, once again, would like to express our sincere gratitude to you, the Parliamentary Commission and the Clerk to Parliament, for working tooth and nail to ensure that the Parliament of Uganda participates in these games. We also want to thank all Members of Parliament who participated. We want to thank hon. Sarah Opendi, who represented you and was present throughout the games and not only present, but also cheering –(Laughter)- dancing and singing all sorts of songs, and deepening and integrating very well in the process. We want to thank you and the Members.

Finally, Madam Speaker, with your permission, allow me to lay on the Table the various trophies that we won, for purposes of the record.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have our trophies? (Applause) Thank you, thank you. Congratulations Team Uganda. Where are our medals? 

MR BASALIRWA: Because this is parliamentary property, the medals were individual; they were passed on to holders. For purposes of accomplishing this, I had requested colleagues who had medals to bring them for record purposes, but they will be returned to the individuals. Otherwise, the trophies, Madam Speaker, are for you and Parliament, under your custody.

This trophy here is the athletics trophy, which was given to Team Uganda as the overall best team. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, athletics.

MR BASALIRWA: This particular one was given to the best golf team for the women.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Golfers, thank you so much. (Applause)

MR BASALIRWA: This one, Madam Speaker, was for the athletics; the overall trophy for the best team - Uganda. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Athletics, thank you.

MR BASALIRWA: This particular one, Madam Speaker, is for the best women athletes team trophy; Team Uganda. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, this is a special category, which was given to Hon. Caroline Kamusiime for the longest drive in women’s golf. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Carol Kamusiime, congratulations.   

MR BASALIRWA: It is here. Madam Speaker, there were medals that were received by the different participants. These medals are from the different disciplines, but the highest number of medals came from athletics. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would like, in a special way, to recognise the presence of the captain of athletics, hon. Julius Acon. (Applause) Thank you very much. Thank you.

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, there was another category –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am sure the assistant captain is there – “Matchbox” –(Laughter)- stand up.

MR BASALIRWA: Yes, hon. Osoru. Madam Speaker, there was a category of veteran athletes, 50 years and above, where hon. Elijah Mushemeza and hon. Alero Tom Aza participated, and hon. Aza emerged the best in that category –(Applause)– and he got medals in that regard.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations. 

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, the athletics team, over and above the medals and trophies, have a group photo, where they are; both the ladies and the gentlemen, which group photo I also want to lay  on this Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR BASALIRWA: Hon. Amero is whispering that we need a medal for COVID-19; I am not going to say it because I do not have it. However, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you, once again and I would like to thank colleagues for the spirit exhibited. There were challenges, as I highlighted in the report, but going forward, we will be able to address those challenges. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you so much. I would like to thank the team that travelled - we are not going to subject this to debate. I thank the team that went and participated and won gold medals especially the athletes. The females were led by Hon. Fiona Nyamutooro and males were led by Hon. Zaake. I congratulate you and thank you so much. Thank you for representing our country. 

I know we had challenges; we are addressing those challenges, especially for the people who were not paid. We had a Commission meeting today and we have agreed that everybody who participated will be paid. 

Of course you will understand what we have gone through as a country because of the budget cuts. We haven’t just refused, but you are going to be paid. Take my word, it is our commitment. People will be paid and the rest of the challenges will also be addressed. 

Commissioner, you need to follow up with the Clerk on the payment of Members.

MR SILWANY: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE SHOOTING INCIDENT OF NO. 68055 PC ROBERT MUKEBEZI THE TRAFFIC OFFICER BY A UPDF SOLDIER, CPL BABANGIDA BASHIR MANGO

4.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Madam Speaker, this is a statement on the shooting incident of No. 68055 Police Constable Robert Mukebezi, a traffic officer by a UPDF soldier, Cpl Babangida Bashir Mango.

On 16 January 2022, at around 0520 Hours, information of a traffic incident was received by Kira Road Police Station. PC Robert Mukebezi, a traffic officer on night duty, responded using a motorcycle to the scene of the incident along Kiwatule-Ntinda Road at Kobil fuel station.

On arrival at the scene, the police officer established that the incident involved a UPDF Toyota Prado Land Cruiser Reg. No. H4D5FI391, which was still at the scene.

Reportedly, the accident happened when the UPDF vehicle was trying to avoid a collision with an on-coming trailer, thereby knocking a billboard, an electric pole and an internet pole at Kobil fuel station.

The officer recovered at the scene a truck registration number UAE 589L Dyna, white in colour, driven by Bonny Lubega, commonly known as “Younger”. The tow truck had been called to the scene by the UPDF officers.

The UPDF officers at the scene of the accident came to ensure that the officer who was in the vehicle during the incident was evacuated. He was indeed taken to a nearby medical facility - the Independent Hospital.

The police officer noted that it was a minor incident which affected the billboard, security light pole and the internet pole, all of which had been knocked by this military vehicle H4DF51391. The tyres of the accident vehicle were deflated and therefore, it needed to be towed. 

At this point, Maj. Albert Okua, the transport officer from the UPDF arrived at the scene at 0710 Hours using vehicle No. H4DF0922. The official driver of the accident vehicle, Cpl Babangida had also arrived.

After the accident vehicle was loaded, Maj. Okua was the transport officer who instructed the recovery tow truck driver to follow his vehicle, Reg. No. H4DF0922 to Mbuya. At this point, the traffic officer, PC Mukebezi, boarded the same recovery vehicle. 

Major Okua and the traffic officer did not have a discussion on where the accident vehicle was to be taken. While Maj. Okua directed the tow-truck driver to follow him to Mbuya, the traffic officer was under the impression that they were headed to Kira Road Police Station. 

When the transport officer realised that the recovery truck was leading to a different direction, he followed it and blocked it. He parked in front of the recovery truck and insisted that the vehicle be taken to Mbuya since it had not injured anyone.

The traffic officer, in turn, also insisted that his superior had instructed him to take it to Kira Road Police Station, a position which Maj. Okua did not agree with and instructed PC Mukebezi to get out of the towing vehicle. An argument ensued and it is at this point that Cpl Babangida fired a bullet which hit PC Mukebezi through the front part of the co-driver’s door of the towing vehicle.

Immediately, the transport officer evacuated the traffic officer to Mulago Hospital for immediate medical attention. While at Mulago, the UPDF officers together with the DPC Kira Road Police Station agreed, in the presence of the wife of PC Mukebezi, who had arrived, to transfer the victim to Victoria Hospital at the cost of the UPDF.

PC Mukebezi was admitted to Victoria Hospital on 16 January 2022 from Mulago Hospital, where he had been initially admitted with a gunshot injury on the right thigh, inflicted by a UPDF soldier.

On admission at Victoria Hospital, he was diagnosed with an open fracture of the right femur and hemorrhagic shock from excessive bleeding attributed to a probable major vessel rupture. He was accordingly resuscitated, stabilised and taken to the theatre where the wounds were explored. The damaged vessel femoral artery was identified, repaired and the limb immobilised.

It was observed, however, that the perfusion of the limb remained poor and it was getting gangrenous. It was further noted that the patient was sliding into sepsis and renal insufficiency as a result of complications of the septic limb. 

Further evaluation by the medical people confirmed the limb to be dead and dangerous to life hence the decision to amputate it above the right knee, an operation that was conducted on the 18th of January, two days after the incident, in order to save his life after failure to construct the severely damaged blood vessel.

On 29 January 2022, the patient became anemic and the police emergency response team picked a unit of blood from one of the hospitals – Iran-Uganda Hospital - and he was transfused. The patient continued to receive comprehensive care at the hospital, including undergoing a series of wound revision surgeries, management for sepsis and provision of psychosocial support and counselling.

I would like to report that the patient is now out of danger and steadily responded to treatment. He was discharged from hospital last Friday and is recovering from his home in Mukono. He will return to hospital periodically for review.

It is hoped that the amputation after-effects will cease in due course, paving way for the rehabilitative phase of his management. 

Further Action

The UPDF transport officer was arrested to assist with investigations. The weapon that was used in the shooting was eventually retrieved in Bukasa, where it was abandoned by Cpl Babangida Mango, who disappeared after the incident.

PC Mukebezi’s immediate family received support from the UPDF after this unfortunate incident and the UPDF is meeting all the medical expenses.

The Uganda Police Force also gave him some money for welfare support while he was in hospital. The officer and his family have been counselled about his condition and future work in the force. Efforts are underway to apprehend and bring to book the fugitive culprit through tracking his movements. His last known suspected location was Buikwe, by tracking his phone. 

The Ministry of Internal Affairs and indeed, the Uganda Police Force, will strive to ensure that the victim gets some form of restitution for his life changing injury, including getting an artificial limb and some compensatory assistance working with the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs and the UPDF. 

I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Let us have Hon. Silwany and then, the Leader of the Opposition. When you talk about organising compensation and getting artificial limbs, when is that? Otherwise, you have not given a timeline for it. What is happening to the family? Is police assisting the family of the police officer? 

GEN. MUHOOZI: Madam Speaker, the artificial limb has to await the final healing of the wound and so, I cannot put a timeframe on that one. The compensation aspect is being worked on between us, the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and the UPDF. We shall report back to the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this question was raised by Hon. Silwany. A police officer was on duty and an army officer shot him, causing the police officer to be amputated. He has been in Victoria Hospital. This is why we asked for a report from the minister to that effect. While that police officer was shot on duty, tomorrow, you may also be shot when just getting out of Parliament. 

MS NAMUGGA: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a procedural matter. We have had several cases of citizens of Uganda who have been recklessly shot by security agencies and they are out there without care. I sympathise with the family that was endangered by the current matter that is being presented by the minister. 

However, Madam Speaker, why don’t we gather information about the victims of the same so that they are handled at once? It is as if the life of the policeman who was shot matters more than that of those Ugandans who have suffered the same. We have seen cases of Ugandans in hospitals seeking help from Members of Parliament, the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs or other agencies. 

Can we get a full report of the cases of other people who have been recklessly shot? It may seem as if this is more important than other Ugandans. I request that we get a concrete report on all those reckless shootings by the police and other men who hold guns.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The police officer was shot -

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. To my colleague – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For your information, we condemn any form of shooting. 

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, I would like to tell my colleague that what we are doing is to set a precedent to what the Member has just talked about. Shooting is something that should never be heard of in Uganda. 

The question I would like to ask the Minister - I am the one who went –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Gorreth Namuganza, when that shooting happened and I heard of it, I personally sent my team on the ground. This is why I followed it up. What is happening? Why are you shooting people? That is how I sent him to the hospital. I am the one who paid the first bill for treatment. I do not even know the police officer.

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, thank you, for the clarification.  I have about three questions to the minister –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of information here.

MR SILWANY: I can take the information from Hon. Basalirwa since we come from Bugiri – conflict of interest.

MR BASALIRWA: Yes and it relates to Bugiri. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give relates to the statement the honourable Commissioner has made that that shooting is unique and has not been happening. 

The information I would like to give is that in Bugiri, during the NRM primaries, the police shot a lady; Cockroach’s mother. You know it very well. In my own by-election, police shot and killed my aide, Asuman Walyendo. 

Therefore, it is now becoming a pattern. I was present when Hon. Francis Mwijukye’s leg was shot in Nsambya by security agencies. This is the information I would like to give you, honourable Commissioner.

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Hon. Asuman Basalirwa. I did not say the shooting is unique. No. Nothing was unique. It is a bad incident that happened and it should never happen. As a legislator, I strongly stand to condemn it and I condemn the incidents that happened in Bugiri and everywhere in Uganda. Honourable member, we are setting precedence to what you talked about. We should stop such kinds of incidents. 

The question I have for the minister is that when I visited the hospital, I interacted with the police officer. Honourable minister, you are just talking about one person who was shot, yet it was a scuffle, involving many army officers of different ranks. You are talking about one fugitive, who is on the run. 

I would like to know, honourable minister: who are these other people who came at the scene during that scuffle when the police officer was shot? You said many UPDF officers – about 10 came, when the police officer was shot. The Minister of Internal Affairs should tell Parliament today –(Interjections)– just a second. Let me drive the point and then, I will give you space.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you wait for him to finish his statement?

MR SILWANY: Honourable minister, why do traffic officers cry on the road? The UPDF officers do not respect traffic rules; they intimidate traffic officers on duty and abuse them. Is this something you cannot control, as a ministry? 

Thirdly, and maybe lastly - I know other Members will submit. However, by the time I visited the hospital, the only money the family had was what you gave me to deliver to them. It was your money. How long does the UPDF take to respond to such an issue? I went there after about five days and the man was stuck. His wife was outside. Everybody was stuck and it was tears everywhere. I beg to submit.

4.22
MS SHARIFAH TABAN (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Recently, there was havoc in my district between URA agents and the youth. In the process, the UPDF shot an innocent man and injured several other youth. In fact, the person they shot was not even a participant in the saga that was happening. He was innocently trying to flee. This man was just shooting anyhow. 

Our LCV chairperson went closer and told him that you need to stop attacking the masses. However, this soldier turned around, pointed his gun at our LCV chairperson and told him: “If you move or speak anything, I am going to shoot you.” So, my chairman stood there; he did not know what to do. He was helpless at that point. 

Today it is a police officer and tomorrow it could be me. Yes, if in my district our LCV chairman, who is the president of the district, can have a gun pointed at him, who am I? They are going to point it at me and, if possible, shoot me. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.23
MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise with a lot of pain in my heart. From the time I joined this Parliament, I have buried around six people who have been shot by either the army or police. 

As painful as this particular story is, all the other people who have been buried, hurt all of us. I would, kindly, wish to say to the honourable minister that we need to instill discipline in the armed forces. 

On Saturday, I wanted a new Airtel SIM card. I went to Entebbe police and as I parked, a police officer said, “No one should park here.” I said, “I have a hurt knee” and he said he would break this knee further if I opened my mouth. 

When I said I am a Member of Parliament, he said: “Who cares.” I still think the DPC should identify this man. This is because, if you are a senior police officer from the headquarters, and you have gone to another station, you have to register. You have to call the DPC or anyone there. I reported to the OC Criminal Intelligence at Entebbe police – main. 

Madam Speaker, I am just saying that all other souls matter. There is grievous suffering in this country. Torture is like nothing. Can we get a concrete report from the Ministry of Internal Affairs to see that the country does not go into turmoil? Thank you so much. 

4.25
MS MOURINE OSORU (NRM, Woman Representative, Arua City): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I condemn torture; I condemn killings in this country. Arua is not exceptional. In my own village, a man was shot by the UPDF and nobody, apart from his family, took him to the hospital - just imagine how poor the family is. 

The man sustained wounds and the legs were rotting. When I interacted with him, I realised that the individual indiscipline of our security personnel needs to be corrected. You cannot attack somebody who is just sitting in a trading centre. 

Secondly, in Arua Town, there was a poor woman who was on a boda boda, carrying a basket and a vehicle came and hit them down with its open door because they were riding a numberless motorcycle – instead of stopping them in a dignified way.  

Honourable minister, at what level are we going to stop torturing Ugandans? When are we going to stop the killings in this country? Are we not tired? The people we are killing have families; those are our brothers and sisters. They also have souls. 

Today you are killing somebody’s daughter or son and tomorrow it could be yours. How would you feel? You think yours is very painful? How about for the families that do not have a voice? Who is going to speak for them? We are here to speak for them. We should condemn killings; it does not matter whether we are in the NRM or the Opposition. Killings should be condemned in this country. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would like to find out from the minister: do you get this information or is it only us who get it? Do you get information about the killings? We might be the only ones getting it – maybe we are informing the minister. 

4.28
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to know from the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, who is a General and former CDF.

Today, the level of discipline and tolerance among the armed forces in the country has gone down. This is where I would like the minister to start. Just like the Speaker asked, do you also get this information? 

Madam Speaker, I would like to see the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs and the Minister Internal Affairs sit down and craft a way of seeing that the arrogance, “the I do not care attitude” and the belief that they can do anything within the armed forces is dealt with.

Madam Speaker, we know that most governments failed in this country because they failed to control the army and the police. 

Honourable minister, you should give us a report of your findings. Why are the armed forces behaving like that yet before, the UPDF had a good name? They had discipline and respect for civilians. What has gone wrong? I think this is the response that you should be presenting to this country. Find out what exactly is going on because it is continuous. Honourable members are being harassed. 

Madam Speaker, I believe this country would need an explanation on why things are changing in the hands of the armed forces to this extent. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: While growing up, I always knew that the UPDF was the most disciplined force. I do not know what is happening. 

4.30
MR STEPHEN KISA (NRM, Luuka South County, Luuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I I would like to thank the minister for the report and seek clarification on two issues: 

Honourable minister, we have already observed that the UPDF does not respect police officers. Is it because of the integration of the UPDF into the police force that the UPDF finds no moral obligation to respect the police? 

Secondly, you have raised all the points in your report. We wanted to know from you what other punitive measures you are putting in place to ensure that such occurrences of shooting fellow members in the forces do not occur. It appears as if it is becoming normal – including fights. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.31
MR WILLIAM CHEMONGES (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement over the shooting of the police officer who was on duty. However, I would like to add to what my colleague said. In fact, my temper rises when they talk about killing.

In October, I raised an issue of national importance where the officers from Uganda Wildlife Authority were killing my people at will and at any time that they felt necessary.

In fact, I am currently paying school fees for almost 10 children whose parents were killed by these officers, who were protecting the forest. It is now about four months, but there is no report in the House. These women have very many children; their husbands were killed for doing nothing wrong. They have never been arrested or found to be doing something wrong. 

These officers are just controlling the forests: they cut trees and sell; they rape women and torture others. I would like to thank the government for –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I am sorry to interrupt the honourable member holding the Floor. However, I have just noticed that the Parliament technical team is screening her name as hon. Ebwalu of Soroti West Division yet hon. Ebwalu is not holding the Floor. The technicians should display the correct name.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is called William Chemonges from Kween. Hon. Chemonges, you can finalise and then hon. Ebwalu will come.

MR CHEMONGES: Thank you, honourable colleague, for correcting that. It is high time we agreed, as Members of Parliament, to set a precedent on what we should really do with an armed officer, who is professional enough, but who just pulls out a gun and shoots at a civilian. As a party, it is really ashaming.

I support the National Resistance Movement 101 per cent, but the killing by trained officers should stop today or else we should all fight - in fact in my area, I have told my people that if such a thing happens again, I will join them so that we all go to the bush and attack the Uganda Wildlife Authority posts. We will not leave them. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Hon. Chemonges, this is not our resolution as a House.

MR CHEMONGES: We will go with our hands: we have no guns, but we will go with our hands.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Be informed that that is not what we have resolved as a House.

MR CHEMONGES: Okay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not our resolution. Can you withdraw it? You are preaching violence, which we are saying should stop.

MR CHEMONGES: Okay, I withdraw with apology, but with a very strong statement from the government side. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are professional ethics for an officer even if you are attacked by a civilian; the armed person should have some ethics of not firing back. 

Hon. Muhwezi, my bodyguards were attacked - somebody wanted to disarm one of my bodyguards. I really thank God, if I was to recommend for promotion, that officer should be promoted. He desisted from shooting even one bullet. So, that is what all other armed personnel should do. 

Why would you shoot a person who is not armed? The best thing is to maybe get away. Now, why was that police officer shot? Like the LC V chairperson said, “Talk and we finish you.” How? There is a procedure matter here.

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, the matter we are raising encompasses many ministries. We are raising matters to do with defence and internal affairs. 

The other day when we put Hon. Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Jim Muhwezi on the spot, he said that wasn’t him. 

Procedurally, wouldn’t it be right that matters related to security are comprehensively discussed when all line ministers are present? For today, maybe we limit ourselves to matters relating to internal affairs because even the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) Members of Parliament will not say anything. 

The President said that they are only listening posts yet we are addressing matters to do with discipline in the UPDF and lack of respect for traffic by the UPDF. These Generals do not want to make lines along the roads; they drive on the opposite direction. So, wouldn’t it be procedurally right to address it in a cosmopolitan way?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have seen the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs here as well as the Minister of Security. Minister of Internal Affairs is there. Yes, Minister of Security.

4.38
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY)(Maj. Gen.(Rtd) Jim Muhwezi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me make it categorically clear that I never hid when this matter by the Leader of the Opposition – [Hon. Basalirwa: “Order”] 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Stop behaving like you are from Bugiri. 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: You mentioned my name and I have to respond – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you are not looking after cows. No, he did not hide. He was there. Please, you are out of order and you are making noise. 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The main point I would like to make is: as you have heard, these cases being reported relate to the UPDF, the Police and even the Uganda Wildlife Authority. They are from different security forces. These are individual criminal acts, which Government condemns and anyone found culpable is punished. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, they are individual acts. Do you have a number or the list of people who have been killed on a daily basis? 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Yes, we have all the – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have the list of the people who committed the act?

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Many of them do not come here, but they are arrested and punished.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I am asking you: do you have the list of those who committed the act? 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Yes, we can produce the list.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What action have you taken on those persons?

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: We take them according to the law, they are punished and some soldiers have been taken for firing squad.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can I have a list of those people in my Office and we compare with what we have and after that you can lay it on the Table?

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. We are going to consult the relevant ministries to produce all these lists and we submit them to Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And the action taken? 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Yes, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How much time should we give you? I am giving you one week because you already have it.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Okay, much obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Hon. Jonathan Ebwalu?

4.41
MR JONATHAN EBWALU (Independent, Soroti West Division, Soroti): Madam Speaker, the President of Uganda, H.E, Gen. Yoweri Museveni is on record, directing the security organs to stop killing and torturing Ugandans. 

However, day in, day out, Ugandans are being killed and others tortured. Others are being detained without trial here in Uganda. We want to understand: is it the commanders or the President? Now that the President came out and issued such directives to the commanders to stop killing and torturing people, who are these people torturing us? I am disturbed. 

The other day, the Ag. Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Hon. Muruli Mukasa, came here and said they have a list of people who are detained in different detention centres in the country. He went ahead to say that they are looking for the perpetrators of these killings and torture. 

My question is, if you have the people that are being tortured with you, who is torturing them? You cannot come and lie to Parliament that you have the list of people who have been tortured and the centres they are in and you do not know the people who are torturing them. Who is lying to whom here? 

Minister of Security, Hon. Jim Muhwezi, you have lived in this country for a very long time. You have been in and out of Government. When you are out of Government, you know how painful it is. When you were detained in Luzira Prison – you know how painful it is to be in prison without trial. I remember you cried and said it was persecution. How about others who do not have godfathers? 

Honourable minister, we need to stop killing people with impunity. It is not correct. If we are going to continue killing people like this – the concerned security officers must be brought to book. If this continues, it is not good for the Government. People out there will continue saying it is President Museveni doing this, yet, it is the errors of a few individuals in security. 

Hon. Jim Muhwezi, I would like to request you – if you cannot tell us the people who are killing Ugandans, if you cannot tell us the people who are torturing Ugandans, why don’t you resign? Of what use is it for you to continue being there when people are dying? (Applause) Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Jim Muhwezi, you will respond –(Interjections)– Please, sit down. 

4.44
MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you for the opportunity, Madam Speaker. I understand we are coming up with resolutions and proposals to ensure that this does not go on, but we already have affected persons and the Speaker has already started contributions. 

I inform you, Madam Speaker, that it is we, honourable members, footing the school fees bills and upkeep for the rest of the affected persons, for the families that have been affected. As we look out for the affected persons, especially health wise, the families behind them are suffering. We need a detailed plan for compensating these people. 

We would also like to know, who actually approves the list of soldiers who go to the masses. In Kiboga, whoever wants to evict people comes with soldiers. They settle in front of your courtyard and say, “Anybody here will be trespassing.” People get lost at that point. Why do we deploy soldiers who are ready to shoot to go directly to our people? Who approves those lists? 

We request to have a point of reporting, where people aggrieved in this manner can report. Otherwise, we have a lot of cases. We are suffering with a lot of expenses on these families. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Members, it is an agreed fact that there are killings and these killings are by officers who do it carelessly. We now need to look at what we need to do. What is the solution? How do we stop these kinds of killings? We need to know who those people are. How do we bring them to book? That is why we have asked that you should lay on the Table – 

4.47
MS SHAMIM MALENDE (NUP, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister. What are the measures being taken by the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Security to address the issue of guns in Uganda? Currently, it is very clear that every person who is connected, whether they are uniformed or not, is seen moving around with a pistol. 

We need to find out who these people are. Who issues guns to them? Is there a system that is being put in place to recall all the guns that are in circulation so that we can use it as a remedy to avert these crimes? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.48
MR DAVID KABANDA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his report. I do not think that the Minister of Internal Affairs is the one who is supposed to respond on this matter. The one who shot is from the Ministry of Defence. I think the minister should speak for the one who was shot. This is Internal Affairs. The one who was shot is a traffic officer. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, Hon. Muhoozi, the Minister of Internal Affairs, is the aggrieved one. The person who should have given this report should have been the Minister of Defence. 

MR KABANDA: The Minister of Internal Affairs should actually thank me because I am here saving him. (Laughter) The minister from the Ministry of Defence, who is here, should come and tell us where the Major who shot the traffic officer is. Do not carry a cross, which is not yours. (Laughter) Let people who are responsible for these things come here and explain. You were injured; you are supposed to protect your traffic officer, but instead of protecting your officer, you are carrying a cross to defend another person who hurt you. (Interruption) 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Thank you very much, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that while it is defence – the UPDF, who committed the crime, the investigation of crimes is under Internal Affairs – the CID. That is why the Minister of Internal Affairs is reporting on what happened, what was investigated and the action taken. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is this an inter-ministerial document from Defence, Security and Internal Affairs? 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: No. I think when the matter – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What Gen. Muhoozi is telling us is what happened to his officer. We want the CDF – did I see the CDF here? 

MR KAJWENGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have listened to the Minister of Internal Affairs in regard to the police officer who was shot while on duty. This has generated debate. Honourable Members of Parliament have also chipped in, giving other instances of shootings committed by other security agencies. 

Madam Speaker, you have ruled and given a timeframe of one week to the Minister of Security to submit a list to this honourable House of who was shot at and what action was taken.

In my view, once that list is submitted, a debate shall follow. Are we, therefore, proceeding properly when you have already ruled and after one week we shall come back to this very debate? I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we also have a document from the Leader of the Opposition, which is going to be presented. I am not going to allow you present without the names. I would like it full so that we are able to compare. It is talking about the same things.

Members, this is a very serious issue - without being partisan, they almost shot my bodyguard the other day. Let us look at this thing holistically. 

We have a report from the Committee on Human Rights, which is coming next week; when are you bringing the Leader of the Opposition’s paper? Is it tomorrow? I am tired. We are looking at the way forward. We need this issue debated holistically with the inter-ministerial document; where he is going to lay the names, actions and way forward. As someone said, these families are looking at us. How do we help these families? What action has Government taken to support these families?

We need that report on what we should do. Truth be told, these killings are not good for our society. The kids that are growing up are now getting to know that it is okay to kill. It is not good.

Let us desist from this and instil discipline in the army, the police and in everybody who has a gun. If one cannot hold a gun, then remove that gun from that person. People need to be professional.

We are going to have a debate. I have given one day for the Parish Development Model and we will also have that debate on torture, together with the killings. The House is adjourned to 2 o’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 4.56 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 2 March 2022 at 2.00 p.m.)


