

Friday, 16 March 2018

Parliament met at 10.06 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. We adjourned to today for very specific purposes and we want to see how far we can go in fulfilling them. There is no urgent matter, so, let us proceed.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON FUNDING THE MANAGEMENT OF THE NODDING SYNDROME

10.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, we have had a discussion with the Ministry of Health this morning and as the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development we are still waiting for their action. We have not received the action from the Ministry of Health to be able to act. As a ministry we cannot send resources without any request. I talked to hon. Sarah Opendi today and she said she is coming back to us in a few minutes. I am still waiting.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, yesterday I saw two letters from the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Health that was sent to the Secretary to Treasury. That was yesterday morning. What happened to the two letters from Dr Diana Atwine, the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Health?

MR BAHATI: I can crosscheck in two minutes and come back to this House. I can get out and crosscheck.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know that matter is important. We want a clear statement from you today.

MR BAHATI: Sir, I can get out and crosscheck in two minutes.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural issue. Now that the Minister of Finance, Panning and Economic Development is in the House and he has been informed that there is some correspondence from the Ministry of Health and the Minister of Health is not in the House, of what benefit will the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development be to us in this House for us to conclude this matter? This is not a casual matter. It is a matter that is threatening lives – lives of Ugandans, above all.

Mr Speaker, I am seeking procedural guidance whether the minister is compellable. He keeps on postponing this matter to another day. What is the hope this Parliament is giving to those who are suffering? Sometimes it makes me wonder whether we care. Government is the parent but do we care at all? I am on record questioning, “What if it was someplace else? Would we be handling it the same way?” We have found money for cows – foot and mouth disease –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, protect me from “my behind”. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, it is a matter that I am struggling to restrain myself from sounding below the standard of this House. What do we do? We have the minister in the House; what do we do in the circumstances?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am also in the same state of affairs. Procedurally, I do not know how to proceed. I am going to suspend this House for 15 minutes to allow the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development organise himself and come back to the House. Without a clear statement on this particular issue, we will have difficulties proceeding today.

House suspended for 15 minutes.

(The House was suspended at 10.14 a.m.)

(On resumption at 10.30 a.m._)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we suspended the House to enable the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give us an update on what emergency measures have been put in place in this case of nodding syndrome. I have received a letter that has been written by the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Health and it is not talking about an emergency as of now. 

It says, “The purpose of this letter is therefore to request you that in the Financial Year 2018/2019, funds are provided under the respective districts to operationalise the two centres.” Therefore, it has nothing to do with the emergency response the letter was referring to.

Honourable members, for the last four days, we have been talking about this matter but nobody has responded in terms of an emergency; not the Ministry of Health, not the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Essentially, what we are saying is that those people should continue the way they are because that is how we care for them.

This House cannot proceed with business. House adjourned to the 27th of this month.

(The House rose at 10.33 a.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 27 March 2018 at 2.30 p.m.) 

