Wednesday, 24 March 2010

Parliament met at 11.20 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s meeting. I had indicated yesterday that we will start at 9.30 a.m. I have been monitoring you since 9 O’clock. We have lost one or two hours; I hope we will be able to catch up. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PLANT VARIETY PROTECTION BILL, 2010

11.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Maj. (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Madam Speaker, I wish to present the Bill entitled, “The Plant Variety Protection Bill, 2010”, for the first reading. It is accompanied by the certificate of financial implications. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is committed to the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for perusal and reporting back to the House.

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

I) MR FRANCIS KIYONGA 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Francis Kiyonga is not here. Let us go to the next item.

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

II) MS CHRISTINE ABIA BAKO

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is she? Please go to the next item.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE NATIONAL FORESTRY AUTHORITY


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the Chairperson, COSASE?  Let us proceed to the next item.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PEFORMANCE OF THE ECONOMY FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2008/2009

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, I think you had presented and we were waiting for the response from the Minister of Finance. 

11.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for the opportunity given to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to respond to the key issues raised by Parliament on the performance of the national economy. In so doing, my response is closely related to the report of the committee as well as the report of the Shadow Minister of Finance. There are six main issues which were raised, to which I want to respond very quickly.

The first one was on economic growth and inequality. I want to confirm to you that Uganda has achieved very significant progress over the years. The economy has been growing at about 7 percent per annum over the last 10 years, and if you spread that to two decades or twenty years, the average has been 6 percent per annum. This is very impressive by any African standards, where the average is only 2.4 percent. 

Indeed, this growth has also been reflected in the reduction in poverty levels. In 1992, the proportion of Ugandans living below the poverty line was 56 percent. In the last count by UBOS in 2006, this had been reduced to 31 percent. This is very positive, and indeed, continuing with this trend, Uganda should be able to achieve the Millennium Goal of reducing poverty by half by 2015. 

Madam Speaker, it is true that while the economic growth has been very positive, it has not been distributed among Ugandans evenly, and this is known and it is measured by the gini coefficient. We have done so, and we do note - and it is known - that the inequality has been a result of past insurgency in the North and part of the North Eastern part of the country. Government is addressing this inequality. 

Since peace returned to the North and East, Government has been targeting and addressing this inequality by initiating programmes such as the Northern Uganda Recovery Programme and more recently, the Peace Recovery and Development Plan. In addition, Government has produced a national development plan. This plan is now ready and it will be launched soon. 

The most important point in the national development plan is focussing on improving the quality of economic growth as well as distribution, by focussing more on areas which improve employment such as agricultural processing; which add value; which require skills development; which improve the quality of education; which reduce the cost of doing business in the country; and which increase profitability. It is true as well, that health indicators such as maternal mortality dimension, is not what we would like to see, and I know, Madam Speaker, you are on record on this issue, on how upsetting it is for a woman to die while she is giving life. The ministry shares your concern on this and the Ministry of Health will be coming to this House to outline the programmes that have been formulated to address the issues related to this challenging aspect. 

The second issue which is very critical, and looking at the shadow minister’s response, we need to address it very squarely.  This relates to the credibility of statistics. I can tell you that to question the credibility of statistics produced by Government is to question the intellectual honesty of Government; and we take this very seriously. I just want, if you permit me, to state before this House, that indeed, the statistics Government gives in its reports are credible, authentic and accurate. 

Over the last two decades, Uganda’s economy has been under close scrutiny. There is no question principally, because it does not need proof. Uganda has been supported by development partners and everyone in this House knows that before the development partners can help, they give conditionalities. These conditionalities can only be satisfied when proper and accurate assessment is being carried out, which has been done. The bulk of conditionalities are related to the performance of the economy and it must be proved. 

As you may be aware, Uganda was among the first African countries to implement debt relief programmes. I want this House to know that debt relief was a reward to countries that have performed better. You could never get a debt relief if your performance economically was not satisfactory.  Uganda was among the first countries to get Highly Indebted Poor Countries Program (HIPIC) relief, which was done after a thorough scrutiny. Recently, with the multilateral debt relief initiative, Uganda again benefited after scrutiny, analysis and evaluation. Reaching decisions of this magnitude for Uganda to benefit from debt relief is based on very strict economic performing criteria, and structural reform implementation is based on data analysis, and on data analysis alone, rarely do you receive poverty reduction packages. 

Some of the Members here have worked with the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. So, they know it too well that for the World Bank, which is the biggest development partner to Uganda, to finance investments such as roads, energy, education, agriculture, health, environment and capacity building, can only be done when these institutions are satisfied with the figures that they are provided with, or they themselves collect from the field. They do that after an exhaustive assessment of the economy’s performance and its policies.  

In fact, there is what they call Country Policy and Institutional Assessment. This is a programme by the World Bank, where countries which are benefiting from assistance are assessed by them. Therefore, it is not true that Government could be cooking figures. 

For purposes of the record, let me inform you that Government has invested quite heavily in building statistical capacity, involving hiring international experts, and there have also been a lot of independent data collecting institutions, which removes any possibility of information pedalling, if you really want. As a result, we have Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) – may I share with you because we have been in various positions in the country and outside. UBOS is rated as one of the best performing institutions on the African Continent. And by law, always the figures in Government are quoted by UBOS, which is mandated and is established as autonomous.  That independence has been maintained to give credibility to figures that we use in Government documents. 

Just to conclude on this point of integrity of data and statistics, because in the report of the Shadow Minister, there is a motive of cooking figures and using public relations exercises to make them look good. This is not true – [MR ODUMAN: “It is true.”]-  This is not true; I am telling you; because – and some of these colleagues have worked with the World Bank and IMF – they work on validated information. IMF sends missions in this country; World Bank does the same. Incidentally, United Nations itself, because we have programmes supported by the United Nations, all these institutions, which do not owe anything to any government and are free to say so, come to the conclusion and agree with the data we have been providing to the House.  

In concluding this point, it is true that the economic performance of this country has been very impressive. There is no question about it; and the creditworthiness of this country has also increased significantly. I should add that there are international institutions –(Interjection)– No! I want to prove this point because -(Interruption)

MR WACHA:  I would like to follow what is going on, but I have a totally different document in my hands. I cannot follow what the minister is saying; I am trying to read, thinking that maybe the minister is trying to elaborate, but I cannot follow. Can the minister either stick to the text or tell us he does not need the text, so that we now concentrate on hearing him and ask him to produce what he is talking about. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think he was elaborating on the issues which are contained in the paper, but if he could follow systematically.

PROF. KAMUNTU: I thank you, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. It is very true that the report has been circulated and what I was doing was summarising. I was not reading it; I was elucidating on the very points which I thought -(Interruption)


MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I want to supplement on what hon. Wacha has just raised. Actually, the text which the minister is reading is from the Table. What has been distributed is different from what he is reading, because it is available and I have it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, stick to the document you have distributed. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Your ruling is consistent with what I thought was trying to help the House so that this matter is settled once and for all, but I will follow your advice. 

We come to the third point, which is also critically important, and that is on debt sustainability. Again, reading from the report of the committee - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think I have a problem, I see a document here reading: “Response to the issues raised by the Shadow Minister,” and then another one, “Response to the key issues raised...” 

PROF. KAMUNTU: What it is, Madam Speaker, is that you have the report of the committee and you have that of the Shadow Minister, which I am combining in order to provide answers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you should first deal with the one of the shadow minister, because if you mix them, it will be difficult for us to follow.

MR ODUMAN: Madam Speaker, what is on the Table is the report of the Committee on National Economy and our response was to that report. Procedurally, the minister should respond to that report also and make clarifications to the issues we raised.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have made a ruling and told him to first respond to your issues and then respond to those of the report. That is what I have told him to do; and you came late.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I can do it because I have –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you know there are two documents and I do not know which one to read. One is bigger than the other. How can you explain? These are not your documents?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I apologise for the confusion in the papers. There were some papers distributed earlier and others distributed today. The papers I am using - I am responding to the Parliamentary committee report and the shadow minister’s report. The written statement that has been distributed to the Members – let me read it, “Response to the key issues raised by Parliament on the performance of the National Economy by the Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development”. The first heading is, “Economic growth and inequality” and that is the one I was responding to. Thank you very much.

The copies were outside because I saw them as I was coming in.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is the three-paged document that the minister is dealing with.

PROF. KAMUNTU: This brings together the salient points that were brought before you. If you permit me, I can continue and deal with the question of debt sustainability. 

Again this question of debt sustainability has been raised time and again. I really want to dwell on this issue so that it is settled and we do other business.

On the debt sustainability, Members are clearly right that the government must avoid the recurrence of debt sustainability constraints, which were expressed before the HIPIC and Multi-lateral Debt Relief Initiative in 2007. The concern is absolutely appreciated that you do not want to burden the future population with loans that are unsustainable to pay. Consequently, Government strategy and measures for maintaining debt sustainability have been published and I have copies. In that strategy, a number of things should be very clear. The following measures are maintained to ensure sustainability of debt. 

One, in borrowing, the cardinal principle is to look for grant financing in sourcing the loans. This is a very vital point. Your first priority in sourcing the loans is to go for grants, and they do not require repayment.

Secondly, in borrowing, Government should aim at concessional terms, meaning that if you went to an international financial market, these would be terms, which are less stringent and costly. Again, I know in this House that Members know that Uganda is a member of the World Bank and a member of the African Development Bank. These institutions by their own mandates give concessional loans to member countries, particularly those belonging to IDA. The bulk of borrowing by Government is, in fact, from these two sources, which give concessional loans.

Thirdly, in borrowing for non-concessional loans - because sometimes you do - these are strictly limited to special strategic development projects, that is, those which are drivers of the economy; which are engines of the development of other sectors in the economy. They are limited to areas such as infrastructure, works, transport and energy. If I had time, I would show you the distribution of these loans, that they are really targeted to these strategic sectors, which become engines of development growth for other sectors.

Perhaps more importantly, every loan that has been procured must be done in accordance with the law. In contracting these laws, Section 20 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act as well as Article 159 of the Constitution, is followed. There is no loan that has been contracted without prior approval of Parliament. All these machineries ensure that what is being done must be sustainable. 

Similarly, internationally, there are statistical benchmarks that are used for measuring the sustainability of debt of any country. In Uganda’s case, I have been involved in these matters and the benchmarks that are given. You look at the solvency ratio as well as liquidity ratio. These ratios are measured in terms of economic growth, export earnings, domestic revenue and the net present value of the money borrowed. The threshold is established, for instance, with the figures we have - using solvency ratio - the threshold is 50 percent; but for Uganda’s case for this year and next, it is less than 50 percent.

In the liquidity ratio, the benchmark is put at 25 percent. In everyone of those you look at, it is much less, proving beyond any statistical doubt, that the debt stock projected over a five-year period, is still within the benchmarks or threshold, and consequently, it is sustainable. 

These figures change, of course, as new loans are contracted, and we can periodically provide information to this House to make sure that this House feels comfortable that the debts that are being contracted are not reckless or wasteful, as is stated in the conclusion of the Shadow Minister’s report. 

We can now move to measures to reduce – the second point which is critically important; this external debt that has come here. Yesterday it was here, and the other day it was here. We can pledge to this House that every time a new loan is being contracted, we come back with fresh figures to ensure the benchmarks are not exceeded. 

Another critical point that was raised is domestic arrears. Measures have been taken to reduce domestic arrears and we have established an electronic funds transfer mechanism, which is working, and the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003. Every accounting officer is personally liable for committing Government outside a warrant, without prior approval by the Secretary to the Treasury. The accounting officers, whose spending votes have accumulated new arrears, will be required to submit detailed accounts of how these arrears came about. 

In the meantime, all non-statutory arrears will be cut from the expenditure releases of the affected spending agencies, for the fourth quarter. 

My last comment on the points raised by the Shadow minister; I would like to assure Members in this House that we respect Parliament immensely, and that we would be the last people to give Parliament ‘cooked’ figures; and I think it is unfair for the Shadow Minister to read motives in the figures provided by Government, of reckless, wasteful –(Interjection)- No! It is not right. I can answer. Just look at the conclusion. It is absolutely wrong; and I would be prepared to answer if any ‘cooked’ figure had been given to this House. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do adopt the report of the Committee of National Economy. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the other business is a report on the Buganda Road flats, which is being reproduced. We shall debate it in the afternoon. So, I suspend the House to 2 O’clock. 

(The House was suspended at 11.52 a.m.)

(On resumption at 2.41 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I indicated in the morning, we are now going to receive the second part of the report on the Buganda Road flats. Where is the Chairperson?

Maybe I should suspend for another 15 minutes. So, let’s resume at 3 O’clock. 

(The House was suspended at 2.43 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.01 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

3.01
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Charles Oleny): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is the addendum report that the committee on Finance was to submit to the House after we had earlier on presented the report on the Buganda Road flats. 

On 20th October 2009, the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented its report on the petition by the sitting tenants of Buganda Road flats. At that time, the Speaker advised that the committee seeks further clarification from the Attorney-General on some essential matters that were being considered in the petition. It is indeed my pleasure, now, to inform the House that we followed the wise counsel of the Speaker, and I would like to report back in this addendum to the first report on this matter. 

The committee formed specific questions and invited the Attorney-General to attend its proceedings to clarify, and these were the issues that we sought advice on:

    1. The legal status of the National Housing Corporation Company Limited, 
    2. the shareholding of the company,
    3. the controlling interest of the company,
    4. the Government policy of selling to sitting tenants and the scope thereof, and
    5. the binding nature of the policy on the former National Housing and Construction Corporation, and now the National Housing Construction Company Limited.

Madam Speaker, the response from the Attorney-General was as follows, on those issues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what we have done is that the old report and the addendum have both been distributed. 

MR OLENY: And I am now on the addendum, the first page. I will be dealing with the response by the Attorney-General. 

The Attorney-General never attended the committee meetings. He, however, submitted a written response, which is attached to this addendum, and advised as follows:

The legal status of National Housing Construction Company Limited is a public liability company registered under the Companies Act with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development in charge of Privatisation holding one share each.

Prior to 2002, National Housing and Construction Corporation was a public enterprise fully owned by Government and operated as such. In 2002, and pursuant to the Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture Statute, 1993, now Act, Cap. 98, NHCC was listed in the First Schedule as a Class II Enterprise in which the state is required to retain a majority of the shares while the rest may be disposed of to persons other than the state in accordance with the PERD Act, Cap. 98.

The shareholders of National Housing and Construction Company Limited

In 2005, NHCCL by special resolution issued additional 37,250,398 shares, in addition to the two shares previously issued, which formed 51 percent of the shares in the company. These shares were credited as fully paid by the Government of Uganda.

By the same resolution and in accordance with the Shareholders’ Agreement between Uganda and Libya of 30 December 2005, 35,789,600 shares representing 40 percent were transferred to Libya Africa Foreign Investment Company (LAFICO). In this, NHCCL had only two shareholders, namely, the Government of Uganda, which holds 51 percent and LAFICO, now holding 49 percent.

There is an inconsistency in the Attorney-General’s submission in regard to the shares held by LAFICO, because here he states that this constituted 40 percent, but when we checked, it should have been 49 percent.

Controlling Interest

The controlling interest in National Housing Construction Company Limited is held by the Government of Uganda, and this means that Government has a large enough block of voting stock shares in the corporation such that no one stockholder can successfully oppose a motion. In theory, this normally means the controlling interest would be 50 percent of the voting shares plus one and that is how you end up with the 51 percent as defined as controlling interest.

Government policy on divestiture of houses to sitting tenants and the scope of its application:
The Attorney-General stated that in 1992, Government approved the policy that Government divests itself of the responsibility of housing civil servants. Cabinet also agreed, under this policy that the existing stock of pool houses be sold to civil servants in line with certain guidelines. 

Specific reference is made to houses rented by civil servants from NHCC, Departed Asians Property Custodian Board and private houses. That the civil servants occupying such houses were to choose to receive the rent paid for such houses for a limited period, as the allowance for houses purchased or houses construction, subject to later rationalisation of those rents.

Evidence of this guideline is not tendered in support, though, there are, however, guidelines dated April 20 1994 (Public Service Housing Scheme Guidelines and Procedure on the Sale of Government Pool Houses), tendered by the Attorney-General. These make specific reference to civil servants occupying National Housing and Construction Corporation houses as follows:

“For civil servants occupying National Housing and Construction Corporation (houses) arrangements are being made with the management of National Housing and Construction Corporation with a view to enabling such civil servants to purchase those units from the corporation under similar terms (similar to the terms applicable to other pool houses as laid down in the Public Service Housing Scheme Guidelines and Procedure on Sale of Government Pool Houses, 1994)”.

The same guidelines provide that the people would be informed, in due course, of the decision derived in regard to National Housing and Construction Corporation Houses occupied by civil servants. No evidence of such decision and communication thereof to the service was tendered by the Attorney-General.

The Attorney-General informed the committee that the scope of application of this Government policy as can be gathered from the Cabinet minutes and circular letters leads to the conclusion that the policy was directed at only Government pool houses and not necessarily any or all the houses that were occupied by the civil servants.

Whether the government policy was binding on NHCC

The Attorney-General informed the committee that NHCC was an autonomous body that owned the houses in question, in its own name, and to which Government was merely a paying tenant. That NHCC was not bound by the policy – that is the Attorney-General.

The Attorney-General did not, however, support this position with any provisions of the law; neither did he reconcile it with the clear legal provisions under the National Housing and Construction Cooperation Act, Chapter 313, which placed the cooperation under the supervision, control and direction of the minister and ultimately Cabinet.

On whether the government policy applies to the successor company, the National Housing Construction Company Limited, the Attorney-General informed the committee that since the policy did not apply to National Housing and Construction Cooperation, it was not binding to its successor company.

The committee took note of the following observations: 

    1. The existence of a government policy of selling to civil servants; residential units previously offered to them by Government for accommodation if firmly established.

    2. The committee received, in evidence, a letter from the Permanent Secretary of Ministry of Public Service addressed to all permanent secretaries. The letter dated, 7 October 1991, emphasised that the sale of the houses, belonging to National Housing and Construction Cooperation to the civil servants was in line with the government policy and that the civil servants should be given first priority to purchase. There is an annexure I to that effect. 

    3. Another communication was from the National Housing Construction Company Limited, addressed to all Buganda Road Flats tenants assuring them that the company had engaged a consultant to facilitate the process of obtaining their condominium titles from the lands office and that the process would be completed within the next three to four months. This communication is dated, 2 August 2005. It also put the total value of each flat at Shs 50 million. Annexure II confirms that.

    4. The ministerial policy statement for the financial year 2006/2007 also expressed further commitment to sell to the tenants, condominium units at Buganda Road Flats. We also have attached it to this report as annexure III.

    5. We further observed that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development wrote to the Managing Director of National Housing Construction Company Limited expressing concern that a failure to grant the tenant first priority to purchase would mean a double standard applied to Government employees in houses as against those living in flats. He put the Managing Director to task to explain if this was not discriminatory and therefore illegal. Evidence of this letter is attached as annexure IV.

    6. We further observed that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in a communication dated 22 December 20009, Ref. No. ADM 12/02 also reaffirmed the commitment to sell to the tenants as a matter of Government policy. He called upon the Minister of Finance to instruct Mr Keith Muhakanizi, the Chairman of National Housing Construction Company Limited, to handle the matter to a logical conclusion; evidence to this is attached as annexure V.

    7. Our other observation was that National Housing and Construction Cooperation was a public enterprise established by National Housing and Construction Cooperation Act, Cap 313, which mandated it to purchase, hold, manage and dispose of any property. It also had a duty, under the Act to provide, accommodation to citizens of Uganda at economical cost.

    8. We also note that National Housing Construction Cooperation was under the close supervision, control and direction of the minister to whom, as the Act provides, functions were assigned ultimately to him. The minister, therefore, had powers, under the law, to appoint the chairperson of the board of directors approved by laws made by the board and to issue written directions of both a general and specific nature to the cooperation while keeping within the law and Government policy. The law required the cooperation to comply with the directives of the minister. 

    9. Madam Speaker and hon. Members, we further note that the government was approved by Cabinet to which the supervising minister was a member. And all Cabinet ministers collectively had the responsibility to observe and ensure its implementation under their domain. The government policy was not contrary to any legal provisions.

    10. We further noted that on 20 April 1994, the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Public Service communicated to all permanent secretaries, including that of the supervising ministry, calling upon them to observe and oversee the implementation of the government policy in line with the prescribed guidelines. None of the available communication excluded the application of the policy to National Housing Construction Cooperation houses occupied by civil servants.

    11. The law allowed the minister to issue directives to NHCC to instruct it to comply with and implement Government policy. The NHCC was, therefore, under a legal duty to comply with such directives.

    12. Madam Speaker, we also noted that the 20 April 1994 communication from the Permanent Secretary of the Public Service specifically cited NHCC houses occupied by civil servants and maintains that they would be sold to them in terms similar to those used in selling other houses under this same Government policy, only that the arrangements were being made then with NHCC to implement the sale to the civil servants and communication to that effect would be made at a later stage.

    13. The committee further noted that the government policy to sell, to the resident civil servants, was binding upon NHCC as a statutory state enterprise under the supervision, control and direction of the minister and Cabinet.

    14. The committee also noted that NHCC Ltd is the successor company to NHCC Cooperation and the government has a controlling interest deliberately conferred by Parliament under the Public Enterprise and Divesture Act, CAP 98 to enable Government retain, control and continue to influence company policy including the observance and implementation of its own Government policies.

    15. Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the committee further observed that that Government policy is therefore binding upon NHCC Ltd as a successor company to the cooperation. There is no evidence of any legal provision to the contrary that has come to the attention of the committee.
 
    16. Government, further, is in a position to apply its controlling interests to route for the implementation of its own policies by NHCC Ltd. The controlling advantage gives it firm capacity to influence the company decisions.

    17. Our final observation is that we note that any rights of the other shareholder, LAFICO, ought to be interpreted subject to and in line with Government policy, because this policy preceded the share acquisition transaction by this very LAFICO in 2005. LAFICO, therefore, had the opportunity to know of and find out about the existence of the policy and its binding nature and it appears to have agreed to acquire shares in NHCC Ltd with full knowledge of the nature and extent of the government policy we are talking about.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, in giving its further recommendation, the committee asserts that Parliament strongly recommends that Government, as a majority shareholder in NHCC Ltd with a controlling interest, respects, observes and routes for the implementation of its own policy of selling to the petitioners as the policy demands and as is expressed in several communications from senior Government officials, NHCC and also from NHCC Ltd.

In conclusion, it is the position of the committee that these issues have been critically analysed and that the petitioners and other stakeholders have been duly listened to. As a committee, we recommend that the first priority right of selling to sitting tenants should be upheld as a matter of law and policy. I beg that the Addendum Report be adopted by this House. Thank you much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chair. I do not know whether there are any contributions – are you the shadow spokesperson – you have been assigned. Okay, hon. Nandala-Mafabi

3.28
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, I think the committee is right to make such recommendations. However, I notice that there are some issues. First, when that Libyan came to buy NHCC in 2005, they used the book values of 2003; there was no valuation done. So, it does not mean that as we sell Buganda Road flats, we should do so at the book value of 2005. The sale should be done at the market value and the returns be passed on to Government.

There must be businessmen behind this – I am worried of the interests behind, because if you say it is a Government policy – I was personally a civil servant when there was a policy for civil servants to acquire houses. We, the civil servants, who were staying in houses for NHCC, were paying Shs 1 and Government would top up for us. Those who were in pool houses were also paying Shs 1 million but with no money being paid to NHCC. So, there was a big difference and there was always a cheque from Government to NHCC to cater for payments. If there were payments to NHCC, it implies there was a difference in these two categories of houses.

Much as I also support the fact that these houses should be sold to sitting tenants, I would like to emphasise the fact that this sale be done at market value; it should not be the business of people to buy houses at only Shs 50 million and end up selling them off at say, Shs 500 million as if it is their right to make profits from Government property.

Finally, it is true we discussed this issue the other time, but I do not think there was any problem with the Attorney-General not coming out clearly, because there were two policies at the time, which showed that NHCC houses were different from pool houses. What we should do is to guard the shares of Government. Much as they were owned by Government, it does not mean these are pool houses. And that is why we had to look for the condominium law to deal with such houses.

Madam Speaker, I would like to propose - much as I support the fact that they should be given first priority - that the sale should be done at a market value. That means we should value the houses –(Interruption)

MRS SSENTONGO: I stand on a point of order. I wonder how hon. Nandala-Mafabi stands to discuss his own report. When I look at the last page, I notice that he is member of this committee and signatory to this very report. Is he giving information or discussing it? That is what I wanted to find out. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Shadow Secretary of Finance, the person you assigned is a member of this committee. Let us move on. Any more contributions? (Mr Oduman rose_) Now you want to contribute in what capacity because you had already assigned someone – no, I have disallowed you because you are a member of this committee; this is your report. Okay, let us hear from hon. Okello-Okello. As far as I am concerned you are a member of this committee. Proceed, hon. Okello-Okello.

3.31
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Madam Speaker, when the policy to dispose off pool houses came into being, I was the Commissioner of Lands and I was deeply involved. Initially, the policy was to sell off traditional pool houses owned by the Uganda Land Commission only because those were Government houses. Any rented accommodation from the National Housing and Construction Company, from the then UDC and others, were excluded. 

Later on, those civil servants who were occupying houses other than traditional pool houses complained that there was discrimination because they were being excluded. So, they were brought in but the National Housing and Construction Company was given free land to sell or not to sell. I left traditional pool housing before this policy, because I had a lot of problems with the government. We went to court - up to the Supreme Court - and they wanted to dismiss me from my job. So I moved into a house belonging to National Housing and Construction Company and I started renting it –(Interjections)– your Government. So, when the policy came, I was renting a house in Kololo from National Housing and Construction Company and claiming my money from Government. 

So, I approached National Housing and Construction Company as an individual and they sold the house to me at market price. That was the policy at that time. But when mass accommodation like Bugolobi flats, Bukoto flats, Makerere, Bat Valley and so forth came on to the market, the National Housing and Construction Company then got a valuer to value all the flats and they started selling to sitting tenants at market price at that time. 

I think one point that should not be lost here is that these sales were subject to the Kampala Master Plan – the zoning of Kampala –(Member timed out­­­_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will give you three more minutes, hon. Okello-Okello. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. If a block of flats is situated in an area now zoned commercial, then definitely, the sitting tenants cannot buy it as residential accommodation because the zoning has changed. In 1982, there was a housing conference here and following that conference, the commercial area of Kampala was extended up to Lumumba Avenue in Nakasero. Lumumba Avenue was the limit. But as I speak, the entire city is a commercial area because you wake up in the morning and find sky scrapers coming next to your residence, no matter where you are. There is no more control. 

So, I do not know as of today, where the boundary of the commercial area is. But in 1982, I think it was gazetted, because it was extended officially up to Lumumba Avenue. So Buganda road flats, in my understanding, as we speak, are in a commercial zone and cannot be sold as residential units unless the tenants jointly agree –(Interruption)

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, we can not afford to be told lies. When you talk of Buganda Road flats, next to them is Nakasero flats. Which are in a commercial area? Is it in order for hon. Okello-Okello to tell us lies about Buganda Road and Nakasero flats? Don’t we know the difference? Nakasero flats next to State House were sold to sitting tenants but Buganda Road is even far away from the city centre. So, we are saying, it is the National Housing and Construction Company flats where hon. Babu stays. You know them; they are even better flats. So, there is no difference between Nakasero and Buganda Road. So, is it in order for him to tell us lies in this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the background to this matter is that the National Housing and Construction Company or Government sold to other sitting civil servants in Bugolobi, in Bukoto, in Wandegeya and at Nakasero, and then when it came to Buganda Road, they said they were still considering the issues. That is the issue which was brought to this House. Even when they said that they needed the Condominium law, we made it and we are still waiting. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is these kinds of points of order, which worry me. It indicates to me that there are bigger interests behind this and that is why we should go very deep into this matter. We could allow the sitting tenants to buy now and tomorrow you may find an individual developing the whole area with the tenants gone. I think this is not the policy. The policy is to benefit the sitting tenants and not to pass on to sharks in the market. This is my fear. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the most important issue here is the petitioners from Buganda Road flats as you put it, who said they were denied the right to purchase. When the Condominium Bill came here, we were really looking at allowing people living in the flats to have titles and the members of this House moved very fast to ensure that this law was in place and hon. Okello-Okello was in this Parliament – the Sixth Parliament. 

We passed this law and most of us who were staying in Bugolobi were beneficiaries and we knew that the National Housing and Construction Company was going slow because they did not have the manpower to partition and make sure they have so many titles. But Buganda Road was online to get their share. 

Those in Nakasero, as I said earlier, bought the flats. In Bugolobi, everybody bought the flats but the issue is, why make it difficult for people of Buganda Road to buy their flats? Why do you have to change the rules? And it was nothing else; it was Muhakanizi’s case and he was actually from the Ministry of Finance as one of the board members as the committee put it - that stopped the whole thing. 

What we are saying on the issue of National Housing and Construction Company is that these people, most of who are civil servants in Buganda Road flats - and they have been coming here - should be given an opportunity. Where somebody opts –(Interjection)– no, I am not giving it to you; you never gave it to me. Whether these members have left or not, those people have been harassed. The issue came here in this Parliament and I think we should dissolve it. The benchmark should be that these people in Buganda Road should be given a priority like anywhere else because –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much for giving way. I agree with you that the rights of the sitting tenants should be prioritised when the property at Buganda Road is being sold. But the issue of contention here is the value; at how much should that property be valued and sold to the sitting tenants? If you would only elucidate in that particular area. There is no controversy as to whether the sitting tenant should buy or not; the controversy is at what price they should buy it.

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, you better advise us, the issue is not the cost; the issue is the willingness of National Housing to give them an offer which had been given to them much earlier. It is a pity that hon. Nabilah is not around here; Nabilah is the one who brought a petition here and I seconded it. The issue here is that Buganda Road Flats have been more or less zoned out of the exercise that was done elsewhere.

So, what we want to find out is why Ministry of Finance, as the ministry concerned with privatisation, denied our people in Buganda Road Flats to have the right of buying. That is all we are saying. Otherwise, the issue of the price is not the case; it arose in Bugolobi, but we remember how we solved it here. This Parliament should look into why the people cannot be given –(Interruption)

MR WOPUWA: The issue of the price cannot be totally ignored. When the offers were being given, they were given without giving values, and we are talking about 1993, 1994 and 1995. Now, most of these sitting tenants are retired; the values are being made so high in order to make it difficult for the sitting tenants to acquire those places.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not cloud this debate with the issue of the value. What we are discussing here is about discrimination of one class of Ugandans against the other by the Government.

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, we cannot talk of 1994 or before because the Condominium Act came into effect in 1998. So, when it came in, that is when people started buying flats because they knew anybody on second floor or third floor can own their flat.

3.45
MR STEVEN BAKKA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): In my view, the biggest issue here is the cost. National Housing and Construction Company Ltd constructs houses as they sell them. So, they have no problem selling to sitting tenants as long as they have the money to pay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Bakka, we are talking about civil servants who were in those houses when this policy was made, not a principle of general application; do not confuse the issues. We are talking about those who were in Buganda Road buildings not Naalya or Namuwongo.

MR BAKKA: Madam Speaker, can I seek information? Supposing the offers are given at an inflated cost to defeat the cause, what will happen?
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you are defeated then you are defeated; but they have not been given the opportunity to buy, that is the issue of contention.

3.47
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): The report has been very clear. We know this policy very well that sitting tenants are given the priority. So, there should not be any discussion on this, and on this question of the price, Government has 51% shares and the policy of Government is that the Chief Government Valuer gives the price. The moment we agree we are giving them, we shall use the Chief Government Valuer to determine the price. I know there are people who do not want people to get property. I benefited from this policy, but we had to use other routes to coerce those other people to allow us buy because they were also trying to bring up such issues so that we do not buy.

What we also have to remember with these people is that they have invested a lot of money in these flats. If you go to Buganda Road Flats, the flats are so old and the tenants have put in a lot of money. It will be very unfair to neglect them.

Finally, something which hon. Okello Okello alluded to about the zoning. I think we may have to revisit the Condominium Law to see that it does not retard development. In my view, as much as I want these people to have those flats, we cannot continue having such flats in that area.

3.46
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): I want to thank the committee for the addendum. The first information I want to give to Parliament is that there is a lot of conversion, speculation and trading going on under the guise of sitting tenants. If you check all the estates which have been sold in the last 10 years, they have since changed owners and, therefore, I would like to pose a question for Parliament, what should come first? What is the priority for the future of this country? Is it this sitting tenant arrangement which has delayed the commencement of Nakawa-Naguru Estate for years, and which is still the problem of Buganda Road Flats, or the zoning and the landuse planning of the metropolitan city which we want?

If we took that as the primary responsibility of Parliament, to lead in that direction, then those who are fighting for flats would not be speaking from around the city centre. I want to beg that Parliament tries to look more into the future than to allow to be clouded by those who are claiming to be former civil servants, but who may actually have already sold off those offers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable members, I am a bit disturbed. This same Parliament, a few months ago, had a very heated debate about transferring Shimon Demonstration School from here, because we were disadvantaging the children of the poor. Now you are saying people should not live in Kampala; you want shops. Who zoned this city and who said people should not live in Kampala? Who has approved that zoning? Who zoned Kampala and said people should not live in Kampala City?

MR MUKITALE: I sincerely appreciate the concerns of the House with regard to this problem, but I am only saying that we are dealing with a problem we are not supposed to be dealing with. If we had the right structural plan for Kampala, even the petition we are talking about would not be here - if those supposed to handle it administratively had done so. Even in future, when a petition comes here and takes years to be disposed of - I wish Parliament would direct some of these things to be handled administratively before we congest Parliament with so many petitions which take very long to be disposed of.

I think, as Parliament, we should support the formation of the Metropolitan Kampala City, which would help us identify other areas where our citizens could live, because we are now talking about the retired or former civil servants only. How about the other citizens of Uganda?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Katuntu, five minutes.

3.52
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I get worried because there seems to be a culture, which has grown in this country, where people want free things and it is a very terrible culture. Whether you are talking about vehicles, they say they want to co-own them, because they want to pay, not the actual value, but hide under the policy of co-ownership. What we are talking about is property owned by a company. Ugandans have only shares in this company. 

As we debate here, we should keep in mind that there is actually a 49 percent shareholding. What is the interest of this 49 percent shareholding in this company? This company was floated for the sole purposes of making profit. The reason why Government went into the process of divestiture was because of these public bodies or companies making decisions which do not make business sense, and this is the same path we are trying to trek; we do not have to be populist about it. We are living in a free market economy; it is the buyer and the seller. If a seller wants to sell to you property, he will sell; but you cannot force a seller to sell to you the property if he doesn’t want. In fact, it could even be at a loss! 

Really, some of these policies are populist, including some of these debates. These people want to –(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: The property belonging to parastatals are not Government properties. These are legal entities; there are Supreme Court rulings, even in my own case. Government holds shares on behalf of all Ugandans –(Interjections)- not owning the property.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okello-Okello and hon. Katuntu, how did the buyers of Bukoto buy? How did those of Wandegeya buy or sell, and also Nakasero? Under what policy? That is the question we are asking. How did those other Ugandans buy and these other Ugandans cannot buy? 

MR KATUNTU: I thank you for the questions. There was an offer and that offer was accepted. At that time, that company found it business wise to offer those properties at that price, and now, maybe it does not. We are not going to do the business of that company in these Chambers. It is wrong and does not make any economic sense at all. Let this company deal in its properties in the way it deems fit. 

Our only interest as a country is the dividends at the end of the year. We are the shareholders and cannot direct management – this is simple company law. Our interest in this company is our shares. If this company improves, our share value improves and we get bigger dividends at the end of the year -(Applause)- yes. What we are actually doing now is to manage the company ourselves as shareholders. Anybody who has studied small company law will tell you that that is wrong. I will take the clarification.       

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wopuwa.

MR WOPUWA: I am surprised, because last time, when we had the problem of NSSF–Temangalo, everybody was arguing that this Parliament should get interested in the activities of NSSF. But then, NSSF in my view, is like the National Housing and Construction Corporation. Why did we use the same argument at that time? (Laughter)

MR KATUNTU: I would like to thank our honourable for the clarification he is seeking. There is a difference between NSSF and this. This is a company limited by shares. NSSF is a statutory company and has no shareholders; this one is a business company and they are very different. In fact, when you look at the report on top of page 4, “The Attorney-General informed the committee that since the policy did not apply to NHCC, it does not bind its successor, NHCCL.” And now if this is the Attorney-General’s opinion, can I know from the chairperson of the committee where they get the authority to differ from this opinion? Unfortunately, he is busy engaging the chair and I will hold on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MR KATUNTU: I will take the clarification and then I can proceed.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I am just seeking clarification from the learned hon. Katuntu. I have a problem with your legal interpretation that in a company where we own 51 percent of the shares –(Interjection)- yes, as the public. This means majority of the shares belong to us. Probably the only question that remains is whether this Parliament has the mandate to talk on behalf of the 51 percent of the shareholders. Now, if the answer is to the affirmative, then it ceases to be a private business of that company. (Laughter) So, the clarification I am seeking is, Government owning 51 percent of the shares, how best can the majority shareholders express these views that are being expressed in this Parliament within that company? That is the clarification I am seeking. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is necessary for the chair to read the prayers of the petitioners because the debate is being diverted on issues which the petitioners did not address. Chair, please read the prayers of the petitioners.

4.00
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Charles Oleny): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for your guidance on this issue. Just before I read the prayer of the petitioners, there is an issue of the right arising from the debate and it is an issue here. We are also talking about a policy and the policy preceded the sale of the company, and so, this House –(Interjections)- no, this information was also useful, honourable members. 

The petitioners seek the indulgence of Parliament and pray that it resolves that:
“1.	The decision of the Chief Executive Officer of National Housing and Construction Company Limited, to cancel the prospective sale offers to the sitting tenants, is halted.

2. 	Parliament directs the Chief Executive Officer of National Housing and Construction Company Limited and its board of management to give the petitioners priority to purchase and acquire the residential units they currently occupy.

3. 	Parliament orders that the tenants’ further payment of rent to National Housing and Construction Company Limited be halted in favour of tenants’ purchase deposits.”

I beg to move.

MR KATUNTU: I still had my time, Madam Speaker, but I will try to conclude.

Listening to the prayers of the petitioners, we really need to ascertain the powers this Parliament has. For example, did the committee look at the Articles and Memorandum of Association of this company? If they did, did they look at the powers of the shareholders - the minority shareholders and the majority shareholders? The committee report is silent on this. (Member timed out_)

4.04
MS MARGARET MUHANGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker.

National Housing and Construction Corporation was formed under an Act of Parliament. Even after it was divested, Government retained 51 per cent shares. Government did that in order to protect its interest in the company. Most of the tenants in these flats, including me, are former public servants and public servants right now -(Interjections)-  Listen to me carefully because I am going to say this only once.

Now, the right to acquire your flat is within the tenancy law. There is no way you can say that the agreement between National Housing and the Government of Uganda ceased to be because it was divested. 

Right now, the Minister of Finance or the Ministry of Finance oversees this company. Why does the ministry oversee a company, which is divested and Government has no interest? The ministry picks the board members like the board chairman and supervises this company. So, as long as Government has an interest in it, we shall not allow to be fleeced by you lawyers quoting company laws, which will not surpass the Condominium Law. The Condominium Law right now says priority should be given to sitting tenants. Unless this tenant has failed to pay, that is when you evict them.

He lives in the flats, he owns a flat, and I own a flat. Actually, I have been given notice that they are going to evict me in the event that I do not pay UShs 77 million. But I cannot be evicted when I have failed to pay! As long as I have the capacity to pay, I should own my flat, and I rest my case. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Three minutes 

4.06
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): The others were given five. Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the committee for the report.

Having listened to the petitioners’ prayers, it led the committee to want to find out whether it is possible for NHCCL to operate outside the boundaries of government policy and these are the questions that they put before the Attorney-General. 

My concern is the difference between the Attorney-General’s opinion and the opinion of the committee. Clearly, the Attorney-General was invited and he did not attend the meeting, but he gave his views. His views were that National Housing and Construction Corporation was an autonomous body not bound by government policy. By extension, this was inherited by NHCCL.

My concern is that, if the committee thought differently, didn’t they go further to engage the Attorney-General so that they bring to us one correct view, because that is what we need? 

Madam Speaker, perhaps this concerns you. In the event that the committee and the Attorney-General do not agree, who are we bound to listen to in order to follow? That is what hon. Katuntu was asking.  Who guides Parliament on legal matters? If the committee does not agree with the Attorney-General, that leaves us, as Parliament, in a dilemma. Do we take the legal opinion of the committee or do we take the legal opinion of the Attorney-General? I will take the information.

MR ODUMAN: Madam Speaker, the trend of the debate last time reached a stalemate over legal interpretation. It was decided that we invite the Attorney-General to give the final interpretation. While the committee was meeting, we agreed to invite him to explain.

Now, when the letter was written to him to appear, explain and elaborate, he chose not to come and just wrote an opinion. And regarding that opinion, Members raised a lot of issues that required clarification. That is why page 3 of the report talks about gaps the Attorney-General did not fill or substantiate. I think the Attorney-General let us down by simply writing an opinion instead of appearing before the committee to substantiate. I think he disregarded the invitation of the committee. That is where the problem is. So, there wasn’t any conclusive legal guidance for the committee, except opinion, which needed further clarification.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, hon. shadow minister, for that clarification. My view is in response to the petitioners’ prayers. We needed guidance from the committee, but the committee has left us biased, because if the Attorney-General holds his grounds and NHCCL also hold their ground based on the Attorney-General’s opinion, we are in a dilemma. We need further consultation. If the Attorney-General wrote, it was okay for him to write. If they did not agree with him, I think the committee should have done more - “We did not agree, but we did our best to make sure that we guide this Parliament on how to handle the petition.” But what we see here is a report that, “We disagreed with the Attorney-General.”

MR WACHA: Thank you, hon. Kamya. I think the issue we have to deal with now is one; if the Attorney-General gives his opinion, is it incumbent upon us to ignore it? And if we ignore it, are we not setting a precedent where any other individual in Government can choose to abide or not abide with the decision of the Attorney-General?

MS KAMYA: Thank you, hon. Ben Wacha. In conclusion, that is exactly what I am saying; the committee has brought here a recommendation that is at variance with the decision of the Attorney-General and we are still in a dilemma and so we cannot help the petitioners. We need to understand how the Attorney-General‘s views are treated –(Interruption) 

MR OLENYI: Madam Speaker, may I provide this information based on what hon. Kamya has raised? Indeed, if you look at the prayers of the petitioners, and in consideration of the mandate of this House - that is why in the first report, we submitted to this House. Our first recommendation was that Parliament does not have the mandate to issue orders and directives compelling NHCCL to act or not to act in a particular manner as the petitioners pray. 

But in the second observation of our report, we stated that Parliament has the mandate to scrutinise all aspects in this petition and make recommendations that urge the CEO and the board of NHCCL as well as the supervising ministry and ultimately Cabinet, to act or exercise their powers in relation to the company in a particular manner. That is the basis of the addendum report.

Honourable members, if some of you were in the House, you may recall that it was on the basis of the first observation that the Speaker sought further clarification from the Attorney-General. Now we did invite the Attorney-General, unfortunately he did not come in, but submitted his opinion in writing. That opinion had some obvious points of variance from what was observed as a committee. And in the addendum, we pointed this out, I think this –(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am a beneficiary of Buganda Road Flats. The clarification that I want to seek is, if it is true that the Attorney-General brought us his opinion, what is the contrary law to this one of the Attorney-General? We must quote indicating where the Attorney-General went wrong and then we bring in the right one. 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the chair of the committee. As a shareholder, do you raise your concerns to the annual general meeting of the shareholders or to the board of directors or even to the chief executive? The recommendations we are making actually relate to management, because you are directing them to the chief executive. 

You are only responsible to the annual general meeting of the shareholders; you do not go beyond that. You do not go to the management of this company; the law does not allow you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. Hon. Katuntu’s legal arguments tend to be very persuasive and make good academic sense. But outside the legal arguments, which may bog us down, I want us to first address ourselves to the underlying issues?

The underlying issue is that, much as we hold 51 percent of the shares in that company and much as it is true that all the shareholders cannot just rise up from their beds and direct those managing the company, I still think politics is not taking precedence. The politics is this anyway; Government is persuaded that the Libyan investors can make good use of that land at Buganda Road Flats as opposed to the sitting tenants. 

From the economic sense, I would agree. I went to the committee and saw the artistic impression showing a one-stop central business area in Kampala in that locality. So, now, if we say that we own 51 percent of the shares, but we cannot command those people from Parliament – it is simple, the Minister of Finance has the powers even to change the board of directors! 

So, they are not showing the commitment to say, “Okay, since you say we own 51 percent of the shares, and we cannot control you from Parliament, I am changing the board of directors.” So, they have two cards, and they are not playing even one. The political message relayed is that it looks like our Government is in favour of those multi-national companies putting massive investment in that area. Even the reserve card we had of overhauling the entire board has not been exercised. 

We are going to spend a lot of time here on legal jargons. Madam Speaker, my request is, can the Government tell us whether it can utilise the veto power it has to change the board, or whether it is not willing to utilise it? Just tell us so that we know that there is nothing we can do. That is the only remaining issue, and we do not even need to go into the articles and memos of association. So, can we be told if the Ministry of Finance is comfortable with the decision of the board, so that we stop wasting people’s time and raising people’s expectations by going in circles? 

Hon. Minister, I know you are very knowledgeable in this area; if you could give me this information, I would give you the little time I am left with. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, minister.

4.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to take advantage to appreciate the comments raised on the Floor of the House, and respond to the question that has been raised directly. 

The first point is that Parliament under the Constitution is mandated exclusively, to make laws and the laws are executed by the Executive arm of Government. Under law, the National Housing Corporation was divested and Government held a controlling interest of 51 percent. By doing so, there was a Private-Public Partnership arrangement; an agreement is there. The motivation behind that agreement is that we should use the private sector in making profits, and of course, combining it with public interest of ensuring security, order and harmony in managing the new entities.

I agree with hon. Katuntu that under that law, the partnership that was structured was that this company must make profit and that it should be governed by a board of directors with management and staff, and that the shareholders should at every end of the year, in a general meeting, be given accountability whether indeed this company is making profit. In that spirit, the new company, National Housing and Construction Corporation Limited inherited from the National Housing Corporation, a situation where the title on which those flats are constructed was mortgaged to Tropical Bank -(Interjections)- yes. As a business, you mortgage, if you have a title. It is true. There is nothing illegal; you simply borrow money against security -(Interjections)- yes! Now, you know and I can confirm to you, that you can borrow against security, and as long as the loan period or repayment has not been effected, that title which is security to the bank is still held by the bank. Consequently, it would not be possible until that loan is retired for the sale offer to be given to the new tenants. (Laughter) 

So, on the recommendation of the committee, I want to confirm that Government agrees that as a majority shareholder with a controlling interest, we will observe the policies of the same Government which is represented in the board, and the policy is to give first offer to the sitting tenants, and to do so, it has to be valued. 

Therefore, Government has no hidden motive like some people are arguing. There is no hidden motive about this property. In the first place, the divestiture was intended for this company to be viable - to be profitable - and it would be counter productive for us to offer at book value without realising the motivation why these companies were formed.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, hon. minister, for the information you are giving us. The clarification I am seeking - and this is how we were guided by the Speaker during this debate - is that the sale of Government property was done in many areas; in Bukoto and other areas. Didn’t those principles guide the management of the sale of Buganda Road Flats? Were they not considered? The question at hand is why the discriminatory management of this sale, as opposed to the other sales? We need to know that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know minister; you are really saying something very interesting. This is the first time I am hearing that the title deed was mortgaged. This House has been asking for this information for more than one year and this is the first time I am hearing that it is mortgaged. This is what I have been asking. Why did you, the government, sell Bugolobi, Bukoto, Wandegeya, Nakasero and then when you come to Buganda Road, you say, no? 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, precisely because - I want to give clarification on this point of Bukoto, Bugolobi and Nakasero. All those had their titles, and titles which are not mortgaged, and consequently, you would have sale offers to enable tenants to purchase those flats. In this case, where the title of the flats is mortgaged, it makes it different from the rest. That is the clarification I want to provide.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why has it taken so long?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Now that we have known that the title is mortgaged, I wonder how much money? If some kind person could make us know how much a title is mortgaged for? What are the terms and conditions for the mortgage? What is the duration of that mortgage? As long as this information is not readily available to us, we cannot have meaningful discussions. 

In fact, one quick question would be, can the sitting tenants redeem the mortgage and still carry out meaningful development? I think these questions must be answered; because if the mortgage is being used as something that when arguments are difficult then we say there is a mortgage, we do not know how much and for how many years at the end of the day; we cannot have meaningful discussions in all these things. In fact, the mortgage to me is blackmail; I even doubt it is there. (Laughter) So, the committee should be given chance to do a thorough job on this particular aspect of this mortgage, otherwise we would be wasting Parliament’s time.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Having listened to the minister and the information coming to the Floor, wouldn’t we seek a win-win situation, and more so, an enabling situation, whereby the board, taking care of the majority shareholder, the new investor, and the minority shareholder, would redeem the mortgage, but while at the same time, taking care of the sitting tenants in the new ultra modern project. We seem to be putting a lot of emphasis on these sitting tenants and forgetting the intentions of this company. Why don’t we as Parliament recommend a win-win situation, whereby the ultra modern investment can accommodate these —(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, the issues being raised are management issues. Really, what do we have to do with the management of a private company? Ours should stop at what a shareholder does. This is what I am praying for, because that is what the law provides for. To go to the extent of looking at the mortgage; how we redeem the mortgage and so on, is not an issue for a shareholder. It is an issue for the management, and if the management fails, then it goes to the board of directors. Really, this is a simple company law and the integrity of this House demands that we should respect the law.

LT COL. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we must appreciate the concerns of members of parliament to Government, because they are talking to Government as a shareholder in the company.

MS MUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When the minister was speaking, he forgot that apart from the mortgage, those of us in Block 31 and 32, were delayed in buying our flats because the titles were lost. While others paid UShs 47 million, we are paying UShs 80 million because the titles were lost. Now here we come back to hon. Katuntu who said it is a question of management. My problem is, why apply double standards? The same Attorney-General has interpreted for Bugolobi flats before and that is how we came to buy. How come when he went to Buganda Road he gave a different interpretation altogether?

In Bugolobi, the titles got lost, and for a long time, we waited to buy these flats and did so at twice the price that the others had bought. So, you can’t tell me that in just one month - even if it is market price - we must do business with a human face. In just two months, you can’t tell me that a house, which was UShs 10 has gone to UShs 200. It is not possible. We must do business with a human face and Government has to control people doing business here. You can’t leave it to the market price because it can’t work here in Africa.

MR WOPUWA: The chairman of the committee should help us because we are taking a lot of time. I am being told that part of these flats have already been condemned by KCC, and the report is very silent on those flats. They should guide us to know which flats we are talking about.

MS MUGERWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am standing to seek clarification, especially from my colleague and big brother, hon. Okello-Okello. I am seeking clarification as far as the ownership of Buganda Road flats is concerned. By the time of divestiture in 1991, who owned those flats? Was it National Housing? So, this is different from the other flats that were taken over by the Public Service? That is what I seek clarification over. Thank you very much.

MR BALIKUDDEMBE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Frankly speaking, I am on the Floor to further express that feeling that has been brought out by hon. Muhanga. One thing should be certain. When we are looking at these tenants vis-à-vis having profits as Government, there is something we have to consider, and that is the human element and face. There should be an equitable element to the tenants that are found in the Buganda Road flats. 

As lawyers, on a number of occasions, when we go out to talk for these bibanja holders, we first ascertain that the kibanja holder has been there for ten or 15 years. The person who has come to buy this piece of land should look at the period or time this person has been in that area. 

When we look at prioritising the tenants in Buganda Road flats, I have been one of the lawyers drawing these agreements and I want to inform this House that people have been getting buyers from Rwanda for tenants. A tenant will get a buyer from Rwanda to come and pay for the consideration that is drawn by NHCCL.

When that person buys that property, the tenant will keep that property, which is called goodwill. As a Parliament though, we are not going to dwell too much into the management of this. The committee should always ensure that it comes out with an idea that these people get priority. However, this priority should be galvanised with the current market value, and that category should be brought out. We should have the Government Valuer come up with the current market value to ensure that as a government, we realise our profit at the end. That is all I had to say.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Balikuddembe, you have put into focus what I have been trying to explain. The reason this matter became a problem was that there was an offer and then it was withdrawn. They said you gave us an offer and now you have withdrawn it. Why don’t you allow us to buy? That is how this matter began.

4.36
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been going through some of the letters that have been criss-crossing around these issues. The then Minister of Finance, hon. Suruma, wrote a letter as far as this issue was concerned on 16 August 2006. A letter from the PS of Public Service to all permanent secretaries as far as these very issues were concerned was written in the year 1991. The Prime Minister wrote to the current Minister of Finance regarding the same matter on the 22nd December 2009.

Basic land economics tells us that land value appreciates with time and the issue here is, should the sitting tenants get their due right now? Yes, but at what cost - because land appreciates each and every day? What was in 1991 is today possibly even 200 percent more expensive, and so, if we are going to give the houses to the sitting tenants, we need an adjustment to this effect. It is just basic economics.

My concern comes when we are not told what the redevelopment plan is by this company limited by shares. Everywhere the letters are just talking about redevelopment. You are harassing the tenants, but what is the basic interest? What are these people trying to develop this prime land into? 

My suspicion here is that these guys are interested because - first of all, in one of the letters that the Prime Minister wrote, they had already heightened rent to 100 percent. That means that the houses became unaffordable to the sitting tenants and, therefore, this gives me a broader suspicion about the deal of Government with this company.

Just read through all the correspondences and there is no clarity and neither is there follow-up. If it is 51 percent shares of Government, what the hell is this 49 percent doing and disrespecting all these letters that have been written? Consistently, there is no follow-up and there are no replies. 

The committee needed to tell me, as far as hon. Suruma’s letter dated 16th August 2006 was concerned, what the reply was. Concerning the one of the Prime Minister of 2009, this was the reply. Concerning the PS of Public Service to all the permanent secretaries, what was the reply? These documents are not available and I cannot debate this when I don’t see objectivity in it. 

My current cry is that there are top government officials involved in correspondences with this company owning only 49 percent shares, and I don’t see anything tangible as far as decisions are concerned.

4.40
MR JACK WAMANGA WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. While I sympathise with tenants of Buganda Road that they should have taken the offer at that time, because in 2005, the offer was about UShs 50 million. But as we speak today, the land in Nakasero has appreciated, and we should also consider what hon. Okello-Okello told us that Buganda Road and Lumumba Avenue are now designated as an area for offices, and thus the value has shot up. Therefore, if tenants of Buganda Road Flats, including hon. Margaret Muhanga, want to benefit, they should pay the open market value so that the government does not lose. (Laughter) When you are doing business, Madam Speaker, you cannot look at any other face without face in business.  

It is very unfortunate that National Housing did not even give letters of offer. They talked of about UShs 50 million at that time, but today, as we speak, the value of those flats has shot up and, therefore, we cannot be bound by the price of 50 million. 

The people who are struggling to buy those flats at UShs 50 million, I want to tell you, are not going to remain there. There are some people in the background. As soon as the UShs 50 million is paid for an apartment, they are going to get the difference between UShs 500 million and Shs 50 million and, therefore, the government cannot lose a difference of 450 million or even more.  (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wamai, the petition was not about the quantity; it was about the withdrawal of an offer which had been given to the sitting tenants. That is how the petition came here. It is about the failure by National Housing to treat the tenants of all these places equally. 

Can I also know who has drawn this town, which everybody is quoting here? Who has drawn it? It is not about the value but about the failure to give these people their offer to buy as they had done with all the other national Housing flats - Bugolobi, Bukoto, Wandegeya and Nakasero. 

MR WAMAI: Madam Speaker, the company at that time re-thought; they changed their mind and never gave letters of offer because Buganda Road had changed to high–rise buildings. That is why they never gave them the offers. It is not the same as Bugolobi; not the same as other areas like Naalya, and so on. They never gave them offers. If they had got letters of offer, then the Buganda Road tenants would have had a point to raise and say, “no”; but they never got those letters. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Oduman, give us the way forward. But I still want to know, who has drawn this city plan? 

4.44
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE (Mr Charles Oduman): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to propose as follows - but my proposal is going to attempt to deal with the concerns that have been raised from the way I have understood them. There is a concern about the double standards by Government setting a policy and then eating it up; applying it on some sections and then not applying it on others. 

Secondly, the issue of the perceived rip-off - I mean if the offer was made several years ago, that value is not the same as the value today. So, that is a concern. 

So, my proposals to cure this are:

1. 	That Government completes what it started and keep the deal with the tenants; keep the offer with those tenants because that is a principal issue that that offer should not be withdrawn. Keep it from that point of time when you offered it. (Applause)

2. 	That the value at which the flats are taken over should be revisited –(Interjection)– yes, even the letter of the Prime Minister to the Minister of Finance dated 22nd December 2009 is raising the value of UShs 75 million from the UShs 51 million.  What we are saying is that it could be a certain figure but let that figure be revisited in respect to the current value of the flats. 

Now, who will determine that? There is a government system of doing that - the Government Valuer -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the shadow minister to make his proposals; these are just proposals. Allow him to give his proposals and then we hear from other Members.  

MR ODUMAN: My principal point is that the value should be revisited, whether it is by market value or Government Valuer, but we should not stick to the point that the price should be the price of that time; it should be revisited. That is my point number two. 

3. 	The rent payments made so far by the tenants who are saying they had a valued offer from a certain time should convert those rent payments into part of deposits of that revised value offered. 

4. 	Any perceived investor who would like to modernise that place more than what it is now should now deal with the new owners of those flats, that is, the sitting tenants who will have acquired that interest. 

5. 	The issue of the mortgage is really administrative. It cannot be an impediment to a complete sell if Government decides that the sell should be concluded. The mortgage cannot be an impediment. 

Those people who are going to give you money –(Interjection)– yes, that is why hon. Otto said, “What is the amount outstanding?” we do not know but that should not be an impediment to the conclusion of the sale. 

With those five proposals, we can get a win-win situation between the tenants and the government and that is our role as Parliament. I beg to propose, Madam Speaker. 

4.48
MR STEPHEN KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. From the onset, I would agree with hon. Odonga Otto, where he says that we may debate and debate without coming to a conclusion if the issue of the mortgage is not clarified. But before then, let me go to this issue. If there is a policy in place, and we have agreed that Government has an upper hand with 51 percent, why apply double standards? If they sold to people in the other areas, why not sell to those on Buganda Road?

Two, on the issue of price, we may not stick to what is there, but let the Government Chief Valuer give the current market value of those flats. And the question I want to put to the minister now is that usually, when Government has a problem concerning money, you come here to ask for supplementaries and the like. But now, the Speaker has put it clearly that we are hearing about this mortgage for the first time, yet these issues have been moving around. Why do you have to bring this encumbrance now?

Two, Government is not the only shareholder, because there is this other Libyan Company. In mortgaging, did you agree with that company and if you agreed with them, as Parliament, we need to see those documents, because these are not private documents. Give us the documents that show that these people who own 49 percent and Government that owns 51 percent sat on such and such a day and agreed that they should mortgage, because you cannot mortgage alone when there is another shareholder. 

Then the other issue I want to put to the minister is that when was the mortgage? Because there is a likelihood that after these petitioners put in the petition, Government having interest could have moved very fast to  mortgage, in order to create an encumbrance. So, hon. Minister, give us the time when this mortgage was made. Give us the details of whether you agreed or whether you did not agree with these other shareholders, then tell us why you apply double standards. Thank you very much.

4.51
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Members are getting worried and concerned as to the cost and how something that has been mortgaged could be sold off. For me, just as the committee recommended, unlike other reports that we always get, this is one recommendation that the committee came up with, implying that they also appreciated and had the tenants at heart. That is why they recommended in favour of the tenants. 

The prayer that I would make to this House is that as Parliament, let us pronounce ourselves with the recommendation that was raised by the committee, and then the ministry and Government will have to work out the technicalities involved. 

Members are getting worried that Government is going to lose a lot of money - but unless we do not feel for those people who are there; we have been passing some sort of subsidies. We have been bailing out certain companies here and passing colossal sums of money to bail out certain companies, moreover private companies. Why is it that -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Like Phenix.

MR MUWUMA: If it comes to Ugandans who are living and staying in these houses, why are we finding it an uphill task, yet we are losing a lot of money? (Applause) It is my considered opinion, therefore, that a question be put asking the House that those in favour of this recommendation as raised by the committee say “Aye” -(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, that is the Motion I am moving. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House adopt the report of the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thank you for the work done today. I would like to remind you that tomorrow we have a special session; the President will be here with President Jacob Zuma of South Africa, and so, I invite you to be present in the Chamber by 10.30 a.m. in the morning. Please be here by 10.30 a.m. The House is adjourned to 10.30 in the morning.

(The House rose at 4.54 p.m. and was adjourned until Thursday, 25 March 2010 at 10.30 a.m.)





