
		



Thursday, 4 March 2021

Parliament met at 11.04 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Thank you for making it here this morning. The business today is quite substantial. There will be not much communication from the Chair.

There are two Members who had requested to raise urgent matters – the honourable member for Pakwach District and the honourable member for Kajara County. If they are not here, we will proceed to the next item. Is the member for Pakwach here?

11.07
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

My concern is about the uncontrolled movement and herding of cattle within the city and the neighbouring districts. It is carried out, in some instances, on the streets, in between buildings and even on the highways of this country. This has a very negative impact and is a great risk to travellers and different road users.

Mr Speaker, that is not the only concern. There is no doubt that these animals are, in many cases, emotionally stressed because where they are being kept is not convenient for them; in most cases, you do not even see any sign of vegetation. These animals are kept and herded on the streets and in between buildings.

My prayer, Mr Speaker, is that the Government moves very fast to remove all animals from the streets, roads and within residential areas and implements the existing laws so that they are kept in the right places. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I think that is an issue of animal rights and the risks that are on the highways. As people drive, there are cows on the roads – they are everywhere. Government Chief Whip?

11.08
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have taken note of the serious issue raised by my colleague, hon. Jane Avur. I promise to follow it up with the Leader of Government Business so that we can quickly find a solution, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Is the member for Kajara County here? He is not here, so we can go to the next item. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE REAL ESTATE AGENTS BILL, 2020

11.10
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The request for a certificate of financial implication, as required under Section 76(1) of the Public Finance Management Act, was communicated to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 23 September 2020. To date, the ministry has not issued the certificate. 

Therefore, I beg to move under Rule 117(4) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and Section 76(4) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, as amended. I beg to move that the certificate is deemed to have been issued from the date of request, since the mandatory 60 days provided for by the law have elapsed and the minister has failed to fulfil his obligation. 

Basing on that, Mr Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Real Estate Agents Bill, 2020” be read the first time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think that since you raised a procedural matter before the first reading of your Bill, you would have allowed me an opportunity to make it clear that under the rules, you are entitled to proceed the way you are proceeding, which would have now given you good clearance to proceed. 

That notwithstanding, the Member raises an important point. However, honourable members, I still think the 60 days in Rule 117(4) should not be taken in such a way that once you have written, you keep quiet about it and wait for 60 days. There should be some prompting in between so that there is a reminder to the finance minister saying, “we have not received”, so that after the lapse of 60 days, automatically, when you come here, you have evidence that there has been no reaction. 

However, certainly, 27 September of last year is way too far. There could not have been any excuse, under the circumstances, for us to delay any further with the Member’s rights to proceed. 

Therefore, accordingly, that right is recognised and granted; the Member has read his Bill for the first time. It now stands referred to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure for expeditious handling. 

You know that the timelines are changing rapidly and we need to act on it fast. Committee chairperson, please act on this. If it were possible, by the end of April we should be processing this Bill so that we can have it benefit those who are affected by the limitations in this sector. Thank you.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE REAL ESTATE AGENTS BILL, 2020

11.10
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the Bill.
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN RESPONSE TO THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FINANCIAL YEARS 2021/2022-2025/2026

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, I gave some guidance on this matter yesterday. I have looked at the copy of your statement and it is quite big. I would request you to consider laying the rest of it on the Table so that it is factored into the budget processing. However, you can give the short statement on the content thereof. Thank you. 

11.14
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me start by first congratulating you upon your victory in the recently concluded election. I also thank you for giving me this opportunity.

In accordance with section 6E (2) and (4) of the Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 2006, as well as rule 52 of the Rules of Procedure, the Opposition in Parliament presents a response to the National Budget Framework Paper for the financial years 2020/2021-2025/2026.

Economy Overview

Economic growth in the financial year 2020/2021 was projected between the two to three per cent range and is expected to improve further, between the four to five per cent range, in the financial year 2021/2022. The economy is currently growing at 2.6 per cent, compared to the expected 7 per cent. 

It is reported that the size of the economy had grown to Shs 128.5 trillion in the Financial Year 20l8/2019, from Shs 120 trillion in the Financial Year 2017/2018. Unfortunately, the growth was largely hinged on economic and human development inequalities. Several Ugandans continue to struggle to meet the average household monthly expenditures estimated at Shs 325,800, translating to Shs 3.9 million annually. This is affirmed by the assertion that the average income per Ugandan is $825, which is about Shs 3.05 million per year.

Whereas there is projected reduction in domestic borrowing in the Financial Year 2021/2022, the same cannot immediately solve the challenges associated with the current level of domestic borrowing. The reduction in domestic borrowing is only by one per cent and this is not very substantial. 

The current loan portfolio is invested into public investments that are characterised by diminishing returns. Uganda's population is estimated at 45 million and total public debt is Shs 58.45 trillion, so each Ugandan shares a debt burden of Shs 1.24 million. This debt burden is largely driven by the fact that the country cannot support its development agenda based on domestic revenues. 

In the Financial Year 2021/2022, for instance, domestic revenues collected by Uganda Revenue Authority and local government collections are projected to only raise Shs 21.69 trillion, of the total projected budget of Shs 45.658 trillion.  This means that domestic revenues will finance only 47.5 percent financing of projected national budget. Besides, debt repayments take the first call charge on domestic revenues. Whereas there is a projected reduction in domestic borrowing, there are no signs that the Government will soon reduce external borrowing. 

This is an indication that the country is heavily reliant on debt. In the absence of debt, the country would struggle to sustain itself. Besides, most of the loans are largely invested in non-productive sectors, subduing the transformation potential of productive sectors such as agriculture, mining and tourism. Hence, there is a need to focus on productive sectors for they present high potential for gainful employment, import substitution and value chain improvement.

Compliance 

There is a table on the National Budget framework Paper format and content compliance. You can go through the table. You will realise that we are not so badly off, although there is need for improvement in areas where we do not have information like petroleum revenue. In the petroleum sector, you will find zero. Even on the net present value of public debt, there is no information. You can go through that table.

There has been an improvement in the content of the National Budget Framework Paper. Nonetheless, there are areas for improvement, and they have included in this statement. 

Regarding compliance to the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility (CFR), it has been noted that the Government has been increasing its expenses through the creation of additional administrative units, which is eroding the gains of additional revenues as a consequence. 

Currently, the fiscal deficit for the Financial Year 2020/2021 is projected to reach 10.7 per cent and decline to 7 per cent, all above the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility threshold of 3 per cent of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP). This implies that the target set for the fiscal deficit in the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility has not been met, making the National Budget Framework Paper for Financial Year 2021/2022 and the medium term inconsistent with the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility. 

This is completely against Section 9(4) of the Public Finance Management (PFM) Act, 2015. Inconsistency with the CFR implies that additional debt has to be raised to finance the excesses created in the budget that were not envisaged in the CFR. 

Section 7 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, provides for incidences of deviations from the CFR. In this regard, Government must prove that economic shock that resulted from COVID-19 led to an increase in the fiscal deficit of 7.7 per cent of GDP in the Financial Year 2020/2021. 

Broad statements are made regarding tax measures. There are no details provided on how much the tax measures are projected to yield and how they will contribute to increased revenue collections. Hence, there is no alignment of eventual tax measures with those proposed during the consideration of the National Budget Framework Paper. 

In line with Section 78(1) of the Public Finance Management Act, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should submit a report to Parliament stating why there is a deviation from the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility.

New revenue policies and tax measures should be articulated in the National Budget Framework Paper detailing how much they would yield. This would articulate the logic of proposed domestic revenues and ensure consistency during the consideration of tax Bills.

Non-Alignment to National Development Plan III (NDP III)

The non-alignment to NDP III is seen in the following:

a) 	Lower targets of GDP in the National Budget Framework Paper for the Financial Year 2021/2022 by 4.3 per cent compared to those in the plan, which is 5.9 per cent.

b) 	Deviation of the programme allocations as presented in the table in the National Budget Framework Paper.

c) 	Increment in the nominal public debt. 

d) 	Levels of domestic financing in the Budget Framework Paper are higher than those in NDP III. 

Recommendation: We recommend that the National Budget Framework Paper be improved such that all programmes are aligned to the NDP III as directed by section 9(3)

Resource Envelope and its Credibility

Decreasing Revenues 

It has been noted with concern that there is a projected reduction in domestic revenue by Shs 1,165 billion although there is an increment in budget support by Shs 755.4 billion. The decline in domestic revenue points to a struggling economy, which was seriously affected by COVID-19. 

We recommend that Government allocates a bigger percentage of the budget in productive sectors of the economy and also gives support to the private sector so as to overcome the economic effects of COVID-19. 

We have table 2, which shows the projected resource envelope and its summary. You can go through it. 

Recapitalisation of Bank of Uganda and Consistence with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 

In the process of scrutiny of the National Budget Framework Paper, it was established that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had a figure of Shs 481 billion purporting to be funds for the recapitalisation of Bank of Uganda (BoU). However, the Deputy Governor, while appearing before the Budget Committee, disowned the funds. This raises the issue of integrity, which has far reaching effects on the resource envelope. 

Section 9(4) of the PFM Act, Schedule 3, Section 5, dictates that Parliament must approve the total resource envelope ceiling to be used in the preparation of the annual budget. The implication of having the recapitalisation of the BoU from the resource envelope is that the interest cost on the budget will be overestimated since the capitalisation was supposed to be financed by issuance of domestic securities.

We, therefore, recommend that- 

    1. Since the resource envelope is over estimated, then the budget should be readjusted to attain a balanced budget. The basis of inclusion of recapitalisation funds to the central bank without any justification questions the integrity of the budget and how the interventions were determined. 

    2. The fiscal authority needs to merit Government interventions based on properly articulated plans guided by the NDP III. 

    3. Even in the near future, Bank of Uganda should exhaust all options before seeking for recapitalisation from Government.

Domestic Borrowing

As proposed in the response of 2019, a public debt repayment schedule should be developed and published to guide debt management in Uganda. 

Terms and conditions of domestic borrowing should be laid before Parliament and become enforceable by a resolution.

The Government must not commit loans that it is not intending to use in the near future. Otherwise, it sounds irregular for taxpayers to pay interest on loans that are idle.

Underexploited Potential for Local Revenue 

Based on the resource envelope, it is clear that from the total revenue of Shs 21.6 trillion, the bulk is projected to be collected at the centre by the Uganda Revenue Authority (99 per cent) and the rest collected from local governments, amounting to one per cent. 

It is thus not surprising that local governments rely on central Government transfers. Due to the reliance on transfers in form of grants estimated to fund over 85 per cent of local governments’ budgets, there is a marginal opportunity for fiscal autonomy and resource allocation discretion. This, in a way, defeats the decentralisation policy which intended to empower local governments to be self-sustaining in service delivery. 

The discretion powers of local governments are increasingly being centralised to the extent that the central Government determines revenue instruments and expenditures through grants. Hence, the revenue collection potential is subdued. This has been worsened by the failure to undertake comprehensive revenue assessments and registrations as precursors to boosting revenue collection. Moreover, the Government policy to create more administrative centres through formation of new districts, municipalities and town councils continues to undermine revenue collection potential.

As earlier recommended by the Auditor-General, there is need to –

i) 	allocate adequate funds to local governments to undertake revenue assessments and registrations;

ii) 	establish unit costs of delivering delegated services at local governments in order to facilitate proper planning and resource allocation;

iii) 	reward entities that surpass their revenue targets with bonuses; and

iv) 	halt the creation of new administrative centres.

Unspent Balances

We have a long list of sectors with unspent balances. For example, the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation – Shs 123.95 billion in 2019/2020 and in 2018/2019 it was Shs 828.871 billion, which is very unfortunate.

As earlier noted during the consideration of the annual budget for the Financial Year 2019/2020, it is not clear how unspent balances of previous financial years are incorporated into financing a budget of the next financial year. This leads to underestimating the available resource envelope for a given financial year. Ideally, the unspent balances of a previous financial year ought to be incorporated into the resource envelope of the following financial year.

Surprisingly the votes with the highest unspent balances are regular beneficiaries of supplementary budgets. This points to the fact that such votes did not require supplementary budgets. It also points to inadequate scrutiny of supplementary requests by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

We recommend that a special audit of the Consolidated Fund should be undertaken with the purpose of ascertaining the extent of unspent balances - how they arise, ought to be budgeted for and utilised.

Macroeconomic Forecast Analysis

Decline in Concessional Financing

Government is increasingly raising non-concessional loans for projects that would not generate revenues for Government within a period of not more than five years, as required under the Public Debt Management Framework, 2013. 

In the Financial Year 2020/2021, it is projected that non-concessional loans amounting to Shs 6.16 trillion will constitute 89 per cent of the total external financing of Shs 6.93 trillion.

As proposed in the response of 20l9, non-concessional borrowing should be reserved for value-addition projects with a high social or growth impact return, such as agro-processing industries and cold chain facilities as well as development of strategic tourism sites.

Employment Creation

The rate of unemployment by 2020 had increased to 1.92 per cent from 1.84 per cent in 20l9. Over the next two years, massive investments in infrastructure development related to the oil and gas sector and the related expected increase in foreign direct investment inflows have the potential to drive Uganda’s economic growth. Sustained growth of the economy was expected to create jobs, drive poverty reduction and make growth more inclusive.

Although the economy is growing, it is not creating enough jobs. Uganda’s economy is now on a path of rapid and sustained growth; however, the number of new jobs arising from this growth has been disappointingly low. 

It is estimated that out of the 700,000 individuals who enter the labour market each year, only 100,000 find employment. This huge job absorption gap has retarded poverty reduction in the country. For instance, although the economy grew by an average of 4.5 per cent year after year, between Financial Year 2015/2016 and Financial Year 20l5/2017 to 2018, the number of people living in poverty increased in the same period from 19.7 per cent in the Financial Year 2015/20l6 to 2l.4 per cent in the Financial Year 2017/2018. 

This means that whereas the economy is perceived to be growing, its growth is not inclusive enough as it has not translated into job creation, poverty reduction and significant wealth creation for Ugandans. As a consequence, many Ugandans are crowded out in sharing the national cake by a few individuals; they are outside the market economy.

The recommendation is that there is need to boost more investments in productive sectors of agriculture and tourism so as to create more job opportunities, as compared to complementary sectors, particularly works and transport, that have taken centre stage in the recent years.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Leader of the Opposition, can I propose that you only deal with the recommendations because that is what we are extracting to send to the Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs)?

MS BETTY AOL: Okay.  

Fiscal Forecast Analysis

Budget Execution Insufficiencies

Here, we recommend that as proposed in the response of 2018, the following ought to be undertaken:

1.	Change of fiscal strategy from growing the external loan portfolio for at least three financial years and place priority on fully utilising the already committed loans.

2. 	The nation's infrastructure development portfolio should be capped until ongoing projects are completed. This will ensure financial prudence.

3. 	As resolved by Parliament in Financial Year 2017/2018, Government should table the cost structure of roads in Uganda. 

Inadequate Disclosure of Treasury Operations

We recommend that – 

1. 	All funds regarding interest payments, domestic financing, external debt repayments and domestic arrear repayments should be reflected in budget allocations and medium-term projections of vote 130, Treasury Operations.

2. 	Indicative proposed allocations of the Contingency Fund should also be reflected in the budget allocations and medium-term projections of vote 130. 

Low Agriculture Contribution to Tax Revenue

Our recommendations are as follows:

1. 	Given that a majority of landlords own an average of 2.5 acres and 84 per cent of the land is under customary ownership, block farming should be promoted so as to boost productivity. 

2. 	We should shift from provision of free agricultural inputs to subsidised inputs with emphasis on fertilisers, so as to boost land fertility and subsequently production, which is a precursor for industrialisation. 

3. 	Revive District Farm Institutes as epicentres for training small scale farmers in modern farming skills and enterprises. 

4. 	Government should invest resources into the sugar industry and open up new sugar factories especially in the areas of Busoga in a bid to solve the sugarcane crisis in that area. 

Certificate of Gender and Equity Responsiveness

This is okay, but we still need to do better in areas where it has not been done well. We should take that seriously and not as just a ritual.

Critical Issues and Alternative Proposals on Proposed Priorities for the Financial Year 2021/2022
Members can read this for themselves. You will find that the Financial Year 2020/2021 allocated more than what we have in the Financial Year 2021/2022, yet you will find that in the strategy about agricultural extension, skilling and also tourism, we have the budget decreasing. This is extremely terrible. 

We recommend that Government allocates more funds towards cooperatives, - you cannot emphasise cooperatives and then lower the budget for the same - extension services, tourism marketing and support for the elderly to satisfy the budget requirements and enhance their performance. 

Revamping Mineral Licensing and Marketing Systems 

As earlier proposed, the following ought to be undertaken: 

1. 	Award of exploration and mining rights or licences should be changed from first come, first served to auctioning. This is also better than the discretionary method. 

Auctioning will ensure that the highest bidder gets rights on a mining area. However, for this option to be feasible, it necessitates developing Government's geological data so that it accurately provides credible estimates of available mineral resources with a high degree of confidence. 

Presently, the most recent geological data is owned by private companies and explicit regulations are required to demand for it to be deposited in the Government repository. It also calls for transparency and accountability systems. 

Nonetheless, as is the case for first come, first served, auctioning without stringent measures is prone to influence by the affluent and the neglecting of small-scale miners. This, therefore, calls for categorisation of mining rights, licences and permits that make reservations for small-scale miners. 

In Senegal, for instance, extraction permits are categorised in four different types, that is, exploration and mining permits (commercial use), small mine permits (maximum area of 500 hectares with no depth restrictions), semi-mechanised permits (maximum area of 50 hectares with depth restriction of maximum 15 metres), artisanal permits and quarry permits.

Zambia has three categories of permits and licenses, that is large scale, small scale and artisanal.

2. 	As a means for securing markets for minerals produced by artisanal miners, it is important to establish formal mineral marketing centres in the major mining centres of Mubende, Bugiri, Buhweju, Namayingo, Ntungamo and Amudat. These will be essential in curbing illicit mineral trading and under-declaration of mineral values. These have been effective in Malawi. The centres will be more effective as compared to existing mechanisms of exhibitions and trade fares. 

3. 	Provide resources to fast-track the realisation of the Mining Act, which will address some of the challenges in the mining sector. 

Skilling and Re-skilling of Unemployed Graduates

We propose, as highlighted in the last Opposition response, that- 

1. 	A reiteration is made of the urgent need to establish a national skills inventory and national employment database which should be complemented by a national capacity building strategy. This ought to be complemented by regular retooling of trainers and apprenticeship so as to ensure that graduates are employable and innovative for self-employment in a changing labour market. 

2. 	A survey of SMEs needs should be undertaken and fit for purpose rather than qualification programmes developed. This would ensure growth and transformation of informal enterprises into formal enterprises.

Environmental Rehabilitation and Restoration 

As proposed by 2020/2021, the national tree fund should be operationalised, regulations developed and funds allocated. This, in line with section 57 of the National Environment Act, will ensure restoration of degraded hilly and mountainous areas. 

Government should release funds collected through the environmental levy for environmental restoration activities. 

Labour Externalisation 

We recommend that as proposed in 2020/2021, a special cadre of labour attachés be created and adequately facilitated in all missions abroad as a means of enhancing and monitoring the welfare of externalised labourers.

Road Maintenance

Set a ratio for works and transport sector development budget, that is, 70 per cent of every sector annual budget should be geared towards infrastructural development while 30 per cent is geared towards infrastructural maintenance.

As resolved by Parliament in the Financial Year 2017/2018, Government should review cost structure of roads in Uganda with the intention of ascertaining unit cost of road construction and maintenance.

As proposed in clause 22 of the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2019, there is urgency to amend Article 166 of the Constitution so as to empower the Public Service Commission to determine all salaries and allowances in Government. This would address distortion in pay among all public institutions.

Human Capital Development Programme 

We propose an increase of the allocation to the Human Capital Development Programme to enhance the performance and competitiveness of private schools and institutions, and also make substantial improvements in the standards and quality of programmes.

Agro-industrialisation Programme

There should be an increase in the budget allocation to 10 per cent to bring the allocation up to speed with the Maputo Protocol. This will enhance empowerment of farmer groups through cooperatives, promote food security, and increase the contribution of the agriculture sector to GDP.

In conclusion, the alternative proposals articulated in this response, when adopted, will contribute to effective and efficient execution of the budget for the Financial Year 2021/2022. The proposals have been made in line with Section 6E (2) and (4) of the Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 2006 as well as Rule 52 of the Rules of Procedure. I beg to submit and lay our response on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Madam Leader of the Opposition. Honourable members, for this to be successfully captured in the budget process, the Clerk should extract these recommendations and forward them to all the ministries, departments and agencies of Government that submit policy statements to this House. 

Those policy statements are supposed to be in this House by 15th of this month and today is 4th; so, time is of essence. Clerk, extract these recommendations and forward them straight to the MDAs so that they can look at them in the process of preparing their ministerial policy statements to be submitted to the House by 15th of this month.

Honourable members, I also take this opportunity to deal with the outline of the budget process so that we know where we are. We have a challenge that this Parliament will not exceed 20 May because by then, a new Parliament will have started sitting. What that means is that we do not want to hand over this budget process to the next Parliament because it will be too difficult for them to begin processing this. That means, we have 15 days left in the budget cycle and essentially, there should be some alteration in the way that we will be processing this budget.

Ministers and the Government Chief Whip, please ensure that by 15th, all ministerial policy statements are in the House to enable the alternative policy statements to be brought into the House by 29 March as it is in the rules. The committees will expeditiously work on these things to be able to achieve what we must achieve by the date when this Parliament will not be operational.

We, therefore, expect the ministry to prepare all the budgetary documents to be submitted to the House by 1 April, in time. But the challenge then would be other processes after 1 April, after the submission on time of the proposed budget, the Appropriation Bill and all the accompanying documents. The processes that come after should be really quick, so that we meet the timelines provided in the rules. We will make all practical alterations to them for us to be able to finish with all the revenue Bills, reports from the committees and the Budget Committee, and adopt everything that requires to be adopted, including the Appropriation Bill.

We must do all this by 15 May. That means we have a whole two weeks less left for us to finish this business. So, the Appropriation Bill, which is the final document we will deal with on the budget, must be dealt with by the 15th of May. That imposes a very tough timeline on us. 

This time, Government Chief Whip, please ensure that from the Government side, all the documents required by this House are submitted in time, so that we can see how the committees can work fast to achieve this. Otherwise, we will have a big problem if we exceed the 15th of May. The President will take oath on 12 May; Members of Parliament will take oath on 17, 18 and 19 May; and the First Sitting of the Eleventh Parliament will be on the 20th of May. We want all these things finished by the time those activities come into place. Thank you very much.

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Given the programme that you have read out, are we going to use only three days in a week or should we begin planning to use Fridays, so that Members of Parliament can adjust their programmes?

The programme is tight. Even if we presented the ministerial policy statements by 15 May, we have actually drawn the programme towards us because of the swearing in. Can we begin preparing ourselves to utilise Fridays and the mornings of the Parliament sitting days? I ask this because Members of Parliament have to adjust their programmes, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the bigger burden will lie with the committees. The committees will have to work even on weekends to be able to achieve these timelines. For the plenary, we will adjust according to the volume of work presented before plenary. 

As of now, we cannot determine if it will be necessary to sit on Mondays and Fridays when we do not have the load of business that the House has to process. The Business Committee will eventually sit to review this and see.

Practically, it will depend on how you respond to this - policy statements should on time, alternative policy statements on time, and the committees work doubly hard. What the committees process is what will inform the House on adjustments we should make in terms of how many days we can sit in a week to be able to complete this. I think that is a practical decision that we will take with time, when it becomes necessary. Thank you very much. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. May I also join the rest of the Members in welcoming you back to the House.

Mr Speaker, Uganda is a multi-party democracy. Year in, year out, the Leader of the Opposition makes statements on the policy statements, the budget and the President’s speech. However, I keep wondering whether all these issues raised by the Leader of the Opposition are included in the Government statements or taken as serious proposals from the Opposition. 

They are for the whole country. So, I want to find out from the Leader of Government Business whether when the Leader of the Opposition stands up here to speak and bring up these issues, they are ever taken seriously and included in the development of this country? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

12.10
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I want to thank hon. Wamanga-Wamai for the point he has raised. 

I listened to the Leader of the Opposition submitting and I took interest in some of the proposals. I called my Minister of State for Planning, hon. David Bahati, because I was concerned at what stage Government shall consider the proposals from the Opposition, because they are there to enrich our submission. Hon. Bahati assured me that we shall have a debate in April and that the finance minister is mandated to make adjustments and proposals to accommodate the recommendations proposed at that stage.

Yes; I want to assure you, honourable member, that we have been accommodating some of the recommendations that Government feels we can work on. We always submit a Treasury Memorandum on how far we have gone in implementing these recommendations. Where we have not done so, the Opposition is there to whip us, to make sure that we include the recommendations. This is because they are made in good faith and they enrich the Government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Like I said, they should extract these recommendations and quickly send them to the MDAs, which prepare policy statements that they send to this House, so that they are factored in. We will be able to track their presence or lack thereof when the policy statements come out. The Leader of the Opposition and the team that she has will be able to see whether the policy statements actually reflect some of the issues that they have raised and the recommendations they have made. So, that process will be done.

By the time we come to the debate that the minister has talked about, it will already be in the final budgeting process, where figures attached to those recommendations will be revealed. We will see the emphasis that has been picked from the proposals that have come from the government in waiting. 

It is a process and so far, we are doing well. If there are issues, we will be able to point them out and see how we can improve on them. However, so far, so good; except that this has come a bit late because now we are in March. Ordinarily, the alternative statement from the Leader of the Opposition should have come about 15th of January so that by 20th, it would have been factored in. However, we are handling that in a practical way.

12.12
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join others to welcome you back to the House. 

What the Government Chief Whip has said requires the decision of the Business Committee. However, I would like to bring up an issue which has been outstanding for a long time. We have very good recommendations from the committees of public accounts or accountability committees. However, most of the time these reports are presented after so many years that the recommendations given are no longer relevant or have been overtaken by events.

Mr Speaker, I would like to urge the Business Committee and those who are concerned to extract some of those recommendations and we deal with them, so that we can capture them in the ministerial policy statement debates when they come. I thought this is a very important matter. It has been burdening some of us. 

We have got some commissions, like the Uganda Human Rights Commission. We have concerns about human rights abuse and they make very good recommendations but they are never brought to us for debate.

Therefore, I think this is time for us to review our way of bringing business to the Floor of Parliament, so that we do not leave too many gaps. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I entirely agree. We need to use parliamentary time better.

12.13
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Independent, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join others who have congratulated you for returning to the Chair and winning the election. Some of us are in the departure lounge.

The point I would like to make is that from my experience here, for policy statements to be brought to the House for committees to discuss them, we always get a hiccup from the Executive. Therefore, we need assurances because as you said, by 15 March we should have them, but they are not there.

Secondly, I serve on the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and we should have dealt with the tax measures. We could have met the responsible agencies, given the timeline we have. Therefore, we need assurance from the Government that all the responsible sectors will act in accordance with what you have stated.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is to remind you that 15 March is still ahead; it has not passed. That is the deadline. Can I have a commitment from the Government on this? This time, you need to help yourselves so that we can help you.

12.15
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join the rest of the colleagues to congratulate you and to welcome you back to the House. I would like to comment on the alternative statement on the National Budget Framework Paper and how subsequently, it should cascade into the budget process.

Mr Speaker, one point to note is that this alternative statement should have come at the point when we were debating the National Budget Framework Paper. This is because the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 provides that the policy statements must be consistent with the National Budget Framework Paper. The House considered the National Budget Framework Paper and made appropriate recommendations to the Executive. By law, the Executive is supposed to consider them before factoring them into the proposals in the policy statements.

Mr Speaker, at this point, the alternative proposals should be included into what the Executive has, for us to consolidate them into uniform recommendations so that by the time we come back to the House, they will be already factored in the policy statements. This has not happened. 

However, I would like to allay the fears of colleagues from the other side - most of the recommendations that the Leader of the Opposition has raised are almost similar to what the National Budget Framework Paper recommended to the Executive. Therefore, unless the Executive did not consider our recommendations, I believe that most of the issues the Leader of the Opposition has raised are already captured in the ministerial policy statements, which we expect by 15 March 2021.

My last comment is on the Treasury Memoranda and reports by the Auditor-General. One of the tools we should be using in the budget scrutiny are reports by the Auditor-General, in addition to the Treasury Memoranda. The laws relating to the budget process do not deter us from using the reports of the Auditor-General even when the accountability committees have not pronounced themselves on these reports.

Therefore, I would like to encourage our colleagues in the various committees to pick interest in the recommendations made by the Auditor-General and to pick them at the stage when they are relevant. These are the issues we should be raising to the MDAs when we are considering their budgets. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

12.19
DR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga East County, Kiboga):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also join the House in congratulating you on your successes so far. 

I just want to also quickly allay the fears of our colleagues regarding these alternative statements. I do not know whether it is just our Committee on Natural Resources, but we have always found them very informative. Over and above whatever may have been presented, we have always allowed a slot for the shadow ministers to present these alternative ministerial policy statements to the committee and we scrutinize them. 

Normally, their input influences the thinking of the committee on the policy statements of the ministries, even where what they may have presented has not been captured. Normally, this finds its way eventually on the Floor of Parliament in form of committee recommendations. Therefore, it is very helpful and informative and it is one of the tools, over and above the Auditor-General’s report, which helps us in scrutinising ministerial policy statements and the National Budget Framework Paper. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  

12.21
MR EMMANUEL SSEMPALA KIGOZI (DP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also congratulate you on your success and welcome you back. 

I seem to have a small problem with the previous speaker from the other side, when he said that most of the recommendations from this side were similar. He seems to suggest that we may take it at that. However, if you say most of them are taken, then the few that are left out could have an adverse effect on the economy. As you all know, we do not die from many diseases; you can also die from one. 

Therefore, I would suggest that we take the recommendations seriously and analyse each one of them. Even for those that are similar, we should look at the similarities as we also take the differences seriously. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we need to draw this to a close.

12.22
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. To add to what hon. Ogwal has said, at times Government responds to reports in form of Treasury Memoranda but also as Parliament, we take time to accord these Treasury Memoranda an opportunity to be discussed. 

A case in point is the report of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) about the closure of commercial banks. Government responded. We have a Treasury Memorandum from the Government that was submitted to Parliament in August. We have been asking for the opportunity to debate that report so that it is not overtaken by events. You can imagine, from August to date, the report has not been brought to the Floor for us to debate it.

It is my request that we specifically give an opportunity for that Treasury Memorandum to be debated. It is very important because there are some recommendations that are supposed to have taken effect immediately but nothing has been done. I know we have a serious schedule but, kindly, accord some time to that report so that it can be debated and we take it to another stage. Thank you.

12.23
Mr abdu katuntu (FDC, Bugweri County, Bugweri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Karibu back to the House and congratulations.

I stood up earlier to raise the issue, which hon. Jack Wamanga-Wamai eventually raised. The budget process is the most important activity undertaken by this House every year because it touches on the sharing of national resources. Mr Speaker, we have tight timelines, as you earlier read out, and sometimes we end up doing many of these things as a ritual without taking into consideration the seriousness of the process. That is why you find that when the policy statements eventually come, it is sometimes a copy and paste of the statements of the previous years. They just change years. It has been happening time and again.

Mr Speaker, I would like to speak to Government: Let us have a paradigm shift and take this process seriously. When you have got alternative views coming in from the Opposition, some of them are a policy difference. You may be in a position to say, “Well, you proposed this, but we do not agree with you.” That is okay because you have a manifesto, which we assume the country chose. 

We need some accountability on the part of Government to what extent they have taken the alternative views from the Opposition seriously, because this is the only forum we have for you to pick these alternative views and enrich the process. 

I think we are also being overoptimistic that in this time left, as you have said, we are going to take this process very seriously. It will involve burning the midnight candle if we are to take it seriously. Otherwise, if people just walk in, tomorrow they will run with documents around, we will not have time to scrutinise them and it will be business as usual. Thank you.

12.26
Mr Michael timuzigu (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join the rest to welcome you back to the House –(Interjection)– I cannot say where he is from because I do not need to answer that question.

I would like to say that the response from the Leader of the Opposition should have been debated together with the report concerning the National Budget Framework Paper. When they say the recommendations are not always captured, indeed they might not always be because we have not debated this response in depth. That would augment that response from the opposite side and then would attract evaluation from the Government side and cause clear digestion of that statement and the other report for the ministries and agencies to act. 

When it happens like this and people complain that their recommendations are not captured, it means that we have to change the culture and make sure that the report and the response come together and we debate both. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I ask for your guidance on this matter. 

Now that the response has come late, are we allowed to debate it such that we augment and scrutinise it from the Government side, so that it gains strength and whenever it reaches any office, it goes with that strength and is captured as the Opposition expects? Otherwise, if we do not do that, we are talking about it today but even next year, we shall find that nothing has been captured. It will be the weakness of Parliament because it is our job to make sure that everything which comes to this House is put into practice. 

Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance; if it is allowed for us to debate this response, then give us a chance to scrutinise the response from the Government and then the Opposition side gets a chance to augment their response. Thank you.

The deputy speaker: Thank you. Honourable members, I explained at the beginning why we are doing it at this time. The time is not right but we are accommodating it because there are processes that are still ahead that could take care of this situation. Ordinarily, as you rightly stated, this response should have come before 20 January because by then, the sectoral committees are ready to report to the Budget Committee. That is where the challenge is. 

The timeline is a bit tight. National Budget Framework Paper - 31 December. Usually, for ministerial policy statements, we give 14 days for the alternative policies to be submitted. However, in the case of the National Budget Framework Paper, we do not have 15 days because if you give them from the 31st, it comes to about 15th or 14th of January. Already, the committees are under obligation to report to the Budget Committee by the 20th. So, you have only four days. That is the challenge that we have.

However, given that the National Budget Framework Paper is normally brought to Parliament before – My experience has been that we have always received it before 31 December; sometimes even on 20 December. The last time I checked, in the other financial year they brought it on 20 December, which would have given us more time.

We are going to have to be more practical in the way we handle this, so that we can all be participatory in this budget process. If we are to wait for timelines that are within the law, sometimes we hit the tail of what has been going on. That is why we do not have to wait for the 15th of this month to bring the ministerial policy statements. It is a deadline. 

As of now, I would have loved if the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was going to tell me, “Rt Hon. Speaker, by Tuesday or this afternoon, these things are going to start pouring in.” That would please my soul and that would be the way to go.

12.31
The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also join my colleagues in congratulating you on your re-election as a Member of Parliament and for the good performance of the National Resistance Movement (NRM) party in the northern region of this country. (Applause)

Secondly, I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for the alternative policy statement she has made regarding the National Budget Framework Paper. We were supposed to receive this statement on the dates that you have mentioned. However, we agreed with the Leader of the Opposition that there was no problem with presenting this after we have considered the National Budget Framework Paper. She graciously accepted and I am glad that she has lived up to our expectations. 

I would like to promise her that we shall also live up to what we promised her. We shall ensure that the alternatives you have recommended to the National Budget Framework Paper are incorporated in the policy statements to the extent possible. We shall accommodate those that we can and those that we cannot will have to be done by the government in waiting. Those that can be accommodated now will have to be accommodated. 

The third point is on what hon. Cecilia Ogwal raised; I think it was also mentioned by hon. Musasizi. When we were considering the National Budget Framework Paper, which lays out the priorities for the budget per sector, many of the committees actually interrogated the performance of the sectors. As the ministerial policy statement comes here, it will now be easy for the committees who did that work. 

I normally interface with the Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, for example. He has already finished most of the work for the budget because he has interrogated the priorities. It will, therefore, be confirmed now if these priorities are actually in the ministerial policy statements. I think if we worked like that and if Members on the left hand side of the House continue to monitor what is in the policy statements, then all the views we are talking about will be incorporated.

Lastly, there is the issue of the audited accounts by the accountability committees. As the Government, we have done our part. The law requires that when you submit these reports to the House to make recommendations, the Executive should make the Treasury Memoranda and bring them back to the House for consideration, stating the recommendations you have been able to implement, those that you have not implemented and the reasons why you cannot implement them. All these memoranda are in this House. 

Mr Speaker, I request that at an appropriate time, we dedicate time to discuss these Treasury Memoranda because the Executive has done its part. What remains now is the part for the House, and we are here to attend to any questions that will come out of those memoranda. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What about the policy statements? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I would like to state that we are committing to do better than we did last financial year. We are going to start receiving them next week. We do not have to wait for the 15th. From here, we are going to start forwarding those ministerial policy statements that are ready. I hope the one for the Parliamentary Commission will be the first to come next week. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you know we changed the way of bringing them to Parliament. We requested them to be laid on the Table so that a date is known and the transmissions are done to the committee from the Chair of this House. Therefore, we expect these policy statements to start coming in time to help us proceed properly.

RESPONSE TO AN URGENT QUESTION ON THE STEPS TAKEN TO ADDRESS CAUSES OF LANDSLIDES IN BUVUMA DISTRICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have looked at these items again and these were urgent questions, so we cannot treat them as ministerial statements. We treat them as questions raised under urgent matters, under rule 42, where the person who will respond to this will answer it in the format of responding to an urgent question, not a full statement that you are going to talk about everything under the sun in that sector. Therefore, restrict yourself to the question and the response to it as an urgent matter. Honourable minister, please proceed. 

12.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I congratulate you in that Chair. It is nice to see you there and I pray that the will of the Lord is done in your life.

I am here to respond to queries raised by honourable members and I have a number of them. I do not know whether you will allow me to present all of them and then the response comes at once, or one by one. It is welcome – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Right now, it is about Buvuma Islands on the causes of landslides. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you. The response is already uploaded on the intranet, so I will go straight to it. 

The honourable member from Buvuma Islands raised this issue and we are responding as follows: 

As we are aware, the Lake Victoria Basin in particular experienced intense and prolonged rain, with no clear dry spell since April 2019. In less than eight months, the Lake Victoria water levels rose by 1.57 metres, from 11.91 metres in October 2019 to 13.48 metres on 19 May 2020, recording the highest ever lake water level in 124 years. Indeed, Buvuma District, being an island in Lake Victoria, has been greatly affected by the rise in the water level. Furthermore, water bodies, rivers, wetlands and swamps in Buvuma District constitute 40 per cent of the total area of the district. 

While the northern part of the district is flat, the southern side consists of sloping lands, with many undulations, where 75 per cent of the land is less than 600 degrees in slope. The highland has 12 per cent of land with 120 slopes. Nairambi Subcounty, which has been affected by the landslides, is the most populated subcounty (21.4 per cent as per the Uganda Bureau of Standards 2014 records). It has conflicting activities to the good environmental practices as a result.

Mr Speaker, there are several factors that triggered the landslides in the district. This particular district receives one of the highest and intense rainfalls in Uganda. Many times, it experiences continuous rains for days. The mean annual rainfall in Buvuma Islands is 11,000 millimetres, with peak seasons in March to May and September to November. 

However, due to the unusual continuous rains within the Lake Victoria Basin from last year through the months of March, April and May 2020, top soils on the high slopes are circulated with water, making the heavy soil loose and resulting into landslides.

Mr Speaker, the environmental degradation plays a role in this. Due to the increasing district population size, tremendous pressure has been exerted on the natural resources through uncontrolled timber logging, wetland encroachment, charcoal burning, pollution, farming activities and settlements. In particular, Bukiyindi Wetlands in Nairambi Subcounty have been converted for agriculture. 

Several interventions have been made by my ministry. When this landslide incident happened, the technical officials from the district, led by the District Environment Officer, on 24 July 2020, visited the scene and the affected people of Bukiyindi community in Nairambi Subcounty. The community admitted that large visible cracks had developed on the elevated mountain slope for quite some time. These were early warning signs of an impending landslide. 

They were informed that the earlier landslide occurred on 22 May 2020 as it was raining. Although the unfortunate event resulted in the loss of property including houses, gardens with crops, the fortunate part was that no life was lost. About 72 people have been affected and 60 acres of land lost. Frequent landslides have since continued to happen with the continued rains. 

Residents in the affected villages have been strongly advised to vacate the slope and go to safety, since the entire slope was on the verge of collapsing. The district local government and the central Government are aware of this recommendation. Vacation of the dangerous slopes prone to landslides, submergence and floods is immediate to save lives and property as the ministry responsible for disaster preparedness and relief finds ways of providing relief and resettlement. The next long rains onset is here and landslides might continue occurring as such. 

As part of the technical backup, a field visit was made during the month of September 2020 by the multi-sectoral national technical team to all flood affected districts in Uganda including Buvuma District. This was intended to assess the on-ground impact of rising water levels, landslides and the floods in Uganda as a whole.

While at Buvuma District headquarters, the team was briefed on the challenges facing the district, including landslides that have caused loss of property and displacement of persons. However, the team could not assess the affected landslide sites because the roads were impassable. 

I wish to inform the House that Cabinet, during its meeting on 20 April 2020, recognised that Uganda was faced with national challenges of rising water levels and floods due to unpredictable, intense and prolonged rains in the region. Cabinet formed a subcommittee to address the issue of rising water levels and associated floods and their impact on people, services and infrastructure. 

The subcommittee, chaired by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, comprises the Minister of Water and Environment, Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the Minister of Works and Transport, the Minister of Local Government, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, the Minister of Health, the Minister of Education and Sports, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Minister of Defence, the Minister of Internal Affairs, the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance, and the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. 

The subcommittee established a multi-sectoral national technical task team spearheaded by my ministry. The team was tasked to prepare a national action plan and provide technical advice on how to deal with issues of rising water levels and the associated floods, landslides and their impact on people, services and infrastructure in the immediate, short, medium and long term. The national technical task team has since prepared a response action plan considering the following priorities, among others:

1. 	To step up monitoring and surveillance of early warning signs.
2. 	Provide relief and resettlement packages.
3. 	Tighten enforcement. 
4. 	Increase awareness campaigns aimed at sensitising communities on risk reduction and resilience initiatives.
5. 	Support restoration of degraded water catchments.
6. 	Demarcation of high risk zones where settlements should not be allowed on some slopes unless the ridge has thick forest cover.

The immediate national action plan was endorsed by the subcommittee of Cabinet for funding.

Parliament of Uganda, in June 2020, approved the supplementary budget amounting to Shs 45 billion to address immediate interventions after the rising water level and floods.  However, these funds have not been released by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This has hampered the response to provide the required services as raised by honourable members. 

We are doing everything possible to ensure that these areas are responded to if funds allow. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member who raised the matter, do you have any supplementary question? Has it been answered properly?

12.49
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Island County, Buvuma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. According to the Order Paper, the minister is supposed to give interventions. This incident happed in May 2020 and I raised it in June. The team visited the districts and according to what I get from the minister, they were unable to reach the affected area and they claimed that the area is inaccessible. As far as I know, the area is accessible. 

One of the prayers that I presented on 22 June 2020 was for the Ministry of Water and Environment to help in relocating the affected people. Half of Buvuma land belongs to the National Forestry Authority (NFA). The other quarter is for palm oil production and only a quarter is left for settlement. Therefore, I expected the minister, in her response, to indicate to Parliament that they have reserved an area, maybe part of the NFA area or nearby, to relocate these people. That was one of the first prayers we made, even before the prayer for food. 

Two weeks ago, we had a second landslide occur in the same area and the situation is worsening. Whereas the other time we never lost any life, this time we may actually lose life. My appeal is that the minister or the technical team should visit the area because it is accessible. 

The second prayer was that relief assistance should be provided. Up to today, not even a single blanket or kilogramme of posho has been taken to this area. It is almost coming to a year. There is some unseriousness that the minister is exhibiting here. Let me hope it is not the unseriousness of Government. We need action on ground, not taskforces. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The truth about these things is that sometimes, you are not even required to come back with a statement to Parliament. You should come to say, “This is what we have done.” These explanations when the problem still remains do not respond to the question. One raises an urgent matter that requires you to go there and solve it and come back to Parliament to say, “We have done this so far and we have the following challenges outstanding.” 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleague. It is indeed sad that we were not able to reach the area. His prayer was that we should have said that part of the forest can be used for resettlement, but there are procedures of changing the usage of these natural resources to other uses. However, as Government, we have heard the cry of our people.

There is some engagement to that effect, which is in Cabinet. Once it is concluded, we can respond. Normally, there is a procedure of turning a natural resource into a settlement. However, I confirm that Government is concerned and it is looking into where to try to settle our people when these disasters occur.

Secondly, the colleague’s other prayer was that they needed some help. I do agree - (Interruption)

MR MIGADDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With all respect, we are talking about an emergency but the honourable minister is talking about a procedure that is supposed to be followed. When an emergency occurs, most of the procedures are supposed to be put aside as other measures are undertaken to save lives. 

Is the honourable minister in order to substitute saving of lives with procedures? Should the people continue dying because there is a procedure to be followed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was an emergency about one year ago but there is a recent one, which is being brought right now, of a landslide in Buvuma Islands. This is the problem when urgent matters are overstretched in terms of response; we start considering things which were not part of what was raised. From their intervention, they knew that certain things should happen but the emergency phase by that time had gone unattended to.

Honourable minister, the questions are: There was an emergency; what did you do? There is now a new emergency; what have you done? There are long-term solutions, medium-term solutions but what is the short-term thing you have done to protect these people from starving to death? That is the essence of this question. So, you have not proceeded very well on this matter. Please, proceed better now. (Laughter)

MS ANYWAR: Noted, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleague, I am not downplaying the suffering of the people. As I have already alluded - my Chief Whip is here - we are putting in place some of these suggestions so that we can do much better.

On the request for my ministry to visit the place since it is now accessible, I have no problem with coming to assess the situation myself as we prepare for the oncoming rains.

On the last question of some interventions since it happened, I hope that we can liaise with the minister responsible for disaster preparedness so that something is delivered to our people. We do care, as a Government. Thank you.

RESPONSE TO AN URGENT QUESTION ON THE DELAYED COMPLETION OF KAHENJE WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION SYSTEM IN RUKUNGIRI DISTRICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Give a direct response, honourable minister.

12.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Bamukwatsa, the Woman MP for Rukungiri, raised this issue and I remember that we responded to it; it is just being repeated. I do not know why it has come up again. Maybe I can give the current position.

One, on the delayed waterworks, all the fittings were delivered and installed. The contractor is testing this installation and by 15 March, we shall have the plant running. A month later, by 15 April, this project will be available for the community of Rukungiri to enjoy. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I am just being informed that there was a similar project in Rukungiri and Ntungamo. Tell us what happened to the one in Ntungamo so that we do not come back to this again. 

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, my response, as on the Order Paper, was drawn to what I have presented. If the Member is raising another substantial query, I am happy to come back and respond, even tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, in your own time, please talk to the minister so that she knows what we are talking about. The Member who raised the matter is here.

1.00
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you. Mr Speaker, on behalf of Rukungiri and on my behalf, congratulations and welcome back. 

Last year in February, this honourable minister made a statement on the Kahenje Water and Sanitation Project. She gave assurance that on 1 May 2020, the people of Rukungiri would be enjoying safe water. I repeated the question because up to now, our people are still dying because of water-related diseases.

Recently - I do not know whether she is aware - this project was handed over to be completed by the National Water and Sewerage Corporation. My prayer is that Government gives us confirmation and assurance, as Rukungiri people, on the date when these people will enjoy safe water, other than spending money on an endless project.

They give statements on the Floor of Parliament yet people keep dying because of unsafe water. I am not even sure of the assurance of 15 March that she has given. I do not know whether they have finished the memorandum of understanding with the National Water and Sewerage Corporation, which is taking over the project. We want a statement on why the first contractor who was supposed to complete it by May 2020 left. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we are going to take the minister’s word that by 15th of this month, this matter will be solved and water will be running. If you do not show up –(Laughter)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My honourable friend and colleague, hon. Betty Muzanira, we have been talking about this issue even outside Parliament. I just want to reaffirm what I have stated here. As you have directed, Mr Speaker, we shall have the people of Rukungiri enjoying the service. If not, I will maybe have another reason to come back and explain why there is change with the project.

Mr Speaker, we had challenges with COVID-19 last year. The project could not be finished on schedule and the contractors could not do their work. Besides, National Water and Sewerage Corporation is an agency in my ministry; it is a Government agency. Therefore, I am talking authoritatively that it is the same Government which has assured the people of Rukungiri that come 15 April, you will enjoy the service.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Did you say 15 March or 15 April? It is 15 April.

RESPONSE ON AN URGENT QUESTION ON THE ACTION REPORT ON KIWULA CENTRAL FOREST RESERVE

1.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRIONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to respond to the issue which was raised on Kiwula Central Forest Reserve as follows: 

I refer you to the directive by the Rt Hon. Speaker to present the action taken by my ministry to evict encroachers in Kiwula Central Forest Reserve. Kiwula Central Forest Reserve covers an area of 2,147 hectares, situated in Bbaale County, Kayunga District. This is one of the forests which Government has earmarked for reforestation by the private sector.

Mr Speaker, I had earlier reported that in 2019, NFA got information that some certificates of title had been created on the central forest reserve, with the intention of alienating part or the whole of the central forest reserve. National Forestry Authority had responded by deploying environmental police to stop the activities of the encroachers and filed a suit in the High Court of Mukono against Ssemugga Badru and two other defendants, challenging their occupation and claim on Kiwula Central Forest Reserve.

Ssemugga Badru transferred his title to Modern Agri Infra Limited on 3 July 2019. Modern Agri Infra Limited, in addition to the title acquired from Semugga Badru in Kiwula Central Forest Reserve, also holds the following titles in the same central forest reserve:

1. 	Freehold Register Volume MKO790 Folio 22 Block (Road) Bugerere 153, Plot 31 at Kirasa Bbaale, Kayunga District, measuring 587,470 hectares.

2. 	Freehold Register Volume MKO1316 Folio 1 Block (Road) Bugerere 153, Plot 32 at Kirasa Galiraya, Bbaale, Kayunga District, measuring 215,101 hectares.

3. 	Freehold Register Volume 1324 Folio 12, Bugerere Block 153, Plot 2 at Nakabaale, Kasokwe, Kayunga District, measuring 551,265 hectares.

4. 	Freehold Register Volume 1258 Folio 4 Bugerere Block 153, Plot 1 at Nakabaale, Kasokwe, Kayunga District, measuring 452,420 hectares.

Modern Agri-Infra Limited sued NFA in a separate case, in Civil Suit No. 18 of 2020 at Mukono, restraining NFA from interfering with the use, possession and enjoyment of the land titles, totalling to an area of 1,806,318 hectares.

Mr Speaker, as earlier reported, Semugga Badru had also obtained a court injunction against NFA, in Civil Suit No.102 of 2019, on Plot 9, Block 14 in Kiwula Central Forest Reserve, measuring 406,492 hectares. 

My ministry and NFA are restrained from evicting encroachers by the two court injunctions covering the entire Kiwula Central Forest Reserve. We are, therefore, constrained from proceeding with the eviction. I personally took my team and we went to this area for inspection but these are the constraints we still have on this issue. 

I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, you will realise that the minister’s first statement was that the Kiwula Central Forest Reserve covers an area of 2,147 hectares. However, you can now see that she has even gone to a million hectares in part of her statement. 

I think the reading was because the hectares sometimes have decimals of up to three. So, let the records show that the reference to 215,000 is actually 215.1 hectares and then we have 551.256 hectares and 452.482 hectares. So, it is 1,806.3 hectares, not one million. That is the correction we need to make on the record, so that we do not end up with land that is the size of the whole country, yet we are talking about a forest in Bbaale County. Let us make that correction so that the records can be corrected accordingly. Thank you.

Honourable members, we are going to take a break for lunch and we will be resuming at 2 o’clock, but let us receive one more statement. Can I finish with one statement then I take the urgent matter from hon. Ssemujju?

RESPONSE TO AN URGENT QUESTION ON THE IMPENDING EVICTION OF ENCROACHERS FROM MOUNT KEI CENTRAL FOREST RESERVE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That will be the last statement we are receiving and then we have an urgent matter from hon. Ssemujju. We can then break and come back thereafter.

1.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. My response is to the impending eviction of encroachers from Mount Kei Central Forest Reserve as raised by hon. Driwaru Zaitun.

The honourable member raised the issue of the impending eviction of the communities of three subcounties in Yumbe District and the need to stay the eviction exercise for three months, pending reallocation of the affected community and consultation of the local leaders.

The Mt Kei Central Forest Reserve affected is situated in both Yumbe and Koboko districts, covering 40,689 hectares. The reserve was established under Legal Notice No.100 of 1938 as a core conservation forest. It is separated from South Sudan by River Khaya. The reserve is surrounded by four subcounties in Koboko and Yumbe districts. 

According to the biomass study conducted in the reserve in 1996, this forest was largely intact. However, by 2017, over 40 per cent of the forest was encroached upon. Encroachment continued as more people from South Sudan, DR Congo and immigrants from the surrounding districts of Maracha, Koboko, Arua and Yumbe and the Balaalo cattle pastoralists from western Uganda entered into the reserve for settlement, grazing and cultivation.

There has also been a notable increase in illegal activities, especially charcoal burning, grazing, illegal timber cutting and logging targeting the endangered Afzelia africana. It is estimated that 2000 people reside in this central forest reserve.

It was this dire and escalating state of degradation in Mt Kei Central Forest Reserve that led the NFA management to engage the stakeholders in Yumbe and Koboko districts to plan and execute a durable strategy to remove all encroachers from the reserve before the onset of the rains in March/April 2020.

The ongoing efforts to address the encroachment in Mt Kei Central Forest Reserve began in December 2018 when the NFA team, led by the Executive Director, met district leaders in Koboko and Yumbe. They appealed for support of the stakeholders to secure Mt Kei Central Forest Reserve from encroachment.

Mr Speaker, throughout 2019, continuous engagement with the local leaders was done. Following calls by His Excellency the President for encroachers to vacate central forest reserves and wetlands, the NFA garnered the support of the leaders in the two districts to free the central forest reserve from the encroachers.

By October 2019, joint field inspections involving Yumbe District officials and NFA were conducted in the central forest reserve, to enable the stakeholders to appreciate the seriousness of the degradation. This led to the resolution that indeed, all the encroachers should be persuaded to vacate. This was followed by several meetings to convince the stakeholders and plan for the best strategy to remove the encroachers.

On 15 January 2020, Yumbe District Forest Protection Task Force, chaired by the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) and comprising all the members of the district security committee, subcounty leaders, community leaders and NFA, was formed to steer the process of removing encroachers from the central forest reserve. The task force has since sensitised communities through radio talk shows and community meetings to persuade them to voluntarily vacate the central forest reserve. 

The taskforce also set a deadline of 15 February 2020 for voluntary vacation of the central forest reserve. Any encroacher found in the central forest reserve after that date would be arrested and prosecuted accordingly, under the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003 and other relevant laws.

Mr Speaker, this process has been participatory, involving all the stakeholders in the district and to date, no forceful eviction has been carried out. There is support for the process by stakeholders, including the security agencies (the police and Uganda Peoples Defence Forces) and the local government leaders who have continuously participated in all the field activities and meetings.

Formation of the taskforce has helped to demystify the negative elements that are encouraging the encroachers not to vacate the central forest reserve. Already, several encroachers, estimated at 50 per cent of the total number, have heeded the message to voluntarily vacate the central forest reserve and they have moved out of the reserve.

As I mentioned above, most of these people are from the neighbouring districts and South Sudan and they know where they came from. Over 15,000 hectares of gardens have been abandoned as encroachers leave the reserve paving way for restoration of forest vegetation.

My prayer is that we all support this exercise that has taken more than one year to plan, engage the stakeholders and peacefully execute. I also appeal to you to help in the effort to free other central forest reserves from wanton encroachment done with impunity across the country.

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The person who is entitled to ask is the person who raised the question. However, for now, let me take hon. Ssemujju with the urgent matter and then I make some announcements. We need to break for lunch and come back to continue in the afternoon.

1.21
MR ELLY ASIKU (NRM, Koboko North County, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join colleagues in congratulating you and thank God that you have come back. Congratulations for winning and thank you for the good performance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You people make it sound like I had gone somewhere. I have not been anywhere; I have been in the building here. I have not been out of the country or in the village.

Mr elly asiku: You were not visible, Sir. 

Mr Speaker, I share a border with the subcounties you mentioned in Yumbe. My home is in Ludara Subcounty. I have gone through the facts raised but what seems to have been left out is the fact that the people who have encroached on this forest do not come from outside only. The population in these subcounties has grown. In fact, 50 per cent or more of the people who have encroached are those who are already in these subcounties because of lack of enough land for cultivation.

I would like to tell the minister that it would be good to involve all stakeholders, including the Members of Parliament from both Yumbe and Koboko because the issue of land is a serious one. You cannot drive people away from where they are surviving.  

The question is: “Where are you going to relocate them to?” It is not true that people are coming from Maracha; yes, they are there, but that is a negligible figure. The fact is that our people need land for a living. Therefore, the proposal that we need to evict them may not be viable, especially for those who now live on that land. I beg to submit.

Ms anywar: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, these are the dynamics we have in the country, where we need to balance between conserving the environment for sustainable development and allowing our people to settle in open places or central forest reserves.

I do appreciate and understand the dilemma our people are in. However, we need to preserve our central forest reserves. If we allow people to go and illegally settle in all the forest reserves, we shall have nothing. We need to understand that as a Government, we are trying to see how people can settle where they are sustainably, rather than encouraging them to go and encroach on the natural resources. It would be a big disaster for this country if we allowed all our people to go in.

We have seen people who are well-to-do go and encroach on the forests, wetlands or along the river banks. The effect of climate change is here with us. As leaders, we have a duty to rightly sensitise our people.

I appreciate my brother who says that we need to engage the Members of Parliament. However, in engagement we will need to be firm and not encourage our people to encroach on the environment. They need to be told the truth. We need to conserve this environment. If, as leaders, we tell the people that if they have nowhere to go, they can go to the forest, then we shall have problems.

My last appeal to colleagues is that as Members of Parliament and leaders in this country, we must stand firm even before our voters and tell them that for sustainable development and their health, we must keep away from encroaching on our natural resources. We can have a better place to engage our people but not encourage it. Thank you. 

The deputy speaker: Thank you. That is mama Mabira coming out now in her true colours. (Laughter)

Honourable members, last year’s World Environment Day theme was “Nature is speaking, listen.” The breakdown was that when nature speaks, it speaks in languages that cause a lot of destruction to people. It speaks in terms of floods, landslides and so many other things that are detrimental to human beings. Therefore, whatever we do, we must listen to nature because when it decides to speak, it can be very bad.

That was the theme last year. In that same spirit, we should continue doing this thing in a sustainable way that does not bring destruction to humans and also our environment.

1.27
Mr Ibrahim ssemujju (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are two things all my colleagues, who have spoken today, have done. First, I congratulate you and I would like to join them in doing so. The second thing is to welcome you back. A while ago, you explained that you were not anywhere else but around, so I am hesitant to join them in welcoming you back because you have said that you have been around.

I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity. The matter I am raising is one of Mrs Madina Amin, wife of former President Idi Amin Dada; if you like, the former first lady. I met her a few days ago. We were in hospital. I will leave out the confidential details. What concerned me as a legislator was that she was unable to pay a bill in a hospital. One of the children is sick.

I approached her because I heard people say so. She said that she was in contact with President Museveni when her husband died in Saudi Arabia, and with his encouragement she returned. She has had meetings with him and also people in Government. 

The urgent matter is for Government to go and help her before this country gets embarrassed that a wife of a former president cannot pay bills. The substantive issues for which Government should come and explain is why this former first lady and the Idi Amin family are being treated differently. The houses of the family of late President Milton Obote were returned. Also, under the presidential emoluments Act, they get their entitlements. Why is the family of Idi Amin being discriminated against to the extent that the former first lady cannot pay a bill of a few million shillings?

Secondly, I think the Minister for the Presidency and the Minister of Public Service need to come to this Parliament and explain the implementation of that particular law. Do they select who they consider? Is that at the discretion of the Minister for the Presidency and the Minister of Public Service or is the law supposed to be implemented as it is even when you are president for an hour?

Finally, we also need to know why the houses belonging to Ms Madina Amin, that are currently occupied by the Post Office, are not returned to her like those of other people that have been returned, including Plot 10 at Prince Charles Drive in Kololo? By the way, at one time it acted as a command post under Idi Amin. 

Can Government first deal with the issue that is urgent and pick these bills because she has been denied her entitlement under the law? Also, explain why and when this law is going to be implemented to enable Ms Madina Amin get her entitlement under the presidential emoluments Act. Thank you. 

The deputy Speaker: Honourable Leader of Government Business, the urgent matter is that there is somebody in hospital who needs help. The subsequent issues, you can deal with them in a more comprehensive way. Does the Minister of Public Service want to respond to the matter right now? 

1.31
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Ssemujju for drawing our attention to this very important matter. 

What I know of President Museveni is that he committed himself to taking care of the families of his fallen comrades. The question posed by hon. Ssemujju as to what has happened to this family is pertinent. I know that the President has been talking about the sons and daughters of that family, saying that they have been working together. 

However, an entitlement is an entitlement. If the Minister of Public Service has the answer to what happened to the entitlements, that will be very good. The urgent matter of picking the bills does not need consultation. The President has been helping people. So, I stand here to commit myself to pursue this very urgent matter to make sure mama Madina is assisted. The President has been giving a hand to many Ugandans. I believe once he gets this information, he will have to come in and help in this immediate need of settling the said medical bills.

For the entitlements, I do not know whether hon. Karubanga has something to say. 

1.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to join other colleagues in congratulating you for the success you achieved in Omoro County and the greater northern region. 

To add onto what the Chief Whip has said, this is a pertinent issue. I would like to say that the Ministry of Public Service has been budgeting for former leaders’ families and we have been taking care of those obligations, as per the law. This issue, in particular, is new to us and I would like to thank hon. Ssemujju for this information. 

As my Chief Whip has said, we are going to follow up. Otherwise, as a ministry, we have been meeting all the obligations because we budget for this item annually. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let us wait for a comprehensive report so that we do not just talk about it easily. On this issue of former leaders, Minister, can you come and brief us what the processes are and who have been the beneficiaries so far? Give us something comprehensive so that if we need to have a debate on it, it is by way of a ministerial statement and not just a response to a question. 

Please, come with a ministerial statement to explain to us what the processes are and how that law is being implemented. If there are gaps in the law, point them out so that Parliament can pick it up and make changes accordingly. Would that be okay? It should not just be a response to a question but a proper ministerial statement under the Rules of Procedure. Honourable minister, are you going to make a ministerial statement on this matter? 

MR KARUBANGA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I promise to come with a statement on this issue within two weeks.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Come with a comprehensive one! Thank you. Honourable members, I will cause an alteration to the Order Paper this afternoon to accommodate a statement by the Minister of Internal Affairs on some very urgent matter - the list of missing persons. He says the list is ready and he is prepared to come this afternoon. I am sure the honourable members are interested in listening to this statement. So, I will cause an alteration to accommodate this immediately after the current statements are finalised. 

Honourable members, I suspend our proceedings for now; we will resume at 2.30 p.m. 

(The House was suspended at 1.36 p.m.) 

(On resumption at 2.30p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

RESPONSE TO AN URGENT QUESTION ON THE ALLEGED BEATING OF PEOPLE BY THE UGANDA PEOPLES’ DEFENCE FORCES AND THE NATIONAL FORESTRY AUTHORITY STAFF AT MIRAMBI VILLAGE, BITOOMA PARISH, BUSHENYI DISTRICT

2.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This issue was raised by hon. Raphael Magyezi. Back then, he was not yet a minister. It is an old issue. It was actually responded to and has been overtaken by events. However, allow me to put it on record – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No; let us go to the next item. Thank you. 

RESPONSE TO AN URGENT QUESTION ON THE EXORBITANT COST OF WATER IN UGANDA IN VERY STARK CONTRAST TO KENYA

2.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Mr Speaker, the issue was raised by hon. Geoffrey Macho and I wish to respond.

The National Water and Sewerage Corporation (NWSC) tariff is not a full cost recovery tariff as it only covers operation and maintenance costs, depreciation and some minor capital investments. The large infrastructure that is capital intensive remains the responsibility of Government.

The NWSC tariff has a provision for a cross subsidy between towns, whereby a large town such as Kampala subsidises the small schemes whose unit cost of production is much higher due to diseconomies of scale. In addition, there are also cross subsidies between different bands of tariffs, that is, different consumer categories. The purpose of this is to provide social equity whereby the rich subsidise the less privileged. 

The mode of service delivery in the informal settlements, urban fringes and rural settings is through public stand pipes where NWSC charges only Shs 25. That would be Shs 21 and when we include VAT it comes to Shs 25 per 20-litre jerrican or Shs 1,060 per cubic metre. 

When we are comparing the NWSC tariff and that of Kenya utilities, it should be noted that the comparison between the water tariff here and the neighbouring two water utilities in the western part of Kenya, namely Kisumu Water and Sewerage Company and Nzoia Water Services Company, shows that-

1. 	The NWSC pro-poor tariff is Shs 1,060, including VAT, per cubic metre compared to the equivalent of Shs 1,330 per cubic metre charged by our neighbouring Kenyan authorities. 

2. 	The NWSC charges a fixed domestic tariff of Shs 3,516 per cubic metre, including VAT, while Kenyan utilities range from an equivalent of Shs 2,500 to Shs 5,030 per cubic metre. Similarly, NWSC charges a fixed tariff of Shs 3,558 per cubic metre of water consumed for institutional category and Kenyan utilities charge a stepped-up tariff ranging from an equivalent of over Shs 2,600 to Shs 5,700 and above per cubic metre.

3. 	In regard to commercial or industrial tariffs, NWSC charges the stepped-up tariff that ranges between Shs 2,500 and Shs 4,220 as compared to the Kenyan utilities whose charge ranges from Shs 2,600 to Shs 5,890 or even above. 

Therefore, according to this comparison, NWSC still looks a little better. 

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, the tariff structure for the Kenyan utilities imposes a heavy burden on commercial, institutional and industrial consumers who consume large volumes of water. Despite the differences in the structure of the tariffs, there are no significant differences between the tariff regimes in Kenya and in Uganda. 

It is worth noting, therefore, that the structure of water tariffs should guarantee commercial viability of the institution and social equity without undermining the operation and maintenance of the existing infrastructure, while ensuring sustained system expansion to the unserved communities. 

Therefore, to our colleague, we have shown that we do not have much difference between Uganda and our neighbouring countries. However, as Government, we think that the stand pipes will enable the poor to access water at a subsidised price other than the rates we give to other people who are able. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister.
 
RESPONSE TO AN URGENT QUESTION ON THE REPORTED OUTBREAK OF A STRANGE BANANA DISEASE IN WESTERN UGANDA

2.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to respond to a question that was raised by hon. Itungo on the outbreak of a strange banana disease in western Uganda. 

A strange disease was reported in bananas in western Uganda in 2017. It was affecting Ndeija Subcounty, Rwampara District, making the fruits turn rusty brown and rot. The strange disease then disappeared until early 2019 when the symptoms of the banana fruit discoloration were again reported by extension workers in Isingiro District. Similar symptoms were later reported in the districts of Mbarara, Bushenyi, Ibanda, Kiruhura, Ntungamo, Sheema and Rakai in 2019.

A technical team from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the National Agricultural Research Organisation visited the districts to verify the report and identify the strange disease. The team visited the districts of Isingiro, Rwampara, Sheema, Mbarara and Bushenyi. They interacted with the district officials and later visited the affected farms and picked samples for laboratory analysis.

During the visit by the technical teams, farmers reported an increase in intensity of discolouration of banana fruits during the heavy rains. These reports were confirmed by the local leaders and extension workers. 

The laboratory findings indicated that the cause of the fruit discolouration was not a disease but damage caused by tiny insects called banana rust thrips. Incidences of the symptoms varied from 30 to 90 per cent in the affected districts. 

Symptoms and Damage they Cause 

The banana rust thrips are slender, long, small creamy yellow to golden brown insects, with narrow fringed wings. They belong to the order Thysanoptera and Thripidae family of insects. Available scientific information indicates that the female rust thrips lay eggs in the banana plant tissue. The eggs later hatch and pupate at the base of the banana plant maturing into adult thrips in about two weeks. 

Banana is the primary host of the banana rust thrips. However, there are reported alternate hosts such as the immature citrus fruits, tomatoes and green beans. The thrips cause damage by feeding on the surface of the green banana fingers. The damaged fingers appear brown, purplish to black. This discolouration, however, is on the surface of the fruit peel. The fruits are edible but they are not fit for the market.

In extreme cases of the severely affected fruits, the whole bunch appears blemished. Damage is more severe to young fruits and it often does not manifest until after two months, as the fruits begin to mature.

When the fruit peel gets damaged as a result of feeding by the thrips, the affected fruits first appear as grey, dusty and later turn rusty brown. As the affected fruits continue to grow, sometimes the peel cracks causing scarring. The scars provide openings for opportunistic fungi including the pathogenic ones such as the anthracnose that cause the fruit to rot. 

The spread of the banana rust thrips is mainly by infested planting material and to a lesser extent, by direct flying from one plant to another. 

The interventions the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for the management of the banana rust thrips and further investigations are: A technical team from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and its agency, National Agricultural Research Organisation, visited the affected districts and identified the disease as the banana rust thrips.

Investigations into the most affected long-term management measures by the National Agricultural Research Organisation scientists are ongoing. Once investigations are completed, appropriate management strategy for the banana rust thrips will be disseminated to all banana farming communities in the country.

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and its sister agency have carried out countrywide surveillance and established the extent of the spread and damage by the rust thrips. Currently, about 20 districts are affected by the banana rust thrips in central and western Uganda. The communities in the affected districts have accordingly been advised on use of the following measures in the meantime to reduce the damage and prevent further spread of the thrips:

1. 	Use healthy banana planting materials from clean sources when establishing new plantations.

2. 	Avoid cultivating the alternate host plants near or within the banana plantations, especially the mature citrus fruits. 

3. 	Immediately at flowering, where possible use a commercially recommended clear polythene bag of 0.08 millimetres thickness that is perforated at 76-millimetres interval with holes of 12.7 millimetres, to cover the bunch as it opens.

4. 	Cut down the affected banana fruits and bury them to reduce the population of insects in the field.

5. 	Remove all the neglected banana plantations as this can serve as grounds for the banana rust thrips to multiply.

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries continues to sensitise the public and calls upon all the relevant stakeholders to apply relevant measures in the meantime to reduce the damage and stop further spread of the thrips. I beg to respond. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

RESPONSE TO AN URGENT QUESTION ON THE UNFAVOURABLE FARMGATE COTTON PRICES DURING THE 2020/2021 MARKETING SEASON

30.3
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Agriculture) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to respond to a question that was raised by hon. Franca Akello on the issue of cotton prices during the 2020/2021 marketing season.

Uganda exports over 90 per cent of cotton that is produced locally. This makes the country dependent on international determined lint prices. 

Cotton is similar to all internationally traded agricultural commodities like coffee, cocoa, tea. Prices go up and down in the world market according to supply and demand. Similarly, the price on the local market also varies depending on the demand and supply, since cotton marketing is liberalised.

In November 2019, when the cotton marketing season for 2019/2020 officially opened, the international lint price was $1.32 per kilogramme. This translated into an indicative farmgate price of Shs 1,300 per kilogramme of seed cotton. Let us note that it takes about three kilogrammes of seed cotton to make one kilogramme of lint. 

By April 2020, prices had dropped to $1.1 per kilogramme of lint, which was a 17 per cent drop largely on the account of the COVID-19 pandemic, which caused a decline in demand for cotton and textile products. At the end of the 2019/2020 marketing season, actual prices paid to the farmers peaked, ranging from Shs 1,300 to Shs 1,700 per kilogramme of seed cotton.

During the 2020/2021 cotton marketing season, cotton prices improved slightly. The international price was about $1.5 per kilogramme of lint in October 2020, which translated into a farm gate price of Shs 1,500 per kilogramme of seed cotton. By the end of January 2021, prices had increased to an average of $1.65 per kilogramme of lint. So far, actual prices paid to farmers have ranged from Shs 1,500 to Shs 2,000 per kilogramme of seed cotton.

Mr Speaker, world over, the textile and apparel industry has been severely hit by the COVID-19 pandemic. The global lockdown and closure of many textile-related factories resulted in a decline in consumption of textile products. This, in turn, reduced demand for cotton, and exports from cotton-producing countries, such as Uganda, consequently declined.

The lack of demand for cotton in the international market resulted in decline in the cotton prices. Recently, however, more and more countries have lifted the COVID-19 restrictions and the textile factories have resumed operations. This has increased demand for cotton and there has been marked improvement in the prices.

In order to reduce the dependence on international prices, Uganda should vigorously promote increased local consumption of lint to produce textiles and garments. I beg to respond, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON MISSING PERSONS

3.07
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. (Rtd) Jeje Odongo): Mr Speaker, you will recall that about four weeks ago - that was on 4 February this year - I made a statement on alleged kidnaps. At that time, I indicated that I was making a preliminary statement on the matter. Further, I indicated that I would make a subsequent statement once investigations had revealed more information. Today, therefore, I am pleased to share with you more information on this matter.

Today, I am presenting to you a list of 177 names, clearly identifying the person, the date when the person was arrested, the place where the person was arrested from, the reason why the person was arrested, and the case management history indicating where the person is now. I have, Mr Speaker, the honour to lay on the Table the said list. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the list of 177 persons, as presented by the Minister of Internal Affairs.

GEN. (RTD) ODONGO: In summary, Mr Speaker, there are 43 persons arrested for participating in riots. These must be taken into consideration, bearing in mind that earlier, the police had released a list of 800 plus people, who had been arrested on this same matter.

One hundred and fifty-six were arrested because they were found in possession of military stores, and 17 were arrested because they were involved in meetings planning post-election violence. Six of the 177 have been released on bond.

In conclusion, going forward, I would like to inform the House and the general public that a copy of this list is at the police headquarters with the office of the Chief Political Commissar. The public is encouraged to check with that office for the whereabouts of their missing persons and get permission to visit them, wherever they will be indicated to be. However, in doing so, we should maintain Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and avoid overcrowding.

Mr Speaker, thank you for giving me the opportunity to present the list. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is what was requested and the minister has responded by giving this list of 177 people, with those categories that he has stated. Do we want to have a short interaction on this matter? Can I start with hon. Ssemujju and hon. Fungaroo? 

3.12
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I sympathise with hon. Jeje Odongo. Why? The first time he came here, he presented about 40 names, but he was only able to account for 13. He did not know where the others were. Maybe God is good; they have now rained from heaven. The Minister of Internal Affairs - a General in the military – did not know where people were. He has now not explained where they have come from. Somehow, he has miraculously come with a list.

However, Mr Speaker, the most important point for me is that this Government now admits that it kidnapped people. The minister responsible for the police did not know where these people were. In fact, he only knew of about 44 but was able to account for only 13. He has now brought a list to tell us somehow, they were there; someone had them.

He then said, “I have the honour” to present a list of kidnapped people. Which honour? You should be regretting. People did not know where their relatives were and you have the honour now to bring a list!

Mr Speaker, hon. Jeje Odongo was in the military around the 1980 elections and helped Gen. Saleh to escape from prison. Can I ask him whether it does not bother him as a person that the things that were done by the previous military in which he served, which led him to help Gen. Saleh escape - You helped him! Does it not bother you that the military, many years later, is doing things that you did when you were in the military? There should be no cause for excitement; these are serious matters about people’s lives.

Secondly, does it not bother you that the agencies in our Constitution and other laws that are not responsible for arresting civilians have arrested and kidnapped them and are only handing over to you a list for you to carry to Parliament and be happy to present? Doesn’t it bother you as the Minister of Internal Affairs?

Finally, I still have people from my constituency who were arrested and I do not know where they are. I will be glad if hon. Jeje Odongo reads out name by name on the list telling us the reason and where they are, because I fear this Parliament might be used as a clearing house.  (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the honourable member that when we are demanding for the names and particulars of these people, our interest is that the public is watching and they want to know where their dear ones are. 

The minister has tabled a list which he is treating as if it is confidential. We need to know that the names are on the record of Parliament and not a list he is presenting. I would like to know about my people from Kalungu and I crosscheck with the names I have. That is the information I wanted to give, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, the minister says that this list is available with the Chief Political Commissar of Police. These are just 117 people and it cannot take even 10 minutes for one to read out their names. He says people should not crowd the area looking at the list as if it is a golden list. 

Just present the list because you were asked by Parliament to do so and not to come and table it. There is a difference between presenting and tabling. What you have done is laying it on the Table and you are very happy to go and sit down. This Parliament asked you to present and not lay on the Table. Presenting means you read out name by name. If you do that, even the people you fear will crowd at the police will not do so. 

This will save honourable members from asking the same questions. I have a list that I would like to compare with the one that you are reading. Mr Speaker, when those issues are answered, I do not have to come back and say, “I am not hearing these ones.” Therefore, could the minister answer those questions?

3.14
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I thank the minister for the attempt he has made to answer the question. 

Picking from what hon. Ssemujju has said, honourable minister, there was a demand for you to present the list of missing persons and not to lay it on the Table. I would like you to read the names.

Secondly, in presenting, we would like to hear the name of the person, the time he or she was arrested, when you got him or her on your list and where you got him or her from. This is very important because it will help us to know the people who got lost before, during and after elections. Some might have got lost from here and others from the north or east. So, when you give us these statistics, it will also help us to know where these people are. 

Also, many people are not capable of coming to Kampala and going to the office of the Chief Political Commissar of the Uganda Police. We have many official detention centres of the Republic of Uganda under the Justice, Law and Order Sector (JLOS) including prisons and police stations. If you mention a place near Obongi, the people of Obongi will not have to come to Kampala but they will go to where the minister mentioned. 

Mr Speaker, this is also good for the minister because if you do not specify the list of people who you have and where they are, those who might have gotten lost not through your system may also be blamed on you. This is also to help you.

It is on record that when the NRM Government, under the leadership of President Museveni, came to power, there was a commission of inquiry established by this Parliament to inquire into disappearances of people during the bad regimes of the past. Today, we have not even seen the implementation of that commission’s report; it is lying there in the Parliament library. 

We have reached a point where again, we need to establish another commission of inquiry – (Interjections) – Yes, because we need to know where these people who are missing are. If you cannot tell us where these people are, we have to find out by ourselves and Parliament has the power to establish a commission of inquiry to inquire into the disappearances of people under the leadership of this Government.

We have law and order institutions, which are established by the laws of Uganda. However, we also have identifications which are provided for these people, like uniforms, vehicles which are official but you hear of “drones”. Can the minister tell us which vehicles were used in arresting these people? Was it these “drones” or the official Uganda Police vehicles?

When we see the police, we respect them because these are our institutions and the police are in uniform and drive official vehicles. What should Ugandans do when they see a kidnapper coming to kidnap the people in the village? What will you do if Ugandans resist such people on the spot when they come to attack and kidnap people and plead self-defence? 

People come in drones without identification, in civilian attire and carrying guns. You cannot tell whether these are the Uganda Police, UPDF or people who kidnap others for their own reasons. How do we respect the rule of law? How do we protect our armed forces if people take on these things and families get scared?

Mr Speaker, I would like to also use this opportunity to bring this to your notice because you have not been around. As we said, welcome back but also know that “drones” went to Obongi after elections. I was followed, tracked down but I survived being kidnapped by these people with their “drones”. I said to them, “You do not belong to either the Uganda Police or UPDF, how do you chase Members of Parliament like this?”

Right now, there are people who are missing in Obongi and in different parts of West Nile. They are being forced to run to exile again, yet we say we have peace in our country. Honourable minister, help us to know where these people are and when they were abducted. Thank you very much.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural issue. Isn’t it procedurally right for you to ask the minister to first read out all these names so that when we come to the debate and discussion, we would be comparing lists and having that information? Isn’t it procedurally right that before we continue, the minister reads out all these names as he was directed to present the names to this august House?

The Deputy Speaker: It is not a procedural matter. You can make the request and we take a decision but it cannot certainly be a procedural matter.

Mr fungaroo: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that guidance. Honourable members, these things that are happening now make Ugandans to live in fear day and night. The concept of peace and security does not only lie in the absence of the sound of gunshots. If people live in their houses or on the roads in situations of uncertainty like this, it means that there is no peace in the country.

Therefore, let the minister help us, beginning with this, to restore confidence in us by saying, “Your people are in this prison. The others are in that detention centre. Those who are not on the list, we do not know where they are but let us inquire; therefore, let us set up a commission of inquiry to know where they are and who kidnapped them”. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members, the last time I checked the Commission of Inquiries Act, the powers of creating commissions of inquiry were vested in the President. These times laws change quickly, so they might have changed in the course of the time; I have not read again. It used to be a prerogative of the President to appoint commissions of inquiry. That is not to say that Parliament cannot institute an investigation into a matter. However, you may not call it a commission of inquiry because there is a Commission of Inquiries Act in this country.

Secondly, I would like to find out if Members do wish that the entire list be read by the minister. The list has the names of the suspects, the place and date of arrest, brief facts and remarks. To take the first case of Ssenyonjo Adam, he was arrested at the New Taxi Park on 18 November 2020. The suspect was arrested on grounds of possession of military stores and now is remanded to Makindye. 

That is the kind of detail that is there. I think that is the point the honourable member for Obongi was raising. I do not know what harm it would do. My only worry is that it will take a lot of time for us to read 177 names with the name, place, date, brief fact and remarks. Ordinarily, I do not see any danger in reading these names apart from the issue of time, which I do not seem to have. 

We can balance it up by saying that the minister can read the name and the place where the person is. If we go to the date and what the person was suspected of having - the rest of it can be uploaded on the intranet and we can access it. For now, can we agree that the minister can read the name and place where the person is? Would that be fair? – Is it already on the intranet? If you look at your iPads, it is already there but let us make that compromise. Honourable minister, read the name and place of detention. 

There is a point of procedure – You look very different with that thing on. (Laughter)

Mr mpuuga: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your indulgence. Indeed, everyone looks different. I knew you would not recognise me.

I agree to the request by Members that the minister reads the list. The assumption is that the minister’s list is exhaustive. However, as far as I am concerned, the list is even bigger. That is the minister’s list. 

I have my own list of people that I am aware of who disappeared and they are about 423, - with your indulgence, Mr Speaker, I will lay that list on the Table - implying that the minister could have been choosy in deciding which names to bring here and present. What do we do with those other names we have that the minister did not present? Do we agree and present after him? I have a list of 423 persons.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members, sometimes, it is easier to receive information in whatever form it comes and then build on it. If we now say that we also bring our own lists, I also might have my own list and another person might have their own. We will then spend three days bringing lists here. I do not know how helpful that will be.

Can we take this as a guide and take another day to see if some names are missing and whether you have information about additional names of people whose whereabouts you know and there are case references to them - they are in detention somewhere? It may be more authentic than an honourable member coming up to say, “I also have a list.” Everybody can have one. This is from the Government.

Therefore, my guidance is that, can we receive this one, which is from the Government in charge of the detention areas where these people are, then we see if we can proceed with others? Is it possible? If we start generating lists, there will be no end to it.

Mr ssemujju: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. The last time, the minister presented 44 names. Now he has about 170. Maybe it will help if he tells Parliament that this is the only list available in Government. Last time, he had talked of 44 but now they are 178. 

It is important for him. A summary can be given. Even if he does not give details, we would like to know who arrested these people because he says they were arrested. He can give us a summary of who was arrested by kiboko squad or Kakooza Mutale, for Parliament to know because this is important.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members, the important thing is that there is acknowledgment that a person has been arrested on a particular date, suspected of a certain thing and he is now in detention in such and such a place. We have agreed that we take the name and the place so that the public knows that so and so is in such and such a place. If we take all the details, it will take much longer. We also have other business to handle.

I know that this is very important; I am not saying it is not. However, for purposes of information, we can read the name and place where that particular person is at the moment so that the family can know as well. Can we now receive this list from the minister first?

3.33 
Mr gilbert olanya (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I remember two weeks ago when the ministry was briefing His Excellency the President, the minister made it clear that we have 313 people who were under detention. Surprisingly, today the minister is bringing names of only 177 persons. At the time, the minister stated that out of the 318 persons, 55 were in known detention centres and the rest were not known. That is why His Excellency directed you to come up with a list of where those people are. My concern is why you are coming up with a list of 177 today yet the other day you deceived Ugandans that you have 318 persons. 

Let the minister be serious. As you directed, Mr Speaker, let the minister read for us the names of these people, the dates of their arrests and where they are currently. Let the minister go into details. For example, there is a boy called Victor Makenya Balikuddembe who was arrested on 6 January, 2021 from Mawokota County South. Right now, his family is in pain and the children are crying day and night. We would like to confirm whether his name is on that list. 

Mr Speaker, we appreciate that there is no time but for the sake of Ugandans and the betterment of our country, let us spare time and come back tomorrow to continue with this particular topic. It is very important for the betterment of this country. I know time is of the essence and we do not have time but the life of our citizens and Ugandans is more important than our time. Let us spare the time; even if it is four or five days, we need to handle it. I beg to move. 

3.36
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I know that when we speak about human rights, we are talking about something close to your heart, as someone that has ever lectured on human rights –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And you were one of my students. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think we need to contextualise what we are dealing with. Human rights are in the Constitution and there is a whole chapter dedicated to that purpose. All agencies of the state have a duty to facilitate the enjoyment of these rights but now they are the violators. 

I think it makes a lot of sense for us, as Parliament, not to sanitise. When we say that someone was arrested at this point by so and so - What happened is that we do not know who made the arrests, and the minister will agree with me. We just saw people in plain clothes, holding guns and picking people, yet the normal procedure of arrest is known. They were not informed or booked in the districts they were picked from. That is why we have a problem. 

Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence on this matter. Yes, we respect Parliament’s time but it is equally important that Parliament or the minister do not cover up for an errant officer that did not follow the procedure of arrest. Once we mention these people on the record of Parliament, many will run away from this. 

I would like to submit because I do not want any Member to think that it is now okay for Government to arrest people and hold them incommunicado and then come up with a list. It is not proper; it is illegal. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What hon. Mwiru is proposing is now beyond what is on the list. I thought we were trying to use what is on the list because we already have it on our iPads. We should use what is on the list for public purposes, to alert the families of these people - give their names and whereabouts. I think, to the families, this is important.

As Parliament, we now know what their names are, when they were arrested, from where and the reasons why they were arrested. We already have them in our record of Parliament; on our iPads. For the public and also to balance the time, it would be the name, to alert the family, and their whereabouts to allow them to access these persons. I thought that would be sufficient for the public. 

The honourable member is now proposing that the minister goes back - because I do not think he has it here. He proposes that we do not handle this list now; that the minister should go back and generate another list of who arrested these people and then come back with six columns to show who arrested them. Should we ask the minister then to go back and add that column? 

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, the reason I am raising that is because there is a tendency – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I am asking is: Do you want the minister to do that? Do you want him to go back and add a column on who arrested them?

MR MWIRU: In my view, yes, and it is for a reason. Even where these people are – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am not saying that the minister should not do it. Is that what you are requesting, so that we just send the minister back to add another column and come back? 

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, it is what I am suggesting for a reason. Those holding those people now are not the ones who actually arrested them. If you go to every police station, they will tell you that people were just dumped there. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I still ask the question: what are you asking us to do? What do you want the minister to do? Honourable member, you are not hon. Mwiru. You even come from another part of the country, not where he comes from. The man comes from Jinja and you come from Obongi. You cannot be the same.

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, in the interest of time, we can take what the minister has got but we should task him to provide additional information as to who effected the arrests. Is it the police or some other persons who arrest and they just offload at police stations?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mwiru, by now the minister would have finished with the list but then you say that you want him to come with it. You are now delaying and the population out there is waiting to hear their children’s names and where they are. 

We are still talking about other things. Can we get the names on the record for the public? If there is any additional thing you are proposing - Can we do that? Honourable minister, can you avail us the names and the whereabouts of these people for now and then we see how to move.  

3.42
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. (Rtd) Jeje Odongo): Mr Speaker, most obliged:

    1. Adam Ssenyonjo 		– remanded to Makindye 
    2. Kasozi Wasswa aka Saku – remanded to Makindye
    3. Dennis Lwetute 		– with the police 
    4. Bonny Kisekka 		– with the police 
    5. Bogere Ali Sebaduka 	– remanded to Makindye
    6. Sharif Jjunju 		– remanded to Makindye 
    7. Emma Kibirige 		– remanded to Makindye 
    8. Suleiman Mayanja 	– remanded to Makindye 
    9. Bumba Twaibu 		– remanded to Makindye 
    10. Jane Kakayi 		– remanded to Makindye 
    11. Rita Babirye 		– remanded to Makindye 
    12. Mwebaza Junior 		– remanded to Makindye 
    13. Alex Yiga 		– remanded to Makindye
    14. Zubairi Mutebi 		– remanded to Makindye 
    15. Hussein Kalule 		– remanded to Makindye 
    16. Geoffrey Mumbere 	– remanded to Makindye 
    17. Peter Basalirwa 		– remanded to Makindye 
    18. Hamis Lule 		– remanded to Makindye 
    19. Wilson Matovu 		– remanded to Makindye 
    20. Abdul Nuru Sebbi 	– remanded to Makindye 
    21. Mutawun Ga Majid Atib – remanded to Makindye 
    22. Alex Kadyama aka Abdul Nasuru aka Muna Muraru Musoga – remanded to Makindye 
    23. Shafic Wasinde 		– remanded to Makindye 
    24. Stephen Sserwanga 	– remanded to Makindye 
    25. Fred Nkuruzinza 		– remanded to Makindye 
    26. Francis Bazibu 		– remanded to Makindye 
    27. Anthony Kitamirike aka Window – remanded to Makindye 
28. 	Edward Muyomba 	- remanded to Makindye 
29. 	Ivan Patrick Bisaso 	- remanded to Makindye 
30. 	Obed Mugume		- remanded to Makindye 
31. 	Isma Kisozi		- remanded to Makindye
32. 	Awuye Sharifu aka Commander Hectar aka Presdo - remanded to Makindye 
33. 	Geoffrey Kapengano 	 - remanded to Makindye
34. 	Joshua Ntegge 		 - remanded to Makindye
35. 	John Bosco Sserunkuma - remanded to Makindye
36. 	Rogers Galiwango 	 - remanded to Makindye
37. 	Denies Mugenyi 		 - remanded to Makindye
38. 	Issa Ssenfuma 		 - remanded to Makindye
39. 	Richard Timbiri aka Umar aka Jabari - remanded to Makindye
40. 	Maxiwell Okello 	- remanded to Makindye
41. 	Muzamiri Muhamad aka Olwenyi - remanded to Makindye 
42. 	David Okello aka Amunga 	 - remanded to Makindye
43. 	Alioni Anywar aka Anyo 	 - remanded to Makindye
44. 	David Ojaiti aka Buruno 	 - remanded to Makindye
45. 	Godfrey Isingoma 	- 	remanded to Makindye 
46. 	Ronald Kayiwa 		- 	remanded to Makindye
47. 	Shafik Umar 		- 	remanded to Makindye
48. 	Bernard Kabale 		- 	remanded to Makindye 
49. 	Peter Kabogoza 		- 	remanded to Makindye
50. 	Shafik Bulega 		- 	remanded to Makindye
51. 	Peter Matovu 		- 	remanded to Makindye
52. 	Sharif Mawanda 		- 	remanded to Makindye
53. 	Rashid Tumusiime 	- 	remanded to Makindye 
54. 	Pius Seguya 		- 	remanded to Makindye
55. 	Samuel Ssekyewa 	- 	remanded to Makindye
56. 	Shakur Matovu 		- 	remanded to Makindye
57. 	Kato Akiram 		- 	remanded to Makindye
58. 	Hazard Kayondo 		- 	remanded to Makindye
59. 	Trazadet Serwada aka Kansanga - remanded to Makindye
60. 	Ronald Jjunju aka Junior 	   - remanded to Makindye
61. 	Andrew Lutakoma Aka Saido Mane - remanded to Makindye 
62. 	Amos Kajuma 		- 	remanded to Makindye
63. 	Sharif Kabite 		-	remanded to Makindye
64. 	Moses Opit		-	remanded to Makindye
65. 	Moses Lutwama 		-	remanded to Makindye
66. 	Joseph Nanada		-	remanded to Makindye
67. 	Musa Byamukama 	-	remanded to Makindye
68. 	Alvine Lutalo		-	remanded to Makindye
69. 	Ronald Bugembe 		- 	remanded to Makindye 
70. 	Katongole Wasswa 	-  	granted bond 
71. 	Musa Hamid 	 	- 	granted bond  
72. 	Sharif Nkalubo 		 – 	granted bond 
73. 	John Serugo 		 – 	granted bond
74. 	Paul Gaira 		 – 	granted bond
75. 	Ronald Twinamasiko 	– 	granted bond
76. 	Christopher Musinguzi 	- 	remanded to Makindye 
77. 	Peter Yiga 		 - 	remanded to Makindye 
78. 	Suleiman Mubiru 	 - 	remanded to Makindye		
79. 	Silver Tukamushabe 	 - 	remanded to Makindye
80.	 Ronald Kiganda 		 - 	remanded to Makindye
81. 	Hassan Wasswa  		 - 	remanded to Makindye
82. 	Tom Tomusange 		 - 	remanded to Makindye
83. 	Sowed Bosa 		 - 	remanded to Makindye
84. 	Nkorwa Shafiq 		 - 	remanded to Makindye
85. 	Abubaker Kayemba 	 - 	remanded to Makindye
86. 	Christopher Bunjo 	 - 	remanded to Makindye
87. 	Hakim Mubya 		 - 	remanded to Makindye
88. 	Cirus Arinaitwe 	 	- 	remanded to Makindye
89. 	Eseza Bamwoza 		 - 	remanded to Makindye
90. 	Reagan Ssentongo	 - 	remanded to Makindye
91. 	Kasim Migadde 		 - 	remanded to Makindye
92. 	Julius Buwembo		 - 	remanded to Makindye
93. 	Ashiraf Nsubuga 	 - 	remanded to Makindye
94. 	Julius Kayuwa 		- 	remanded to Makindye
95. 	Kigozi Jamil 		- 	remanded to Makindye
96. 	Bashir Bugembe 		- 	remanded to Makindye
97.	Saidi Ssempija 		- 	remanded to Makindye
98. 	Haward Opwoya 		- 	remanded to Makindye
99. 	Moses Nyombi 		 - 	remanded to Makindye
100. 	Lawrence Ssemogerere - 	remanded to Makindye
101. 	Ssewandonda 		 - 	remanded to Makindye
102. 	Henry Ssebitosi 	 	- 	remanded to Makindye
103. 	Umar Munabi 		 - 	remanded to Makindye
104. 	Joseph Baale 		 - 	remanded to Makindye
105. 	Ian Arinkunda 		 - 	remanded to Makindye
106. 	Allan Ssenono 		 - 	remanded to Makindye
107. 	Kaddu Ashim 		 - 	remanded to Makindye
108. 	Gavin Ssekajja 		 -	remanded to Makindye
109. 	Fred Ssentamu 		 - 	remanded to Makindye
110. 	Moses Ssenfuma 		 - 	remanded to Makindye
111. 	Mutebi 			 - 	remanded to Makindye
112. 	Emma Kwesiga 		 - 	remanded to Makindye
113. 	Tonny Kibalama 	 	- 	remanded to Makindye
114. 	Ashraf Kibombo 	 	- 	remanded to Makindye
115. 	Henry Ssebatta 	 	- 	remanded to Makindye
116. 	Jackson Akampurira 	- 	remanded to Makindye
117. 	Amuza Opio 		- 	remanded to Makindye
118. 	X-Topher Mulindwa 	- 	remanded to Makindye
119. 	John Ekanza 		- 	remanded to Makindye
120. 	Ojok Isaac 		- 	remanded to Makindye
121. 	Kenneth Ngobo 		- 	remanded to Makindye
122. 	Eddy Mawejje 		- 	remanded to Makindye
123. 	Allan Kameri 		- 	remanded to Makindye
124. 	Swalik Kisitu 		- 	remanded to Makindye
125. 	Shafik Kayongo 		- 	remanded to Makindye
126. 	Isma Bwengye 		- 	remanded to Makindye
127. 	Alega Alex 		- 	remanded to Makindye
128. 	Madhi Ssenabulya 	-	remanded to Makindye
129. 	Ronald Kibalama 	- 	remanded to Makindye
130. 	Muslim Kabu Mugalu is committed to District Military Court but he is in Makindye 
131. 	Issa Wasswa 		- 	remanded to Makindye 
132. 	Francis Simbe 		- 	remanded to Makindye
133. 	John Bwaza 		- 	remanded to Makindye
134. 	Brian Makubuya 		- 	remanded to Makindye
135. 	Haruna Gabula 		- 	remanded to Makindye
136. 	Abdu Majid Kabega 	- 	remanded to Makindye
137. 	Sedric Odiambo    	- 	remanded to Makindye
138. 	Hamza Sali 		- 	remanded to Makindye
139. 	Blasio Ntumwa 		- 	granted police bond
140.	 Kafuma Yakubu 		- 	remanded to Makindye 
141. 	Ronald Mutebi 		- 	remanded to Makindye 
142. 	Latif Kadir 		- 	remanded to Makindye
143. 	Katamba Arafat 		- 	remanded to Makindye
144. 	Kyate Joseph 		-	remanded to Makindye
145. 	Vicent Kweyamba 	- 	remanded to Makindye
146. 	Robert Beriwu		- 	remanded to Makindye
147. 	Kassim Sseruwagi 	-	remanded to Makindye
148. 	Julius Nuwamanya 	- 	remanded to Makindye
149. 	Abdu Karim Ssebi 	-	remanded to Makindye
150. 	David Emou 		-	remanded to Makindye
151. 	Abdu Rahaman Sad 	-	remanded to Makindye
152. 	Edward Male 		-	remanded to Makindye
153. 	Isaac Ouma Akol 	-	remanded to Makindye
154. 	Nsamba Rogers 		-	remanded to Makindye
155. 	Joseph Kasujja 		-	remanded to Makindye
156. 	Joseph Kigozi 		-	remanded to Makindye
157. 	Stephen Lule 		-	remanded to Makindye
158. 	Jude Ssemanda 		-	remanded to Makindye
159. 	Frank Nuwagaba 		-	remanded to Makindye
160. 	Moses Kibirango 		-	remanded to Makindye 
161. 	Bernard Katende 		-	remanded to Makindye
162. 	Samihu Mukwaya	-	remanded to Makindye
163. 	Joseph Kisuku 		-	remanded to Makindye
164. 	Ashraf Katamba 		-	remanded to Makindye 
165. 	Magunda Geoffrey 	- 	remanded to Makindye 
166. 	John Muwanguzi aka King - remanded to Makindye
167. 	Stephen Mukasa 		- 	remanded to Makindye
168. 	Ismail Ssozi 		- 	remanded to Makindye
169. 	James Katabazi 		- 	remanded to Makindye
170. 	Richard Ssempija 	-	remanded to Makindye
171. 	Hannington Kasirye 	- 	remanded to Makindye
172. 	Fred Katongole 		- 	remanded to Makindye
173. 	Luyima Ashiraf aka Taata Emma - 	remanded to Makindye 
174. 	Abasi Amidu aka Dogo Mazi 	- 	remanded to Makindye
175. 	Sharif Kasozi 		- 	remanded to Makindye
176. 	Kasaato Sambwa Silas 	- 	remanded to Makindye

The place of present location is related to the reason of arrest. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I think the total number is 176, not 177, because No.166 does not have a name. So, those are the names we have received. Can we proceed with the rest of the business?

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Like I stated earlier, the list is not exhaustive. I tried to follow through my list of 423 and not even a tenth of the names I have were presented. These are names of citizens that were presented to me as a leader in a community by their relatives. I have the benefit of laying on the Table a list of those presumed murdered and even those that were shot and killed prior to and after elections. 

We have received parents, wives and children of these missing persons and they are complaining. This will benefit the ministers in charge of security and internal affairs to inform the country vide this address and list on the whereabouts of these persons. I beg to lay this list on the Table for the minister’s attention and the attention of Parliament. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable minister will pick it from there and move with it as he deems fit.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The list has been generated but wouldn’t it be procedurally okay that we debate this list because there are a lot of issues coming out?

The minister has read names of people in military detention, and the minister reading this list is the Minister of Internal Affairs who also supervises the police. Members are confusing Makindye Military Barracks with Kibuye Police Station. Once people are under military police detention, it means they are committed to a court martial. All these are matters that call for debate.

Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally okay for you give us some time to debate this as we give our input because there are a number of issues we want to raise? It is disturbing that the Minister of Internal Affairs is reading names of people charged in a court martial the way Gen. Kale Kayihura was kept there for 72 days. This list must be dealing with something else and not the people we are looking for.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you cannot debate a list of persons in detention; you can only raise issues to the minister. You can raise issues of clarification with the minister to which the minister will respond. It should not be a debate. We could raise them quickly and the minister will respond to them. Is that okay?

MR JOHN BOSCO SEGUYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When the President appeared on television, he mentioned that there were people who had been arrested by commandos. Surprisingly, the names of nine people that were arrested from Mpigi are not on this list of 176.

With your guidance, Mr Speaker, and for the information of the minister, I have a list of names with me here. It would be wonderful to give them to you so that you follow them up. On the list is:

    1. Mukinga Rashid from Buwama
    2. Kawooya Baker from Buwama
    3. Kijjambu Fred from Buwama
    4. Bazira Emma from Buwama
    5. Mugerwa Ronald from Buwama
    6. Ssekimpi Madi from Nindye
    7. Bukenya Victor from Jalamba
    8. Mutebi from Jalamba  
    9. Katongole from Kagenda Kituntu. 

All these are from Mpigi District; it would be useful to know the whereabouts of these nine people. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, it might be smarter, if you have a list, to give it to the minister without reading it on the record. That will help us to crosscheck and see what happened to these people. We can then task them later to come and update us because this looks like an evolving situation. We cannot complete it now since there are still issues, which are outstanding. 

Therefore, if you have a list, just take it to the minister without going through the burden of reading the names because for now, we have no means of verifying whether they are real or not. So, for now, we can only raise clarification issues to the minister.

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I am seeking from the minister pertains to the recent mysterious disappearance of National Unity Platform (NUP) supporters in Busia, Mbale and parts of the districts bordering Kenya. 

Some are suspected to have fled into exile. However, because the unmarked vehicles have been roaming in this particular region, one of them, Abdalla Were, who was a flag bearer for the mayoral seat in Busia, could have been arrested and taken to an unknown place. I highly doubt whether the minister’s list has captured him because most of these names that have been read are from the central here. Eastern Uganda now has names of over 30 missing persons got from their families. These were bread winners and families have been approaching us.

Honourable minister, I am the Deputy President of the National Unity Platform in the eastern region of Uganda, so I am speaking from an informed position. I am talking about bread winners who were taken. The people who arrested them were dressed in black clothes, brandishing pistols, AK-47 assault rifles and SMGs. They run after Were and we do not know his whereabouts. Could you please respond so that the families may know what is happening?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for allowing us to at least have this report on the list of missing persons.

Mr Speaker, I also have a list of 18 people from Kisamula Village in Kyotera District, which has been forwarded to me as a Member of Parliament by Zanda Advocates in Masaka. As you have guided, I would wish to forward it to the minister.

Mr Speaker, the minister has only read out names of those on remand at Makindye Military Prison. However, as you and Members are aware, there are many other Ugandans languishing in Kitalya. Last week, as part of our oversight function, we met those the so-called abductees in Kitalya. 

I do not know why the minister has conveniently chosen to speak about Makindye only yet there are other facilities – Luzira, Kitalya, Masaka and many others. It could be true that what the minister has been giving Parliament is only a fraction of those cases of missing Ugandans.

Mr Speaker, I would, therefore, call upon the minister to be honest to this country and Parliament and tell Ugandans the truth. You are very mean with your list. You are very reserved. You keep your eyes on the paper; you are not looking at the Members who are seated before you. (Laughter) This is unfortunate because we would like to see you and look you in the eye and see how you are giving us half-truth –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How else can you read a list if your eyes –(Laughter) 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, this is a matter of great public importance that touches on the fundamental rights –(Interjection)– I will kindly take the information –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, hon. Ssekikubo, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to give information to illustrate the point hon. Ssekikubo is making. There are people who were kidnapped from wherever they were kidnapped from and taken to some military disciplinary committees without anyone knowing. 

Eventually, the relatives of the ones you are talking about, in Kitalya, did not know where they were because they were quietly produced somewhere before a Major and then driven to Kitalya. Up to now, even people do not know that the persons you are talking about are in Kitalya.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you. Indeed, I tasked the prison authorities at Kitalya about how they received prisoners without warrants. Ordinarily, they should go through the normal judicial process – through warrants and then they are sent to those prison facilities. However, they said that whether they come from military or civil courts, all of them come with warrants but the people who are involved there are disputing that position.

Mr Speaker, I would like this House –(Interruption)

MR GUTOMOI: Thank you, hon. Ssekikubo, for giving me this opportunity. Mr Speaker, when I was the Shadow Minister of Defence and Internal Affairs, this kind of dirty game took place. The minister is very mean with the list because what we discovered was that some of those people who were kidnapped were being kept in safe houses. In each safe house, every hour of those days was costing $1,000, and there were 30 safe houses by then.

I think when this is in play, there is no way he can read all the names because maybe he knows the names of the safe houses or not. However, I am advising that the number of people, as has been read, is more than what could be kept at one place only. If this is exactly what is happening, then it is difficult for me or the whole country to believe. Thank you very much.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, at an opportune moment, it would be equally important that this Parliament interrogates and debates the circumstances under which these people have ended up in military detention centres and are missing persons. 

This is because there seems to be uncoordinated movement of troops in this country. The President orders in one direction; on the 1st of February, the Deputy IGP of this country, Paul Lokech, also orders the same; on the third day, the Minister of Internal Affairs here orders the production of that list but nobody does the needful, as per the President’s directive.

Having looked at the 177, as per the list today, under what circumstances did they end up in these military detention centres or go missing? I ask this because the genesis could have been political. This country has had a bad political history. The bad political history is now being clothed in military wear and materials. On this side of the NRM, I want to come out clean and say that as NRM, we have never conspired to do this. There are some other actors behind this but as a country and the leadership, where I am a member, we have never agreed to do this to Ugandans. 

This is putting us in a very difficult position, honourable minister. It is a very undefendable position. There is no way you can defend this. There is no way you can defend a political difference that degenerates into the court martial of civilians, whom you know are supposed to be tried in civil courts.

Honourable minister, I am on your side but I do not want to side with you on this matter. On this matter of the abducted persons in this country, there is no way I can stand and defend you. This is a very bleeding stigmata. You have not allowed the wounds of politics to heal. The abductions are still continuing.

Mr Speaker, this morning, I was at Lwemiyaga. I passed by Lwemiyaga Police Station. I went there to inquire about a case of attempted abduction by a drone, which happened to none other than myself. The matter was reported to the police in Lwemiyaga under reference 08 of 01/09/2020. 

A “drone”, registration number UBG 849C that had eight soldiers, waylaid my team and I as we were coming – We were within Lwemiyaga. They then blocked the road. We heard guns being cocked from behind and in front of us and then they stopped us. They wanted to pull me out of my vehicle into the “drone”. Fortunately, the police had sent guards. Each side cocked guns and there was a standoff for over 45 minutes.

For 45 minutes, they kept saying, “We are dragging you. We are taking you” and the others would say, “You are not taking him.” So, it was, “We are taking him; you are not taking him” until we said that if it is a police matter, let us go to police. When we reached police, the police intervened and said they would have the matter heard the following day. The occupant in that vehicle, a one Major Mugabi, is an intelligence officer at Kabamba Military Barracks. He never showed up. It took the intervention of other authorities but he has never showed up to date. 

This morning, I passed by to check on the progress of the case of a Member of Parliament. If a Member of Parliament can be handled in such a manner - This is why I am proposing that we investigate the circumstances surrounding the arrests and kidnap of these Ugandans. Individuals in the system - The cardinal principle of the military is command and control. Who is commanding and controlling the security agencies in this country if the President is saying, “come out and produce this report”? 

The example I am giving of my own case could relate to these other cases where the Government is not directly sanctioning the abductions and kidnaps of these Ugandans but there could be wrong elements within the system. If we interrogate the circumstances under which these people were being kidnapped, probably we would come to the root of the matter and find out whether there are legitimate reasons for the kidnaps. 

For those who could be kidnapped to settle political scores, debt collection, differences over wives or women, money, among others - a lot is taking place in this country. I would like to tell the minister not to have a blanket cover for all these cases he has read out and many other cases that he has skipped. Honourable minister, there could be hundreds more that you have skipped. Tell us where they are and if, indeed, they are in your custody, let the civil processes take over.

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you. I move that this Parliament takes this list but demands that the minister and the Government produce a comprehensive list of all Ugandans who were kidnapped and the circumstances under which they were kidnapped. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I have heard the word “missing persons” being used even by the minister. How can you have missing persons whose whereabouts you know? If Oulanyah is in Parliament here, you cannot say he is missing because you know where he is. 

Honourable minister, you know the places where these people are; how can you call them “missing persons”? That is one of the confusing words we are using, which has completely a different meaning. A person who is missing is one who has disappeared and cannot be traced - their whereabouts are unknown. Usually, in the law, there are timelines within which you can declare a person missing. When possible searches have not revealed the location of that person, then you can formally declare a missing person. There used to be a missing persons Act. I do not know whether it is still there. We might have to purify the words that we use so that we do not bring interpretations that do not fit the situation well.

Honourable members, we need to find a way to process this matter to finality. The way we are and the structure of our debate is not going to yield any results - Wait, honourable member. When I am speaking - Have you forgotten me, hon. Ssewungu? (Laughter) It has been a long time, so you could have forgotten me. Usually, when I used to speak, you would be sitting down but now, you have forgotten me.

What I would suggest is that if there are people whose whereabouts are not known, we might need a process where we get a list, like the one hon. Mpuuga brought, and send it to the authorities. They can then crosscheck with their systems and confirm that such a person is actually missing. If you know the whereabouts of a person, that person cannot be called a missing person. In fact, we might establish that the matter is smaller than what we think or it could even be much bigger than what we think. 

Can we now do a formal process? Let the minister receive the lists from whoever has one and then he crosschecks it with the names in his systems, so that he can generate a better list of the people whose whereabouts are known and those that are not known. After a period of time, under the law, they can then say these persons are actually missing. That is when proper investigations can take place. 

For now, we are all shooting in the dark and we may not have reasonable conclusions to this rather very serious matter, by the way. When a matter is serious, we give it serious attention and handle it comprehensively. That is my suggestion. I am only going to allow the Member of Jonam County.

MR ONGIERTHO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to congratulate you for coming back to Parliament. I have just two points of clarification. 

One is about the whereabouts of these people. If I heard the minister correctly, he talked about the military police or the ordinary police. I would like to find out if all these 160 people can fit in the one place that he has talked about.

Secondly, can we now be sure that from here, the relatives of these people can visit them and they will be allowed to see them?  There is a possibility that they will know where they are but when they go there, they will not be allowed to see them. Therefore, can we be sure that their relatives can have access to them? Those are the two issues of clarification I wanted to bring up. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I only want issues of clarification. Honourable members, words like “missing persons”, “abductions”, “kidnaps” cannot apply to the Government and its agencies. They can call them arrests. Under the law, you do an arrest but under some circumstances, you can do abductions, kidnaps and things like that. I do not know how we are using words these days. 

I had already said that hon. Ongiertho will be the last to speak. Can we close this and then generate a more organised way of processing this matter? Can I have the Leader of the Opposition?

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the north, especially in Gulu, we do not have members of NUP a lot.  Even if they are less than one per cent, they are still our people. Last week, I was in Gulu and on Saturday, a young man that I think is a member of NUP came to me and told me they wanted to arrest him. I told him to go and report the matter to the police. 

Mr Speaker, I witnessed something in Luzira. There was an Acholi who was arrested without a warrant of arrest and taken to Luzira Prison. I asked those people how they could allow the person in Luzira without a warrant. That means this is happening. Therefore, can the minister clarify to us why people are abducted? Why should arrests using “drones” continue to go on? Is there any way they can stop these arrests?

I thought we are in a multiparty dispensation, where a person is free to choose where to belong. I do not want to agree with what hon. Ssekikubo said, that it is not NRM. If it is not them, then what is happening? Who is doing it? If the NRM is a strong party and institution, it must condemn this act and stop it straight away. If the NRM cannot stop it, then it is them behind it. 

Do not intimidate our people and cause a lot of fear to them. Give us the confidence of being Ugandans and moving on. We need to be free. Where is the freedom? You need to clarify that and stop these arrests. Thank you.

Gen. (RTD) odongo: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank colleagues for the issues they have raised. 

I would like to begin by making some corrections. First, the missing name No. 166 should be Musinguzi John. 

The second correction I would like to make is in reference to the matter you have just raised. The list reads, “missing persons” and the word “missing” should be in inverted commas. The fact that there was a typographical error has made a big difference. The word “missing” should actually be in inverted commas. This is because they are not missing but they are with us.

The third correction is in reference to a statement made by hon. Ssemujju. He stated that I helped Gen. Salim Saleh to escape. Kindly check your facts. The person who did that was not Gen. Jeje Odongo; I know the person but I will not tell you - (Interjections) - Find out.

An allegation was made that by this list being presented or laid on the Table, I was making it confidential. No; I thought it was procedurally right to make it available for all colleagues to access it by placing it in a public place. There is nothing confidential in a matter that has already been laid on the Table.

Also, I would like all of us to agree that the matter we are discussing of missing persons is an evolving one. If you recollect, I started on 4 February by informing you of 44 names that I was aware of. I promised that we would continue to do investigations. Today, I am telling you that I am aware of an additional 177. That does not mean that I have laid the matter to rest. I am continuing to investigate to establish the matter and as I get additional information, I will be coming back to this House to say, “These are the additional names of persons I have been able to establish and this is where they are.”

For this matter, I would like to encourage all of you and Ugandans out there; if you indeed have a concern about a missing person, report to the police. Let us have the details so that we can carry out investigations and establish and report back that the name of a person called Kibalama John, for example, who was arrested on 30 June 2019 from Kawempe for this reason is here.

If I can get those additional concerns and complaints, I will be happy to follow them up. For example, hon. Mpuuga has laid on the Table a list of 436 names. I am glad to receive the list and I will go through our system and establish whether indeed we can establish where these individuals are. I will then be happy to come back here and report again – (Interruption) 

Mr ssekikubo: Ssekikubo’s case can be managed, but I am a member of this House and I know that there is a government in this House. To my dismay, however, I have heard the minister now soliciting for information from Members of Parliament and the public to furnish Government with information about the so-called missing persons.
 
Mr Speaker, Government has its entire machinery. If they cannot have a list of persons in their custody - they are not being privately held – (Interruption)

Mr ssemujju: Mr Speaker, the minister says, “If you have a person who is missing, bring the name –

The Deputy Speaker: Is the point of order to the minister or to hon. Ssekikubo?

Mr ssemujju: I am laying the background.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No; who are you raising the point of order against?

MR SSEMUJJU: It is against hon. Ssekikubo. The minister said, “If you have a missing person, please report; I will check our system to find out where that person is being kept.” The minister clearly admits that there is a system keeping people incommunicado somewhere. This is because he said that if you bring a name, he will go and check somewhere. 

Is hon. Ssekikubo, a member of the NRM, in order to express ignorance when he knows the Government that he supports has a system where it keeps people? The minister said that if you bring the names, he will go and check. Is he in order?

The Deputy Speaker: I do not think it is punishable to be ignorant. (Laughter) The day they start punishing people for being ignorant, that will be the day many will be in trouble. The honourable member simply does not know; so, I cannot rule him out of order.

Mr ssekikubo: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. Why should a minister come before this Parliament and beg from honourable members as if there is no system and structure of Government in place, and as if he is depending on other sources of information? Detention facilities, by whatever nature they are, are supposed to be gazetted and manned by Government. It would be a question of generating a list from all the detention centres and facilities that they have.

In the past, this House went to great lengths to fight the so-called safe houses for this very reason. Government now has legitimate holding grounds or centres and the minister is talking of being at a loss. He is not in charge. 

The last thing I wanted to hear is that you have declared a stop to the further arrest of Ugandans and those in your custody are to be set free if they cannot be produced in court. That would have been a more welcome statement from the minister. It would have been an assuring statement to the public. 

Now, for you to continue saying that more will be abducted and more will go missing and you will continue generating lists – the interest of this House is to put a stop to the arbitrary arrests. Produce those civilian citizens in civilian courts or civil courts of law, honourable minister. Please, let us not settle political differences in that manner. Let us not do that. If indeed these are criminal cases, they can be handled as that – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you still speaking on a procedural matter? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Is the minister, therefore, procedurally right to continue running away from the core responsibility of Government and seek for sympathy from Members of Parliament and the public? Is he in order to express himself as if he is not in charge of the security and internal affairs’ docket? Is he procedurally right, Mr Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am sure if I asked you to rule on your procedural point, you would have difficulties because you were just making a complete speech. 

Honourable members, I do not see how the public cannot get involved in this. The biggest percentage of cases that end up in court are actually complaints from the citizens. I suppose what the minister is asking is that you may have information that he does not have, so give it to him, like the honourable member has brought a list. 

The minister said his list is limited; you may have – It is the public to raise the complaint. It is the person whose relative has gone missing to alert some authority of his disappearance - that he has not come back or he does not know where he is, so that the name can be captured. Without the family complaining, how would you know?

I think the point the minister is putting across is that honourable members should work on this together. If a family has reported to you that there is a particular person that has not returned home for a period of time, give that name to him and they will start handling the investigation from there. That is the point the minister made. I could not read anything beyond that. If that is what the minister meant, then he is proceeding very well. 

GEN. (RTD) ODONGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. Indeed, this is a matter that involves all of us. The first point of call is indeed the public and that is what I am asking you to do. 

Secondly, hon. Ssekikubo asked that we should stop arrests and I am saying it is impossible. Arrests will continue as far as there is reason to do so. To say, “no arrests” is impossible. What if there is a thief tomorrow? If we say that there will be no arrests, then we will not arrest the thief. I cannot stand here and say that there will be no arrests because it will be a wrong statement on my part. 

I would like hon. Ssekikubo to understand that this matter will continue as long as it is reasonably carried out. As hon. Ssekikubo says that you should not do this, his colleagues are continuing to give me lists of persons they think are missing and I welcome these and encourage you to do that. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us move on to the next item on the Order Paper. I think the statement that the minister has made is very important, that he will keep coming back to inform the public each time he has done some investigation. He can inform them through the public media but also as representatives of the people, I think it is important for him to come and brief us. As you brief the general public, you could also brief us, as Members of Parliament. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.39 
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the semi-annual budget framework report of 2020/2021 on behalf of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the appropriate committee, which is the Budget Committee, to look at and advise us how to proceed with this document. Thank you. 

Can we start with the tax Bill which is very small and has only one clause, honourable members? 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) BILL, 2020

4.40 
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2020” be read the second time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is seconded by honourable member from Rubanda, hon. Gen. Jeje Odongo, honourable member for Adjumani District and the representative of persons with disabilities, eastern. Would you like to speak to your motion? 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, like you said, this is a simple but very important amendment. We have proposed to vary the excise duty in respect of undenatured spirits made from locally produced raw materials. It is an advantage that we do carry out this simple amendment. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you beg to move? 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I beg to move, Rt Hon. Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the motion is that the Excise Duty (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2020 be read for the second time. That is the motion I propose for your debate, which will start now with the report from the committee. 

4.42
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development considered the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2020” and made the following observations: 

1. 	The Bill seeks to introduce the excise duty rate on undenatured spirits made from locally produced raw materials for use in the manufacture of sanitisers and disinfectants from 60 per cent or Shs 2,000 per litre - whichever is higher - to zero or nil. This will reduce the cost of disinfectants and sanitisers so as to make them affordable and competitive and limit the exception to manufacturing of sanitisers and disinfectants. 

2. 	The Bill provides for 1 July 2020 as the date for commencement if it is passed into law. The committee was informed that Government informed the manufacturers not to pay excise duty on undenatured spirits to be used in the manufacture of sanitisers and disinfectants so as to make them affordable. However, the proposals were intended to come into effect from the lockdown period in order to have the intended effect. The law should, therefore, commence on 1 April 2020 when the proposals were brought by Government to reduce the cost of sanitisers and disinfectants. 

3. 	The proposed Bill does not exclude refund of tax paid on undenatured spirits made from locally produced materials before 1 July 2020. There is need to exclude refunds for persons who had already paid the tax and included it in the process at the time of sale. 

The committee recommends that the Excise Duty (Amendment)(No.2) Bill, 2020 be passed into law, subject to the proposed amendments. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The question has been proposed, debate starts now on the principles of this Bill. If there is any debate, this would be the time. 

4.45
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Ordinarily, I would not have risen to debate because this is a small and straightforward matter. However, the submission from the chairperson of the committee has forced me to seek clarifications. 

The committee proposed that the date of commencement be taken back to 1 April 2020 and the reasoning is that the Government had communicated that the manufacturers should not pay. I wonder whether the committee has this evidence on record that Government directed the manufacturers not to pay. I also wonder if the committee went ahead to verify that they did not pay. 

Secondly, we know that once you are proposing in this House that we should legislate retrospectively, there should be facts that are laid out clearly for this House. Do we know those manufacturers that actually paid and charged? 

If you are seeking to block them from processing refunds and at the same time the spirit of this legislation is that people should benefit, you are creating two legal regimes within the same tax Bill - that one group should be able to enjoy the benefit and the other should not.

It was wise for Government to state 1 July 2020 as the date of commencement and we should stand by that. If we are supposed to go back to 1 April 2020, then we must have all the facts relating to those companies that imported within that period so that we know the people we are protecting. Otherwise, we are going to protect people and the benefit will be going out there. That is the point I wanted to make on this matter.

4.48
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the amendment. 

Undenatured spirit is a raw material for sanitisers but when you look at the law, it attracts 60 per cent excise duty. The spirit in which Government had intended to lower the cost of sanitisers was actually so that even our local manufacturers would compete in the sector. 

I am privy to an engagement on the President’s directive on the matter as of then and the actual implementation. Even when the President had directed that that be the case, it required an enactment of the law. I think that is what the chairman was not bringing out clearly. 

There is a presidential directive and there is a letter from Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) objecting to it. They said that whereas the intention of the President was good, the law as is does not permit it. That is the reason the chairman was labouring with - the retrospective approval as of that time. 

I support the amendment. It will even help our local manufacturers participate in the business. Now the bigger enterprises, which actually manufacture these undenatured spirits and also manufacture sanitisers, outcompete the local manufacturers because they do not have to pay the 60 per cent as a cost on raw materials. Therefore, I support it based on that argument. Thank you. 

4.50
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee. I support their submission but I need some clarification. 

Whereas it is okay that the Bill should be tracked back to 1 April 2020, my concern is how we are going to determine the manufacturers who are not supposed to benefit from this tax refund. 

If you went to the market, you would realise that before COVID-19, the cost of the sanitisers was a bit lower but from around April, the cost kept rising. Normally, these are indirect taxes where that the tax is already reflected in the prices at which consumers are buying the commodity. 

I need clarification from the committee. First, I agree with them that they need to exclude all those producers who had included the taxes in the final prices of their product. However, my issue is, how are we going to determine those who included the tax and those who did not since all these – if you look at the sanitisers, the prices kept rising. The price was rising by virtue of addition of the tax to the final product. 

I need to know how you are going to sort this out. Do we have a list? How are we going to sort out those who actually – My opinion is that all the manufacturers pass this tax to the consumers. How do we make them benefit when the consumers have already footed the bill? I agree with your position that they should be excluded but how do we determine them? Thank you. 

4.52
MR EMMANUAL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. In principle, I agree with the position of the committee. However, I would like to ask a question that is close to what my colleague asked. 

The intention of Government is to eventually support the final buyer, but in this situation, from what my colleague has stated, the consumers have already paid some price, which is higher and in which case the tax was already included.

In this situation where we are going to approve this retrospectively, what happens to the consumer who has already been paying a higher price because of the tax which was already included in the course of manufacture? That is the clarification I want to get because my problem is with the consumer that the Government wanted to support. Thank you.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Odur raised a concern on how we determine the manufacturers to benefit from this exception. I would like to use hon. Mwiru’s submission to respond to him.

This proposal is not intended to benefit particular companies but is intended to exclude excise duty on raw materials used in the production of sanitisers and disinfectants. Therefore, the question of the list of beneficiaries may not apply, because whoever is involved in the production of sanitisers and is using this material will definitely be a beneficiary.

Another important area for clarification is on whether the committee interrogated the genesis of this exemption. We were informed by the minister of finance that Cabinet took a decision to find ways of bringing down the cost of sanitisers. Sanitisers and disinfectants in this era of COVID-19 are treated like medicine because they are aimed at preventing a certain pandemic called COVID-19. We normally give an exemption to such products when they are being produced. 

Based on this background, the President gave a directive which was supposed to take effect on 1 April 2020. Uganda Revenue Authority found difficulties in implementation because there was no law and they advised Government to come up with a Bill. This Bill should have been processed much earlier but we got a technical difficulty. 

This is Bill No.2, implying that there was Bill No.1, which had been returned to Parliament and it came together with this one. We got technical guidance that in order to process Bill No.2, we must first complete Bill No.1 and get it assented to. This is because we could not amend a Bill which is not yet a law. That is why there were delays.

Lastly, how do we identify companies that already sold goods which included those prices? That is why we are saying that if you were involved in manufacturing sanitisers and disinfectants and had already sold them before this law came into force, then you get excluded by implication. This means you had already factored the tax in your final price and therefore, you did not suffer a loss as a result of charging a high price. That is why we are saying that those who had paid should not be refunded and they should start benefiting from this exemption with effect from 1 July, whereas the law will come into effect on 1 April.

We are putting a disclaimer for those who had already paid that theirs becomes effective 1 July. With this justification, I beg to move that we go to the next stage.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it 1 July 2020 or 1 July 2021?

MR MUSASIZI: It is 1 July 2020.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that not retrospective? What about those who paid the taxes and sold their goods in August, September and October?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, we were informed by the minister that ever since the President gave the directive, the manufacturers have not been paying taxes while waiting for this Bill to come into force. 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Mr Speaker, the explanation from the chairperson assumes that when you produce, the goods are bought in an instant. I wonder about those who manufactured and sold extensively over this period; they manufactured before April and the goods were on the market competing with those that did not pay excise duty.

How do you come here and seek to protect one group and say that these ones who paid taxes should not ask for a refund and yet others are going to enjoy? You are creating two regimes within the same law and I do not see us agreeing to this. It is as if you have a list of people who you want to enjoy. Why doesn’t everybody be subjected to the same legal regime? It is 1 July after all; that is what the mover of the Bill proposed when they said commencement is 1 July.

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have asked a very fundamental question: who will benefit from this? To date, all these manufacturers are selling sanitisers and I can assure you that on the market, prices have never gone down, implying that the component of tax has been put on them.

That is why my colleagues asked, the consumers have already paid so what is the essence of this Bill? If in real sense everybody has sold and the -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, it cannot just be because of taxes. When demand increases, you know what plays in the market; there is a demand supply factor. So, it cannot just be the issue of tax but maybe because the demand shot up. 

MR OTHIENO: Granted, but that creates room for abuse because how shall we tell that right from April, it is not those other factors. We are now making a law which will be dead on arrival. It means the manufacturers were already gauging a loophole to escape paying these taxes using the argument that it could have been other factors.

As consumers, taxes should be the major drivers of final prices and we have already paid them. The price of these sanitisers has actually never gone down –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. Actually, the answer lies in your question. Once there is exemption of excise duty, which is 60 per cent, which is a cost of raw materials, the price will automatically go down. I think you need to understand that. If this Bill does not pass, 60 per cent of the cost of raw material for manufacturing sanitisers will be passed on to the final consumer. As to how the public is protected is going to be the question of pricing. 

Once this Bill is passed into law and a manufacturer maintains a higher price, other manufacturers of course will automatically bring down the cost. Therefore, the other one will be outcompeted. 

The other issue which you need to understand is that sanitisers came in the wake of COVID-19, as a way of fighting COVID-19. That is why we must help the prices to go down. That is the rationale. Thank you.

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, but I think there is a missing link somewhere there. The issue is effective from after 1 July 2020 because the law came into effect on 1 July. What the amendment is trying to seek is take it back to April. So, we are saying from 1 July 2020, all these manufacturers have been benefitting. That is what I am getting –(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, hon. Othieno, for giving way. Mr Speaker, thank you very much for giving me an opportunity.

To begin with, raw material imports, which we do not have in this country, are already zero rated. They are exempt from VAT. I do not know what we are running to. I want to give you information, hon. Othieno, to assist us.

What you are raising, hon. Mwiru, is that materials are expensive because of taxes. It is not true! You see, it depends on the material. If you are importing materials which can be got here locally, that is when you will attract taxes. However, if they are not found here - If you are telling us that we do not have raw materials to manufacture sanitisers, then they will not attract tax.

Hon. Othieno is raising something that we need to also think about. One, what are we trying to achieve? If we want to waive tax for a good consumed, then there must be another method. I think the method should be for Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should come up here and say that they want to waive taxes, which were supposed to be paid on sanitisers, but not to say the law will be effective from 1st April. 

We are making a mistake and I think we should make better laws. I am sure, Mr Speaker, you will agree with me. The law has been passed –(Interjection)– Under what law? You sit down! (Laughter) I am simply giving free professional advice. Please! 

Mr Speaker, I request the finance minister, who is hon. Ruth Nankabirwa now, to not let us run to committees. If you want those people who are supposed to have paid taxes between April to 30 June 2020 to be refunded their tax, or to assume that they have paid but they have not paid and tax should be waived, just bring that law. Bring the law to say, “For any person who paid tax or who has not paid tax from this period, this tax is hereby waived”. This should not come through the excise duty law; it should come through the Finance Act - okay, it is a Bill.

However, when you do it like this, we look so ugly. I went to the committee and I wanted to advise my chairperson but I discovered he had already made a report. Mr Chairperson, just ask the finance ministry to go and bring a waiver for that period but do not bring this Bill. This will look funny, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since you are a good drafter of the laws, you should help us so that we do not create a precedent in the House that the laws of taxation can be passed retrospectively.

Of course, I am a member of the committee; I did not participate but after listening to what hon. Odur said, I want to say that there is a tax regime already and now, we are bringing another one within the same regime. Uganda Revenue Authority refused to extend it to these people because there was no law. If there was no law, for the best drafter, what we want to achieve –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Kakooza is a member of the committee which processed this Bill. I am only wondering whether we are proceeding right when he comes to participate in the debate, when he is a member of the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I recall that he rose on information. He rose on a point of information. He was giving information to the honourable member for West Budama North.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You know, when we are making tax laws, we have to make them carefully so that they stand the test of time. Actually, the best way we could do it, as hon. Mafabi has said, is if the whole House can allow –(Interjection)– Can I finish my point?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is giving information.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Can I finish my point? My chairperson, sometimes you know I do not disobey you but we have to make a law, which is a benefit to all taxpayers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please proceed.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: What I am trying to say is that you cannot create another regime within a tax regime. It cannot happen. Even Parliament will look shabby when we debate retrospectively, which has never happened in this House.

Therefore, listening to the submission of Members, I think the best way to do it is, since we are going to consider tax measures in April as a policy, the finance minister can bring this in the tax measures in April and they start being effective in July. Otherwise, we are creating a problem and the consumers who we want to help are not going to be helped. The revenue which was supposed to be collected in the financial year, which is almost ending, is not there; the Government does not have it and it will be a problem.

Therefore, I think the best way is to come through those tax policies which are coming to be effective in July, so that we pass it then rather than passing this one retrospectively.

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, honourable members, for the information.

Mr Speaker, to summarise my point, I want to say that it is very clear that what we are trying to do will not be possible when it comes to implementation. Already, nobody qualifies because between 1 April 2020 and July 2020, all those taxpayers sold their products and the consumers have already paid these taxes. The consumers are not going to benefit. 

So, we do not even need this amendment in the first place because nobody is going to benefit from it. Taxpayers paid and consumers paid. So, if you are going to refund and you are saying we exclude all those who have paid, we do not have anybody who produced sanitisers between 1 April and July 2020 who has not sold those sanitisers. If they have not sold them, they can benefit from the law as it applies from 1 July 2020.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, while I sympathise with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the minister can be advised to do the right thing. You can withdraw this and we think of another way of helping those taxpayers who could have suffered during that period. Otherwise, you should also think about the consumers. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we propose laws to solve a problem. In this case, that problem could only be solved by the passage of a law. What problem are we solving by this? What problem do we intend to solve by this enactment?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, briefly, the problem we are solving is the cost of production for sanitisers and disinfectants. We are trying to bring this cost down by removing that 60 per cent tax component or Shs 2000, whichever is higher.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The next question is: as of when?

MR MUSASIZI: It is as of 1 April 2020 until when it is amended. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, the problem is that there are only two dates. It is either the date when that decision for lockdown was taken or a date in the future or the date of today. How it will affect a manufacturer who has already factored in this thing in January this year? Sanitisers are not like those things that you will manufacture for five months. You mix the things today and the next day, they are out and are bought in two or three weeks.

Why back date it? That is why I asked you whether it was 2020 or 2021. If you put it to July 2020, it is difficult for it to make sense. However, it might make sense if it starts either now or in a week’s time because you are now dealing with those beginning to manufacture. For those who have already manufactured in the past, how is it going to help them?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, with your guidance and the guidance of our legal counsel, we propose that the effective date becomes the date of assent. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That the date becomes the date when the President assents to this Bill makes sense to me. Can I now put the question? I see hon. Mukitale, who has not been speaking on this matter, rising up. I hope you are not going to take us back.

5.16
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Mr Speaker, it is not national dialogue now. I am processing a motion for a national dialogue and I will be coming to you soon. 

To declare interest, I am a tax agent who has been on leave and I am only going to get active now. The questions you raised were about what this Bill envisages to cure and its effective date. I would like to join this with the earlier submissions of my colleagues, hon. Kakooza and hon. Nandala-Mafabi. These two said that in just next month, we will be receiving new tax Bills.

If the minister and the chairman had come out openly to tell us which companies were disadvantaged in the earlier tax regime, and therefore legal regime, then we would be targeting to make good the inconveniences they have suffered. However, the question again would be: What of the consumers who have already paid at a higher price?

Therefore, I would like to agree almost 100 per cent with the position you are about to take. I would like to ask the minister this: Why don’t you bring all the tax Bills together next month so that Parliament does not do a double job?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we are trying to be pragmatic here. This is the beginning of March; therefore, there is March, April, May and June, which are still days ahead. The compromise of effective date being a date when the President assents to the Bill will make sense because then it operates prospectively. We are not going back to see who has paid or not. That is too complicated to start doing. Can we now proceed and deal with this matter?

5.19
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. While April 2020 falls in the previous financial year, it would make sense if this Bill was to be dated or effected on the 1 July 2020, which is in this financial year, so that the law runs up to the end of the financial year, which will be 30 June 2021. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I now put the question to the motion for second reading? Okay, honourable members, I now put the question that the Excise Duty (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2020 be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) BILL, 2020

Clause 1

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 1 by substituting it with the following: “This Act shall come into force on the date of assent.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, we propose to rephrase this entire clause to read as follows: 
“The Excise Duty Act in this Act, referred to as the principal Act, is amended in Part 1 of Schedule 2 – 
(a) by substituting for item 3 (a) the following: 

‘undenatured spirits made from locally produced raw materials used in the production of disinfectants and sanitisers - nil.’”

The justification is: to reduce the cost of disinfectants and sanitisers so as to make them affordable and competitive and to limit the exemption to manufacturing of sanitisers and disinfectants – (Interruption)

Ms ogwal: Mr Chairman, I would like to be advised whether we cannot add an amendment to include any other medical substances. For example, we have spirit, which is used for cleaning wounds. We should not restrict it to disinfectants and sanitisers only. What about any other medical substance? Thank you.

Mr nandala-mafabi: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, medical facilities are exempted. The only concern I would like the chairperson of the committee and the House to consider is that we should provide a definition. If we leave it in this current form, anyone can abuse it.

Why don’t we define what the raw materials are specifically for? If you agree, I would suggest that we add, in the interpretation clause, “materials specifically for sanitisers.”

The deputy Chairperson: That is what the amendment from the committee proposes. It states, “undenatured spirits made from locally produced raw materials used in the production of disinfectants and sanitisers.”

Mr nandala-mafabi: Mr Chairman, disinfectants are very many. Even in the toilets, there are those blue and green things we put. There is also soap. If we are talking about sanitisers for the hands, it should be very clear. If you leave it like that, even soap manufacturers will have a problem.

I plead with the chairperson of the committee that it should be specifically for sanitisers. However, if you bring in those disinfectants, you will make it worse.

Mr musasizi: Mr Chairperson, I would like to get hon. Nandala- Mafabi’s ear on this. Are you saying that in between the words, “raw materials used” we should insert “specifically”?

The deputy Chairperson: He wants you to remove “disinfectants” because it is too wide. 

Mr musasizi: Mr Chairman, we do not need to lose the intention of the Bill. If we add the word “specifically” and leave “disinfectants and sanitisers”, I think it would work. Not all disinfectants are used outside the spirit of the Bill. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I would like to persuade you that we add the word, “specifically” and then we will be able to move on.

Mr JAMES kakooza: To ease the work and for the law we are passing not to be ambiguous, when a tax collector is defining an ingredient, they must specify the material and it must be coded.

As hon. Nandala-Mafabi is saying, the spirit of that law is that you want to reduce the cost of sanitisers, therefore the materials used in those specific sanitisers are the ones we want to exempt from tax to lower the cost. Therefore, the best drafting could be, “specifically those materials used for sanitisers.”

Mr nandala-mafabi: That is what the chairperson has said. I think we delete “disinfectants” and insert the word “specifically” as you have proposed.

The deputy Chairperson: I do not think it will solve the problem. Suppose you extend it - if this is the spirit in which you want to use it - “…used in the production of disinfectants and sanitisers in the protection against COVID-19” or something like that, so that it is clear that it is for those purposes. “Specifically” still does not solve the problem. 

Can somebody draft it along those lines? “…produce raw materials used in the production of disinfectants and sanitisers…” Someone can give an extension and relate it to the fight that this specific intervention is for.

Mr mwiru: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I understand where hon. Nandala-Mafabi and colleagues are coming from. However, even by doing that, you do not solve the problem. This is because undenatured spirits can be used in the manufacturing of sanitisers and disinfectants but they can also be abused if bought by other people who are not going to manufacture sanitisers and disinfectants. 

I think it should come with a regulation where one must produce a certificate to show that one is licensed in the manufacturing of sanitisers and disinfectants. Short of that, hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s fear will come true.

I would like to propose that we create a rider that there is a requirement that for one to buy the undenatured spirit, they must have a licence or have to be certified by the Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) as a manufacturer of sanitisers and disinfectants. 

The deputy Chairperson: Have we found a compromise?

Mr nandala-mafabi: Mr Chairperson, we are looking at COVID-19. The moment COVID-19 gets over, this law will not be applicable. That is the intention and I would like to agree with everybody.

I would like to interest the chairperson of the committee in saying, “…undenatured spirits made specifically from locally produced raw materials used in the production of sanitisers for COVID-19.” The justification is that as soon as this is over, we shall revert to a normal process.

The deputy Chairperson: I think let the drafting team here help us. The spirit the House wants to capture is that these undenatured spirits should be locally produced as part of the raw materials and they should be used for the manufacturing of disinfectants and sanitisers for the purpose of the fight against COVID-19. 

Get the language and give us a draft that is good. The operative qualification is that it is aimed at a fight. In other words, if you are making it for something else, it is not exempted.

Chairperson, are you ready? Honourable members, as we wait for what is coming up, there is a technical issue concerning what we have dealt with in the clause. I think it is not “on the date of assent.” The phrasing we have adopted is “on date of publication in the Gazette.” That will be the effective date of the law, if that is what you want, which I think is the spirit of this. So, the records should show that what we meant by “date of assent” is “date of publication” because that is when it is gazetted and becomes operational.

This is because no one knows when it is assented to. It can be assented to today and no one gets to know. However, when it is gazetted, the public can know that the law is now in force. That is the correction. I do not know whether we need to take a decision on it. Maybe I should just take a decision to make that correction. Let us go back to clause 1 and make that clarification. 

Clause 1 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The proposal is to make it “date of publication in the Gazette.” I put the question to that. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, are you ready for clause 2? 

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 2 as follows: “…by substituting for item 3 (a) the following: ‘undenatured spirits made from locally produced raw materials used in the production of disinfectants and sanitizers for prevention of COVID-19.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think that captures it. It is specific to those that are targeting the fight against COVID-19. It is not open-ended anymore. I think that is for the tax person to deal with.

MR MWIRU: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose a subsection immediately after 3(a) so that it comes with a requirement. Since we are talking about the manufacturing of sanitizers and disinfectants and the Government has licensed people who manufacture sanitizers and disinfectants, the purchase, since it is in the context of COVID-19, should be accompanied by certification from UNBS.

If we do not do that, people will say that they have come to buy sanitizers and disinfectants and then they will go and manufacture waragi. By the time you go back to your constituencies, they will all be drunk. That is my proposal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do we need to put that here? I thought there is a requirement in another law saying anything going to the public must be certified.

MR MWIRU: If I go to Madhvani Group of Companies, for example, to buy undenatured spirits, I just need to present myself as a buyer. The pricing will be different, so that it remains as an exception to the people buying undenatured spirits for purposes of manufacturing sanitizers and disinfectants. If any other buyer walks into the same Madhvani Group of Companies to buy undenatured spirits for production of waragi, they should pay the excise duty of 60 per cent. 

When we were levying the 60 per cent tax, it came from complaints from our constituencies. Since the cost of the raw material for manufacturing waragi is too low, it became a lucrative business for everyone. Therefore, that had an impact on society. I beg to submit. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Chairperson, I understand what my brother, hon. Mwiru, is trying to emphasise, that people should not cheat the Government. However, what he is proposing sounds like an administrative arrangement, which I do not think should be included in the law. It is an administrative arrangement. 

This is not the first time that you are making such an amendment to exempt specific areas. Therefore, those who are implementing it should ensure that they bridge all those gaps through their implementation modalities. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, I would like to give information to the Government Chief Whip, who is representing the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. For that person going to sell that undenatured spirit to get a waiver, he or she must present evidence indicating that he or she has been one of those registered to produce sanitizers for COVID-19. 

If you are just a waragi man from Walukuba and you come bear handed, you will get nothing. Also, if you have registered and sell the spirits to the man from Walukuba, you would have committed a crime. By the way, URA has the capacity to know what you produce and what output you are expected to get, in terms of the input and output model. If you have high input and less output, there is a system that can show that you must have sold some of the spirit to the black market. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for irrigating my information.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Members, are we clear now? Can we now proceed? We do not need to over legislate. I think the principle is picked and we can comfortably proceed. I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the chairperson of the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

The Title 

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, with the amendment of clause 1, the new clause collapses. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. I now put the question that the title to this Bill remains as title to this Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Title, agreed to

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.41
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report thereto. I put a question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE 

5.42
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2020” and passed it with amendments to clause 1 regarding the commencement date and clause 2 regarding the definition to do further clarification. I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.42
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READ READING

5.43
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) (No. 2) Bill, 2020” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Excise Duty (Amendment) (No. 2) Bill, 2020 be read a third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) ACT, 2020”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations! Honourable minister, thank you. The Chairperson and the committee, thank you for processing this. Honourable members, thank you for this debate. It was involving. We need to engage in this spirit so as to pass laws that are beneficial to the targeted group of people. 

Are we able to handle another Bill?  - Honourable members, the time being what it is now, we will not be able to proceed any further. We started in the morning. Thank you very much for coming in the morning to enable us process this business this far. This House now stands adjourned until Tuesday, 9 March at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 5.44 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 9 March 2021 at 2.00 p.m.)
