Wednesday, 22 May 2013

Parliament met at 2.22 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. We should work hard to bring this Session of Parliament to an end today, though that will depend on whether we will be able to finish the business before us. You have looked at the Order Paper for today; it is quite long but do-able. I know your spirit and I also know my spirit; we will be able to move as far as we can in terms of completing the business lined up on the Order Paper.

On the 15th of this month, Parliament received a report from the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs regarding the issue of amnesty. During that sitting, two issues were raised. One was about the revocation of the instrument that terminated the application of Part II of that Act. Parliament made a resolution on that. The second aspect was on the extension of the Amnesty Act in total. This Parliament also made a recommendation on this, which was passed by a resolution of this House. 

Towards the end of the sitting, I will make a statement in relation to this matter. This is because there still seems to be some difficulty in its implementation, arising from what the Learned Deputy Attorney-General cited that the minister has no powers to reinstate Part II as it had been repealed. I will make a formal ruling on this subject at the end of this sitting so that members of the Executive and the rest of the members of the public are guided on what steps should be taken to ensure the Amnesty Act is handled in accordance with the parliamentary resolution.

Honourable members, I will use my prerogative to alter the Order Paper to allow the discussion on some of the issues that need to be handled urgently before we conclude business for this Session of Parliament. Thank you very much.

2.26
MS CHRISTINE ABIA BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national interest regarding Makerere University. You will recall that over the years, Makerere University has been rearranging its faculties into colleges and schools, which are supposed to be headed by principals. As a result, a search committee was instituted to identify suitable candidates for the posts of principals. 

After their work, the search committee presented its findings to the Senate. The Senate later released those findings and the opinions therein on who the successful candidates would be for the positions of principals and deputy principals to Makerere University Council. The Council later instructed the Chancellor of Makerere University to appoint those who they deemed fit after interviews took place. Unfortunately, to date, the Chancellor has not lived to his expectations for three of the colleges namely, the College of Agriculture and Environment Science, the College of Veterinary Sciences, and the College of Humanities and Social Sciences.

As you are aware, when I raised this yesterday, the responsible minister was not in the House and you asked me to raise it while she is present. Now that she is here, I would like to ask her to urgently respond to this issue. This is important because these colleges now face a leadership vacuum. Much of the financial administration duties have become difficult. Those in acting positions were supposed to be relieved of these offices by 31st January this year. However, to date, they are still transacting business in those offices illegally.

I would like to implore the minister, who is present in the House, to take this matter seriously because we are already in a dilemma. I am saying this because I have information to the effect that huge sums of monies are being removed from faculty, school and college accounts by those not legitimately supposed to transact business in those offices. 

May I, through you, Mr Speaker, implore the Minister of Education and Sports to react to these matters? I lay on the Table results of the candidates who actually successfully passed but some were denied the opportunity of being appointed principals and deputy principals.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did I hear you say you are going to ask for permission or you are going to lay them on the Table?

MS BAKO: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Search Committee for the Principals and Deputy Principals for Science-based Colleges presented to Senate of Makerere University. The report is dated 20 February 2013. I beg to lay.

Mr Speaker, since the minister is here and matters of financial mismanagement in our public universities are a big concern to the ordinary taxpayers, I pray that she treats this as a matter of urgency. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, you will recall that in our rules, we have provisions that could take care of this situation better than the ones we are using now on matters of urgent public importance. Some of the issues could be more comprehensively handled through questions for oral answer. However, because of the reluctance of the Executive in responding to issues that Members usually raise, these questions pile up with no responses. That is how Members now report using this approach. It is because they want answers, which they cannot get through the procedure of questions for oral answer. 

If we improve on this, we will help management of the House in processing business that comes to the House. This can only be done when information is brought forward. We are now adopting this method because you have left us with no option. You people on the frontbench of Government, you leave the Speaker with no option but to allow Members raise such issues, which should have come in form of questions for oral answer. We need some improvement in this area, Leader of Government Business, if the rules are going to be observed properly.

THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take note of your statement and I also would like to undertake that improvements will be made. We would, of course, like to have these questions in writing in good time so that we are able to reply. As I said, I have taken note of that. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. We take this seriously. That is an undertaking from the Leader of Government Business. Those questions are presented in writing through the Clerk’s Office and served to the ministers responsible, who are required to respond in only three days. Now I have questions that are a year old, which is not very proper.

2.33
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Jessica Alupo): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Christine Bako, for finally shifting the discussion with me from Muni University to Makerere University. She is really national now.

I promise that I will follow up the matter with the Chancellor of Makerere University, with the urgency that it deserves. I should be able to get back to hon. Bako, and indeed to colleagues, about the matter. Thank you.

2.34
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking further clarification from the honourable Minister of Education. You are aware that this House passed a motion concerning the investigation into the mismanagement of Kyambogo University and the case was handled by the Office of the IGG.

Last week, the top management of Kyambogo University were arrested and charged in courts of law. At the moment, the same officers are back in office and comfortably carrying out their daily duties, despite the fact that their case is already in court, and the issue of mismanagement of the finances is at its best. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable Minister on how she has handled this case, allowing the top management of Kyambogo University, who have been charged in courts of law and are under investigation, to be back in their offices. This is being done well aware that the taxpayers’ money is actually at stake and students are about to riot. I would like to seek that clarification.

MS ALUPO: Mr Speaker, I would like to extend my thanks to hon. Anywar for the concern about the status of the management of Kyambogo University, and I share your sentiments.

This House knows that the matters of Kyambogo University were debated here after the chairperson of the Committee on Education and Sports made a presentation. This very House pronounced itself that the IGG and other competent departments of Government should investigate the confusion that is in Kyambogo University. As we speak, the IGG has given us the impression that by the end of this month, her report will be out on matters concerning her investigations. 

I know I am not a learned friend but I have always been educated that discussing matters which are before courts of law is sub judice. So, maybe I would seek your guidance, Mr Speaker, on whether I should talk about matters that are in courts of law, involving the key leaders and managers of Kyambogo University. 

I would also request that maybe the Attorney-General should guide us on who should take action in line with the interdiction, if the occasion so demands. As you can see, my position is that the matters concerning the managers of Kyambogo University were taken to the courts of law and as a ministry, we are waiting for the report of the IGG. The communication between our office and the IGG is that we should stay any other interaction with Kyambogo University until her report is out. (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, the time is now for this House to be serious –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And this House is serious.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I expected the Minister of Education to know that we have a government and where you have a government, there is action all the time. If there is a pending matter in a court of law, it does not mean that Government becomes functionless. Is the honourable Member of Parliament and Minister of Education aware and in order to give an impression that when a matter is in court and an emergency comes up consequently, no action can be taken because the matter is pending in court? Is she in order to give an impression that Government does not exist? What is she talking about? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the question of sub judice that was raised by the minister was in relation to whether she can respond substantially on matters that are already in court. That is what she was talking about. But the subject matter of the question was: why are they still in office? I do not think that one is in court. That is the question that remains outstanding. Why are they still working? Why are they still in office when they have already been charged in court? That was the question. If you have an answer to that, Madam Minister, please give it.

MS ALUPO: Mr Speaker, first of all, I would like the hon. Ken- Lukyamuzi, the man, to know that because Government is working and Government is in action, the examinations in Kyambogo University are progressing smoothly. 

On how and why they are still in office, the Office of the IGG –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Order. Order. Order!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you just have to say it once and once I have heard, it does not matter if anybody else has heard. Once the Speaker has heard your point of order, it is finished. You do not have to repeat it again and again.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You ruled on this case, Mr Speaker, and guided the House and the honourable Minister that other matters can be handled later but the issue at hand is: why, despite the fact that the officials of Kyambogo University have been taken to court, are they still in office carrying on their duties as if there is no problem? Is the minister then in order to dodge the guidance you have given and meander around the issue by giving us a different answer? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the question is very specific: Are they still in office? If so, why, when they are in court and charged? That is the issue. (Mr Kwizera rose_) Are you the minister? Information is for the minister to allow. 

MR KWIZERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister has no capacity to interdict the people who are not appointed by her. The people in Kyambogo are appointed by the council and it is the council, which is in court. Instead, the minister will be telling us what action she is going to take on the council that would have been the one to interdict the officers in court.

MS ALUPO: Mr Speaker, it is true that the officials were taken to court and through a representative of the ministry to the council, we got a report that they appeared before the Anti-corruption Court and they have reported to work. We are also told that the university council is seeking for further guidance from the Office of the IGG on whether they should stay in office or they should be interdicted. That is the report we have in the ministry.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should now move to the Order Paper. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE CLOSURE OF MEDIA HOUSES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you ready with the statement? Let us move to the next item; we will come back to this.

LAYING OF REPORTS

RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PARLIAMENTARY BUDGET COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER COMPRISING THE MEDIUM TERM MACRO ECONOMIC PLAN AND PROGRAMMES FOR SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT FOR FISCAL YEAR 2013/2014 – 2017/2018 AND THE INDICATIVE PRELIMINARY REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FRAMEWORK OF THE GOVERNMENT FOR FISCAL YEAR 2013/2014

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the committee chairperson? The report is ready and I received a copy. Is there any committee member who is ready just to lay the document on the Table? Let us move to the next item. Honourable members, we will defer item 5 and instead go to item 6.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 1 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/2013

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the committee chairperson? 

DR LULUME BAYIGGA: Mr Speaker, if all the committee chairpersons are not around, I have a minority report I attached and I am ready to proceed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But a minority report is attached to the main report. It is the one that opens for the minority report. (Laughter) Let us go to the next item. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE BUILDING CONTROL BILL, 2012

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you will recall that we processed this Bill up to clause 37 and we adopted clause 37. Let us now go to the next clause.

Clause 38

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 38 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, we agreed that we had an amendment on clause 33 – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We are on clause 39.

MR SSEMUGABA: We agreed that our amendment goes to clause 39 to include the phrase “within five working days”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, where is it going to be inserted?

MR SSEMUGABA: Clause 39(3) should read as follows:  “A Building Control Officer shall forward to the Building Committee for review, within five working days, a copy of each application for a permit made under this section and his or her decision on that application.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, it is true we had a discussion on clause 33 and an amendment was proposed that the committee deemed it necessary that it would properly fit if it was put under clause 39. That is now the amendment being proposed by the committee chairperson. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I agree with the chairperson’s proposal except that after the discussion, you remember we proposed the insertion of the expression “after his or her decision”, to be more specific from when we start counting the five days.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So can you formulate it then?

MR RUHINDI: Well, his formulation was not mine; mine was supposed to be at the end. Mine was: “A Building Control Officer shall forward to the Building Committee for review, a copy of each application for a permit made under this section, and his or her decision on that application within five working days after his or her decision.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think that takes care of everything now. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 39, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 40 

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, under clause 40(1) (b) we would like to insert just after the word, “disabilities”, the phrase, “as provided for in the Accessibility Standards”. Justification: to ensure compliance with the Accessibility Standards in all building operations.

MR BYANDALA: I concede. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The Minister has conceded to that amendment. I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 39, as amended, agreed to.

Clause, 41 agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, in clause 45(1) we propose to replace, “one thousand currency points” in the fifth line with “two hundred eighty eight currency points”. Justification: to harmonise it with the Law Revision (Fines and other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters) Act, No.8 of 2008. It provides a fine of two currency points as equivalent to a period of imprisonment for one month. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, that is for harmonisation. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, in clause 45(2), insert a new paragraph (d) to read as follows: “(d) failure to take out insurance for the workers”. Justification: to require the contractor to insure the workers at a site. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is the amendment proposed by our committee; I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 45, as amended, agreed to.

Clause46

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, in clause 46, National Building Code, insert just after paragraph (d) the following paragraphs: 
(e) 	Mechanical installations; 
(f) 	Fire and safety; 
(g) 	Geotechnical report; and 
(h) 	Accessibility standards. 

The justification is: 
    • To provide distinctly for mechanical installations (mechanical lifts, elevators, air conditioning etc) as integral parts of building services that should be considered based on current practices. 

    • To set up fire and safety requirements to provide for adequate protection for occupants in buildings.

    • To provide for a geotechnical report on the soil type and conditions, to guide the designer in choosing an acceptable building type to construct in a particular area. 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, I am of the view that introducing the above is not necessary since standards for mechanical installations, fire and safety, and accessibility standards will be covered under section 46(2) (a), building standards. Geotechnical surveys and symmetric codes of practice of structural design will be covered under section 46(2) (b), structural design. So I propose we leave them in 46(2) (a) and (b).  

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I also agree with the Minister that the new proposal by the chairman of the committee is catered for in (a) and (b). However, I want to insert a paragraph (e) to read, “the postal code”. We are implementing the postal code project where all homes and buildings must have postal code addresses. If we do not include it in this Bill, then the postal code policy may not have an enabling law because it is just a policy and not a law. So I would like to include it here as (e) to read, “The postal code numbering”. 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, my view is that it is not good practice to cast law in stone as this can be a problem. The minister has powers to issue statutory instruments when and if necessary. Instead of casting it in the law now, it is better to have it dealt with in the code where the minister has powers to easily move with the times. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, those are the positions. Mr Chairman, do you want to withdraw your amendment or you go by it and we take a vote on it? 

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, the committee wanted emphasis and for these things to come out clearly. So, I cannot concede on that. Let us take a vote on it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, I will put the matter to vote on the addition of (e), (f), (g) – 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, what my chairman is saying is the same as what I am saying. It is only a question of where to insert it. He is saying that it should be in the main law while I say that we should put it as an appendix, under these codes which are easily changed by the Minister that will not require coming back here. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: For me I am putting it in the question. Honourable members, the question is for an amendment to allow mechanical installations, fire and safety, geotechnical report and accessibility standards as extensions of 46(2), running from (e) to (h). I put the question to the amendment of the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment on the postal code. Honourable member, are you holding to it or not? For the postal code, there is no need for a justification; we will just take it to vote. I put the question to the amendment for the inclusion of “postal code” as one of the things that should go in the National Building Code. I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, we propose an amendment to insert a new sub clause (3) to read as follows: “For the avoidance of doubt, the Minister shall establish the building code under this section not later than six months after the commencement of this Act.” The justification is that we wanted him to expeditiously put this code in place so that the Building Control Act becomes very useful to Ugandans.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, the timeframe for you is six months. 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairperson, I have no objection to that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment from the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 46, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I propose an amendment to delete clause 48. Clause 48 reads, “The Minister may after consultation with the Board, give directions of a policy nature in writing to a Building Committee and the Building Committee shall comply with those directions.”

The justification is that the board should be the one to deal with the building committees. The building committees report to the board. If there is anything of a policy nature, the minister should communicate to the board. If you look at clause 9 about the functions of the board, it is also an appellate in case any person is dissatisfied with a decision of a building committee. This clause 48 as it is would presuppose that a minister ordinarily can direct a building committee through the board. I do not find it useful for a minister to deal directly with a building committee on policy issues rather than through the board. I propose that we delete the clause and we let the board deal with policy matters directly with the committee. 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, operationally, we have found it easier for the minister to handle, and the minister is in charge of the overall policy you are talking about; the board is acting on behalf of the minister. So, we are of the view that it should remain as indicated in the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The question is: why should the minister direct the committee rather than the board?

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, the minister is overall, and at the same time it is well indicated that in consultation with the board, the board gives all technical advice to the minister and the minister acts.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Learned Attorney-General, what is the usual drafting of these kinds of clauses? Does the minister direct a committee or the board on policy matters?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, that is why we create these boards as semi-quasi government autonomous bodies. The idea is to make them self-accounting and have a semblance of reasonably apparent independence. Therefore when you say “direction”, more often than not the ministers should always have supervisory functions and roles over boards; otherwise, it will be like a department within his or her ministry. However, in case it is the wish of this Parliament to have the minister direct, then he or she should be directing the board and not the committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: He should be directing the board and not the committee. In the usual drafting that I have come across, on policy matters the minister directs the board and not some other small group in the kitchen. 

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to clarify that there is no way the minister can direct the committee because the committee is appointed by the board and the committee reports to the board. Moreover, it is the minister who appoints the board and the board reports to the minister. So, the minister directing the committee to furnish any information to him may be under-looking the powers and the role of the board. Thank you, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, your policy directions should go to the board. That is the proposal.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, I have no objection. I will be directing the board. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, what will the redrafted version be? “The Minister may give directions of a policy nature in writing to the Board and the Board shall comply with the directions.” Would that be the spirit? I will put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 48, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 49, agreed to.

Clause 50, agreed to.

Clause 51, agreed to.

Clause 52, agreed to.

Clause 53, agreed to.

Clause 54, agreed to.

Clause 55, agreed to.

Schedule 1, agreed to.

Schedule 2, agreed to.

Schedule 3

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I have an amendment to schedule 3, which unfortunately will also cause amendment- I want to request and put the House on notice that I intend to have a recommittal arising from the amendment on schedule 3(2) on the quorum and decisions of the building committee. 

Schedule 3(2) reads, “The quorum for a meeting of a Building Committee is two-thirds of the members, including at least one member of the District Executive Committee in the case of a District Building Committee or one member…”- I want to introduce the word “executive” between “or one” and “member”. “… or one executive member of the urban authority.”

The justification is that for district building committees, there is a requirement for at least one member of the district executive committee to be part of the quorum. That should also apply to the urban building committees; at least one member of the urban executive committee should constitute part of the quorum.

Mr Chairman, I said that there was need for recommittal because this affects specifically clause 28 on the establishment of building committees. When you read clause 28 (2), on the composition of the building committees, you realise that we do not see a member of the district executive committee in the case of a district building committee yet they are supposed to be part of the quorum mentioned in schedule 3 (2).

I hereby recommit clause 28 to take care of the participation of the district executive committee member in the case of a district building committee, and the participation of a member of the executive committee of the urban authority in the case of an urban building committee.
On recommitting this –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, let us handle that when we reach there.

DR EPETAIT: Okay, but I just wanted to put the House on notice that there is another clause that we intend to recommit.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The notice is already there.

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, I concede to the recommittal because it is indicated that in case of a district, there should be a member of the executive committee and the same applies for urban authorities. That is just self-explanatory.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, I now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR JOHN OKOT: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. I think we have to consider schedule 3, 5(4) because it says, “For purposes of determining whether there is a quorum, a member withdrawing from a meeting or one who is not taking part in a meeting under paragraph (3) (b) shall be treated as being present.” 

You realise that we are now talking about two-thirds. Supposing that person is the one who makes the quorum of two-thirds and there is voting to take place? I propose that we should rephrase this to read, “shall be treated as being absent” for voting purposes, so that we do not encourage issues of conflict of interest.

MR SSEMUGABA: On that, Mr Chairman, I will need the indulgence of the Attorney-General.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, can somebody who is absent constitute quorum?

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, with quorum a person must be present. In the circumstances, there is need to amend this. This matter might create problems.

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. When you read it from 5 (1), you realise that the member being referred to is present but has got interests in the matter in the contract. He is among those who are present but when it comes to the time of voting, that is when such a member can be counted as absent. 

The spirit of the Bill was that if such member has been part of the proceedings but at some point this member disclosed their interest in the matter under consideration, such a member should be considered to have been present. The issue in 5(4) is not that the member is absent; the member is around, taken part in the deliberations but disclosed his interest under 5(1) and so cannot participate in the voting. That is how it all comes up.

I want to believe that the framers of the law had a reason behind putting in place such a provision. They did not want to stifle the work of the committee just because one of the members who has been present and formed a quorum has moved out because of the interests he has.

MR MAJEGERE: Mr Chairman, I just want to inform you about a precedent that was set in Parliament here on an issue that was supposed to be voted on. Voting did not take place on this issue because there was no quorum because some members walked out. Names of members who signed in the book were read out and although they were not physically present, they had signed in the attendance register and they were believed to be present. In the circumstances, much as they were not around, a quorum was constituted.

MR RUHINDI: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. This matter of quorum is common knowledge. It is based on the total number of people, and that is also true for Parliament. When you read schedule 3 (2) on quorum and decisions, it talks about the quorum for a meeting of a building committee of two-thirds of the members including at least one member of the district executive committee in the case of a district building committee, or one member of the urban planning and development committee in the case an urban building committee.

When you read (2), it says, “All questions proposed at a meeting of the building committee shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the members present…” That is for purposes of making a decision. You are not going to take a decision in this House, for example, and say that even those who have walked out are part of the majority present. So, quorum, even for Parliament, is based on Members of Parliament – (Interjections) – Not present, please; quorum of Parliament is not based on Members present, otherwise we would be in problems in this Parliament. It is based on the total number of members. After you have established the quorum, then the decisions must be taken by those present and it is not inclusive of those who may have withdrawn.

This 5(4) is the one that my friend from Agago commented about, and it seems to be causing problems. A person who has withdrawn from the proceedings can be taken to be part of the quorum because such a person is a member. However, for purposes of reaching a decision, why should that person be taken as part of the decision-making process after they have withdrawn? What is being said here is for purposes of making the quorum and not for purposes of taking a decision. That is my understanding of 5 (4).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, what is your advice?

MR RUHINDI: My advice is that we leave it as it is.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. I will put the question to that.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am still not satisfied with the submission by the Attorney-General. This particular provision raises a lot of questions in the sense that first, this person takes part in the deliberations and he is supposed to withdraw when they reach the voting stage. However, during the process of deliberations, this same person can influence colleagues and in the end the decision can be in his favour. So, I would suggest that we provide a clause that will provide for declaration of interest before-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This is the one. If you look at 5, it is on disclosure of interest of members. That is what the section is about.

MR ATIKU: So, if someone has declared his interest then he should not take part in the deliberations.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: They should not form the quorum?

MR ATIKU: Exactly.

MR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, I want to support the Attorney-General because on several occasions, we have some people who can come here and we sit with them and when it comes to voting, they refuse to vote. Do you say there is no quorum if I have abstained? 

I was of the view that we leave it the way it is because somebody may be available but may not be willing to vote at all. It means that when it comes to issues of quorum, he is there. His vote cannot be counted but the man forms the quorum. Honourable members and chairperson, the person is present, so let us support the Attorney-General. If I have not voted but I am present, does it mean the quorum is not there? It is there.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, there are two processes going on and they are independent of each other. One is participation in the deliberations and decision-making and the other one is determination of quorum. If somebody has disclosed his interest and does not participate, he has done that perfectly well but he should be counted as being present in the formation of a quorum because he is there. He should not participate because of his interest in that issue but he is present. So, for determination of quorum, he should be taken as somebody who is present.

MR KAFEERO: Mr Chairperson, in most cases we want to know that there is quorum for purposes of voting. So if this member who has been around and participated during the deliberations has declared his interest and therefore walks out, that implies that he has undressed himself of the powers to vote. So, there is no way you can say again that he is part of the quorum.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But can’t that person abstain and be part of the quorum?

MR BIRAARO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Normally, when we hold meetings of whatever nature and a member develops an interest in the matter at hand, the member will put up his hand and declare to the chairman and other members that interest. If you are awarding jobs, for example, he may say his son is the one you are going to discuss and he will not be part of the discussion about his son.

Secondly, he normally writes a chit to the chairman that when we reach this issue, I have an interest and for matters of transparency, I seek not to participate but I will be bound by what others have said. So I think the clause should stay because he is still a member and he has declared, in good faith, that he will be bound by what others say even when he does not participate in the deliberations and voting. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I will put the question to the preposition of restructuring 5(4) in schedule 3. There is a proposed amendment. I will put the question as to whether it should stay as it is. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This is the definition/interpretation clause. Are there any matters that we have not defined or that are not clear? Can I put the question to clause 2? Had we adopted the issue of accessibility standards? Did we adopt them already? I think we adopted access and accessibility standards, so we made amendments to the interpretation clause. We adopted those ones already. So I think we put the question to clause 2, as amended. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME


3.29
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The motion is for the House to resume to enable the Committee of the whole House to report thereto. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.30
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House considered a Bill entitled “the Building Control Bill, 2012” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.31
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to move that the House adopts the report from the Committee of the whole House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I beg to re-commit clause 28 of the Bill to provide for the membership of the building committees of the districts and urban authorities and also to re-introduce another clause to provide for the qualifications of a building control officer. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was that second bit part of the prayers you made at committee stage? You are now extending the ambit of what you had sought from the House.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, at the time I was trying to explain the need to re-commit, just as I was beginning to explain the need for qualifications you said that during the re-committal we would handle it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, justify your motion. Is the motion seconded? Yes, it is seconded by Jinja Municipality, Kyadondo East – all the eastern people are supporting it. (Laughter)

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, under clause 28 I beg to introduce (2) (k) to read as follows: “A member of the district executive committee”. The justification is: to be in tandem with schedule 3, part 2 on quorum and decisions of the building committee, where for any building committee meeting there must be a member of the district executive committee.

Consequentially, again on clause 28(2) (f), I beg to add to “the officer responsible for engineering”, the words, “who shall be a secretary to the committee”. The justification is that whereas we have designated the chairperson of a building committee, the law remains silent on who the secretary of the building committee should be. I think it would be smarter to provide it within the law.

In addition, if you look at the membership of the urban authority, it says in clause 28(4) (c), “an architect appointed by the District Service Commission”. I beg to propose that we delete (4) (c) because under (4) (b) an architect is already covered. It says, “a category of officers in the Urban Service similar to the category of officers in the District Council referred to in subsection (2) (b) to (i)”. Now when you look under (2) (b) to (i), (2) (i) says, “an officer responsible for architecture.” That means it is already covered and that makes (4) (c) redundant. So, I propose a deletion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for re-committal of specifically clause 28 of the Bill. I put the question.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, I am rising under rule 127(1) and (2) to also re-commit clause 38. On that clause, I argued sometime back that when I calculated 60 months, it came to five years. That is the time you are expected to have completed your house. If the house remains incomplete, clause 38(2) will require you to re-apply for permission to extend the period and that clause pre-supposes that – (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, is the Minister for Public Service in order to sleep in Parliament? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is very human to be in deep contemplation and meditation. (Laughter) It is hardly human to be in deep contemplation and meditation and to have your eyes open. So, I have not seen any Member who has been asleep; I have only seen Members who are in deep contemplation. (Laughter)

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, the last time we considered clause 38(2), I was very uncomfortable with the words, “shall apply”. It says, “Notwithstanding subsection (1), where a person, due to unforeseen circumstances, is unable to comply with the period of time specified in subsection (1), he or she shall apply to the Building Committee for extension of the time within which to complete the building operation and the Building Committee shall not unreasonably withhold the grant of extension.” If I applied – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you argued that point and it was rejected by the House. You remember that we took a vote on it and it was rejected. Do you think there is a change of mind now and that they are going to accept it? Well, I will put the question for re-committing clause 38 so that you come and explain when we are on clause 38. Okay? 

The motion the Member has moved is for re-commission of clause 38 of the Bill. I put the question to the motion for re-committal.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a motion for re-commission of clause 28. It is clause 28; you cannot re-commit anything else but what is in the Bill. I will put the question to the motion for re-committal of clause 28.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE BUILDING CONTROL BILL, 2012

Clause 28 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I beg to move an amendment to clause 28(2) to insert immediately after paragraph (j) a new paragraph (k), which should read as follows: “a member of the district executive committee.” The justification – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think this matter was justified; it appears in schedule 3 but it does not appear in clause 28. I will put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I beg to add to clause 28(2) (f), after the word “engineering”, the words “who shall be the secretary to the committee”. I think I already gave the justification. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, you gave the justification. The amendment is to nominate the secretary to the committee to be the person responsible for engineering.  

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I feel that that takes away the flexibility of the building committee to regulate its procedure. First of all, if you look at 29(2), it says, “A Building Committee may, in writing, delegate to a competent person, any function conferred upon it by or under this Act, other than the functions referred to in sections 29(1) (b) and 41.” The duty to take minutes or to call meetings, for example, are one of those other functions for which a building committee can delegate a person to handle. 

If you look at schedule 2, part 6, it says, “Board may regulate its procedure. Subject to this Act, the Board may regulate its own procedure or any other matter relating to its meetings.” So I think –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But that is the board, not the committee. 

MR RUHINDI: That is the board. The committee is under 29(2) - delegation of an officer. It gives flexibility in the handling of its matters – to look for a person, to delegate a person - rather than making it rigid. 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, this is a technical matter; building is a technical matter. So for purposes of clear records, I thought it must have a secretary who is technical, and who should therefore be the engineer or the architect or the physical planner, to take the minutes. I do not know what the chairperson’s opinion is, but it is important to designate a clear secretary to the committee. 

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, I think it is prudent to leave that job to the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) who is the chief executive. I thought we should mention the CAO to designate anybody whom he or she feels can take minutes. Let us give the responsibility to the Chief Administrative Officer. I beg to propose. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is now a second proposal. Is there a need for a secretary to the committee? Yes, there is. Now the question is: who will that secretary be? The Attorney-General says it can be by a delegated function under 29(2). The chairman is saying the Chief Administrative Officer, being a member of the committee, should be able to appoint somebody. 

MR BIRAARO: Mr Chairman, the committee chairman’s submission has reminded me of how the districts are being run. You find there is a district tender board, a district service commission and then council itself. It is the Chief Administrative Officer who looks amongst his staff to appoint or delegate a secretary to the tender board and a secretary to any other board or committee. So I think it would be prudent here for it to be left at the discretion of the overall, either of the urban authority or of a district. 

If we appoint anyone here, because all these are qualified personnel there will be conflict on the criteria used to choose the engineer and not the physical planner. So, it is better to leave it to the core administration to appoint a relevant person. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, in schedule 3, paragraph 6 it says that the building committee may regulate its procedure. Schedule 2 was about the board but schedule 3 is about the committee. It says, “Subject to this Act, the Building Committee may regulate its own procedure or any other matter relating to its meetings.” I suppose that includes the appointment of a secretary. Would that take care of it? 

DR EPETAIT: I concede on that one.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, thank you. The second amendment is withdrawn and we have approved the first amendment. 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that we delete 28(4)(c) because it is redundant; it is already taken care of under (4)(b). 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think that is straight forward. I put the question to that. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, just for the record, the qualification of the building control officer is not mentioned in the Bill. That is why I was attempting to have it placed here as a new 34. Unfortunately, I do not know how to proceed and yet we need to have certain basic – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You will have to bring an amendment later. I put the question to clause 28, as amended.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 28, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.48
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Ibrahim Byandala): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is for the House to resume to enable the committee of the whole House to report thereto. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THAT COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.49
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Ibrahim Byandala): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the recommitted clause 28 of the Bill entitled, “the Building Control Bill, 2012” and passed it with amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.49
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Ibrahim Byandala): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE BUILDING CONTROL BILL, 2012

3.49
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Ibrahim Byandala): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “the Building Control Bill, 2012” be read the third time and do pass. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled “the Building Control Bill, 2012” be read the third time and do pass. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE BUILDING CONTROL ACT, 2012”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister; congratulations, Mr Chairman. (Applause) 

Can we go back to the issues that we deferred at the beginning. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.52
MR BAKER SSALI (NRM, Buikwe County West, Buikwe): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Budget Committee on the National Budget Framework Paper 2012/2013. It is dated 21 May 2013. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the report of the Budget Committee on those framework papers. Thank you.

MR SSALI: Mr Speaker, with me I also have a report of the Committee on the Budget on Supplementary Schedule No.1, dated 17 May 2013.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that has not been called. It was only the first one that was called. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.53
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Hilary Onek): Mr Speaker, while copies are being distributed, can I read? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, honourable minister.

MR ONEK: Mr Speaker, the on-going search by the Police of the premises of the Daily Monitor Publications and the Red Pepper Publications is part of Police investigations into the letter that appeared in the Daily Monitor of 7 May 2013, purportedly written by Gen. Sejusa to the Director-General, Internal Security Organisation, and copied to a number of senior security officers. It is also part of an investigation on documents purportedly originating from Gen. Sejusa that were published by the Red Pepper. 

We wish to state from the outset that in conducting this search, indeed in carrying out this investigation, the Police have acted professionally and within the law. At the Daily Monitor Publications, the interest of the Police and other sister agencies is to get the letter that was published by the Daily Monitor; and given its security classification, investigate how the Daily Monitor got it. Also to investigate possible violation of the law that may have been committed especially in respect to the Official Secrets Act and the UPDF Act.

Logically, at the beginning of the investigation, the interest of the Police was to establish the authenticity of the letter published by the Daily Monitor. The Police inquired from the Director-General ISO, who stated that he never received the letter. The Chief of Defence Forces as well as the Director-General External Security Organisation, to whom the letter was supposed to have been copied, also did not receive their copies. 

Evidently at that stage, it was only the Daily Monitor who was in possession of the letter. Accordingly, the CID then summoned the Managing Director of the Daily Monitor Publications and the journalists who authored the story in which the letter was published to assist in getting the letter as well as disclose the source of the letter. They refused to co-operate with CID. Subsequently, the CID applied for and got a court order under section 38 of the Press and Journalist Act to compel them to co-operate. 

In addition, the CID got information that the Daily Monitor Publication was in possession of other documents in relation to the contents of the letter, which they intended to publish. They then, in addition, sought and got from court a search warrant to search the premises of the Daily Monitor Publications. The search warrant was served and duly acknowledged by the Managing Director of the Daily Monitor. The search then began on 20 May 2013 and is still on-going. 

I wish to clarify that the Daily Monitor Publications, KFM and Dembe FM have not been closed- (Interjections)- They have been asked to halt operations to facilitate the search and investigations on their premises. Indeed, from the moment the search began, the premises were declared a scene of crime under the custody of the Police according to the law. Consequently, the Monitor Publications, KFM and Dembe FM, which were on the premises, had to be asked to temporarily stop operations so that routine activities and traffic in the premises associated with their business do not interfere with Police work.

The search will go on until the letter and those other documents relating to the letter are found. Police have asked the management of the Daily Monitor to co-operate so that they expedite the exercise. Indeed, the duration of the search depends on whether or not the Daily Monitor co-operates with the Police in their investigation. To date, they have declined to co-operate. 

We should point out that this is not the first time the Police is carrying out a search. In the course of investigation, Police sometimes finds it necessary, as in this case, to carry out searches. Incidentally, even in this particular case, the Police earlier carried out a search at the offices of Gen. Sejusa in the presence of his lawyers without any incident and the premises remained a scene of crime. It is therefore surprising that anybody should make issue of this routine procedure in the investigation when it comes to searching media houses. Are media houses governed by laws other than those that the rest of the society are governed by? 

On the Red Pepper Publications, the Police has initiated investigation into the publication of documents purportedly originating from Gen. Sejusa and published in successive stories in the Red Pepper for possible violation of criminal laws. Similar to the case of the Daily monitor, the Police sought and got a search warrant to look for this and other related documents as well as stories which violate the laws of Uganda; unless otherwise, the Police is operating within the law of the country. 

Noteworthy, while the Press and Journalist Act, Section 2, gives the right to publish a newspaper, that right is not absolute. It is qualified by Section 3 of the Act, which provides that the right does not absolve any person from complying with other laws. Even without that section, the rights to publish a newspaper cannot mean that journalists and publishers in doing so are free to commit crimes. The Police are committed to the rule of law and to respect the rights and freedoms of the media as well as other persons and groups. However, at the same time, we have a constitutional mandate to ensure that the laws of Uganda are respected and upheld. 

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, let me emphasise and assure all of you that the Daily Monitor, KFM, Dembe FM and the Red Pepper newspaper have not been closed by Government. I beg to report. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the statement from the Minister of Internal Affairs. I can see all of you want to speak to this matter, but you need to bear in mind that we have very limited time for this matter. Ordinarily, this debate should take only 30 minutes. Now that more than 30 Members have shown interest in speaking to this statement, it means each Member will have to take less than one minute. This will help us use our time to the maximum. Let us use two minutes each.

4.03
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a very serious matter because it touches on the freedoms of those who consume media content and the media freedoms themselves.

I have read and listened to the minister’s statement. He has said that the censure of media content is provided for in the laws but he has only cited one law, which is, the Press and Journalists Act of Uganda. The minister needs to know that in this country, there are various laws that deal with issues of the media. The other time, I cited laws such as the UCC Act, the Interception of Communications Act and the Electronic Media Act. All these laws provide for the freedom of the media.

From that background, can the minister take us through the law upon which they based to secure a search warrant to conduct a search at the Daily Monitor Publications and other media houses?

Further, can the minister lay on the Table a copy of that search warrant? Can the minister also tell the House where the monitoring centre that is supposed to track and monitor communication is based in this country? I am asking this because search warrants should have been obtained after a report from such a centre. Three, can the minister tell the House the meaning of a search warrant – (Member timed out_)

4.05
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for presenting this statement. However, I would like to point out that the minister failed to answer the fundamental question that this House asked him to respond to yesterday. The fundamental issue was: if the magistrates’ court issues a search warrant, there are limitations regarding search warrants. A search warrant cannot permit you or the Police to stop the operations of a media house; it cannot! 

You are now talking about halting operations, but how do you stop the operations of a media house? It is now coming to three days and you are just saying the search will continue until the said letter and other documents relating to it are found. What are those other documents? I am asking this because your junior minister just talked about a search warrant for a letter. Now that you have gone beyond that letter to search for other documents, can you tell this House and the country what those other documents are?

On NTV yesterday, I watched Mr Felix Kaweesa. When he was asked to tell the people when the Daily Monitor would be opened, he actually mentioned that they were no longer looking only for the said letter but for other information. So, can you also tell this House whether or not your search warrant talked about the said letter and other information?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure in relation to Section 9 of the Interception of Communications Act, which describes the scope of a warrant. The minister said they went to court, and there is nothing illegal about that, but if only the warrant could be laid on the Table, it would help this Parliament to discern its content and it would save us time. 

The procedural matter I rise on, therefore, is whether the minister can lay that warrant on the Table now so that we can discern it in relation to the law.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am sure if the honourable minister has the warrant, he will seek the opportunity to do that immediately.

4.08
MR LATIF SEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to say that the closure of media houses is of great concern not only to us as Ugandans, but the entire world. This record has been captured globally, though we keep saying we are trying our best to get more investors into Uganda. What transpired yesterday in the international press leaves a lot to be desired.

Mr Speaker, I have three questions to ask the minister. The minister talked about the search warrant. We have been informed that that search warrant was intended to enable the Police look for the said letter in hard copy. That warrant did not give the Police permission to close the media houses, but what we are seeing is the closure of media houses. If you are searching for something, why do you close? You should do the search in the open so that other people also get to know that you are searching the premises.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, if the Police was given a warrant to search for a hard copy of the said letter, why did they dismantle computers? Why did they close the radio stations when they were just looking for a paper? I believe that the closure of these media houses was intended to ensure that the right to freedom of expression and freedom of the press are violated.

As we build democracy in Uganda and also encourage as many investors to come to Uganda, it is a shame that this Government that claims to be interested in investors coming here can close media houses without proper reasons. The reasons they are giving cannot hold water. (Interruption)

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, I think we already asked the minister to lay the said warrant on the Table. To save time, can the Minister of Internal Affairs lay the said warrant on the Table before we proceed? Thank you.

MR ONEK: Mr Speaker, I have asked my junior colleague to get the search warrant -(Interjections)- He is my junior minister.

Mr Speaker, I think the intentions here –(Interjections)- Would you like to listen to me or not? - (Interjections) - Then I sit down.

4.12
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Mr Speaker, I rise to move a motion that in the absence of the search warrant and to save this honourable House from speculating, the debate on this statement by the minister be suspended until the warrant is produced to the House. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded by Rubaga South, Ayivu, Gulu District and Busia Municipality. Honourable members, that is the motion, that debate on this matter be suspended unless the search warrant is in place. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please, ensure the availability of this warrant in the course of this sitting. Debate on this matter is deferred until we are in receipt of copies of the warrant.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PUBLIC ORDER MANAGEMENT BILL, 2011

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, can we have some order, and that applies to the honourable members in front of me. Please, let us have some order. 

Honourable members, yesterday, we examined clause 7, processed all the other issues and we stood over the clause when we reached sub clause (5). There were some discussions that were initiated but we could not - 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. After careful study of the Members’ views and concerns, we would like to concede that sub clause (5) should be deleted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there is concurrence by the committee on the amendment moved by the honourable Member for Oyam that sub clause (5) be deleted. There is concurrence on that. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

 Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Chairman, to the best of my recollection, I moved an amendment to the effect that the entire clause 8 be deleted. I made a submission on it but because most Members here were not present, I will give a summary and not the details. 

The reason we are saying clause 8 should be deleted is because it contravenes Article 92. It is a retrospective legislation whose intended effect is to give the Police powers to prohibit, to which the Constitutional Court was explicitly clear. Even the lead judge went ahead to define the powers to prohibit and said “‘prohibit’ means forbid”. 

In clause 8 (2) and (3), they talk about unsuitability of a venue. They go ahead to say that if you write to the Police and issue them with a notice, if they respond to you with a notice from the authorised officer and they have reasons, however justifiable they are, that letter will tantamount to a letter prohibiting you. The Constitutional Court was very clear and explicit – the Police do not enjoy powers to prohibit any gathering. To that extent, I even appealed that I do not think this Parliament has the mandate, whatsoever, to go ahead and pass such a law. It is unconstitutional and it is a nullity, in my humble view. 

We are very thorough and very meaningful Ugandans and that is why we suggested a middle way. We said that to the extent that the Police prohibited, and they imagine that they have a good cause to stop somebody from gathering but on this other side the convener is insisting on going ahead, I moved an amendment to the effect that the Police, as it has done with the publication of Daily Monitor, can go to court. They can go to court and get a court order to ensure somebody does not go ahead to enjoy his rights. These are God-given rights-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Would you like to read the amendment you proposed, please? Honourable members, he proposed the deletion of the existing clause 8 but proposed a new clause 8. That is what I am asking him to do.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: The proposed amendment should read as follows: “(1) An officer to whom a notice has been given and has reasonable grounds to believe that the proposed meeting should not take place at a given date, time and venue, may apply to the chief magistrate in whose jurisdiction the meeting is scheduled to take place for an order restraining the organiser from conducting the public meeting. 

(2) The chief magistrate shall hear the parties as soon as practically possible, and in any case not later than 48 hours from the date of application.” That is a middle ground for all of us. 

Mr Chairman, I would like to inform you that when you read the preamble of the court judgement stating why we moved to court, it was after notification. At one time, we even notified the Minister of Internal Affairs. This judgement was laid on the Table by the minister, so I can refer to it. We notified and that was abused by the Police. That is when we moved to court and court agreed with us that the power the Police was exercising was unconstitutional. Therefore, I move to delete clause 8 and replace it with the amendment as hereby proposed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, and that includes the Minister in charge of Security, there was a constitutional petition by one of our honourable colleagues, which dealt with Section 32(2) of the Police Act. That section gave the Police powers to prohibit – stopping - but the Constitutional Court said that was excessive and unconstitutional. 

Section 32(1) of that same Act, which granted the Police regulatory functions, was saved and it is part of the provisions of the Constitution. The minister has proposed what is in the Bill and the argument is that some of the things in the Bill try to bring back the prohibition matter that was dealt with by the court. The argument from the Attorney-General and the minister is that this Bill is now meant to cure the gap that had been created by the annulment of subsection (2) to put in force the regulatory function of the Police, which was saved under that same Act and also under the Constitution. Now, that was the debate that ensued for a long time and it is something we must take a decision on.

The proposal by the Member for Butambala, he says, is a middle ground. The argument was that introducing court to be part of the exercise of the regulation of the Police power was beyond, according to the Attorney-General, but the proposers of the amendment are saying that this is the middle ground. In order to take away the subjective assessment of a police officer, you rather have it go to court. That is what they are proposing. 

Those are the two positions, honourable members. I hope I have summarised them well. Can we now take a decision because this matter has been debated for the last I do not know how many sittings. Let me give two minutes to the Member who was not there, the honourable Member for Aruu.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I want to appeal to members of this House. Of course, the entire Public Order Management Bill is to regulate our rights. We have been going through clauses and we have cut on some of the rights because we are trying to get an acceptable law. 

Now, this is the gist of the whole law: Clause 8, the way the minister has brought it, means that if hon. Ogwang writes to the Police that he wants to hold a rally in Katakwi and the Police write to him saying that it is not suitable, that is it. The letter from the Police to him is final. Forget about us, the Opposition, this means that even if you are holding primary elections and someone else wants to make it impossible for you to address a rally anywhere, he will just instruct the Police to reject your application for whichever venue you apply for. That will make it practically impossible for you to address a rally anywhere. For us, the Opposition, it is now impossible to address a rally anywhere, so nothing may change much, but I may be sympathising with some of you. (Laughter)

Mr Chairman, my suggestion and appeal to Members is that we find another middle ground. It says here that when you are aggrieved by the decision of the police officer who has rejected your rally, you appeal to the –(Interruption) 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to draw the attention of hon. Odonga Otto to the fact that what he is trying to come up with is what we proposed as a committee. We proposed that if you are aggrieved, you can appeal to court and court must hear and decide this matter within four days.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you for that information. Imagine that there are three days to the end of a presidential election and I would like to hold my last rally in Kalungu but the Police have rejected it and the court is on vacation; what will happen? This is why I am appealing to Members to accept the position of hon. Kivumbi.

MR JAMES BABA: Hon. Odonga Otto quoted the example of a political campaign but we are all aware that all electoral processes are governed by a separate law under the Electoral Commission. (Interjections) Yes, this is not going to apply during elections. 

In this particular Bill, the committee itself has provided for an appeal to a magistrate’s court in the area of jurisdiction where that meeting is going to take place. We are going to accept that with a minor amendment. 

MR SSEGGONA LUBEGA: Mr Chairman, the information I want to give hon. Otto is crucial and is a matter of law. However, before that, it is not correct, as the Minister has said, that when it comes to campaigns, then we are going to be exempted from the application of this Act. But if you want, you can state it.

Secondly, it is a matter of fact, the court has decided, that the Police do not have the power to grant or prohibit. Now, when you tell the individual applicant, who is going to hold a public rally, that since you are aggrieved by a decision of the police officer, go to court, it is going to imply, contrary to the Constitutional Court’s decision, that the Police has the power to say “No”. The interpretation of our Constitution is that the Police do not have the power to say “No” in their regulatory function. So, I cannot appeal against a decision that someone cannot make. 

That is why our colleague came up with a compromise position, that since the Police has to regulate but it is also told that it cannot make a prohibition, if the police officer is of the view that a venue is unsuitable for the reasons given, let the police officer be the one to go to court. Now, court will arbitrate and finally, will guide the parties.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, recently, we were invited by the Police to witness the joint training of the Police from the entire Great Lakes Region. We watched a real situation where a rally was allowed by the Police and some terrorists came and shot at the people who were lawfully authorised and the situation turned into something else. That was the situation that we witnessed and the minister, hon. Hillary Onek, was there. So, when I am talking about this, I am very conscious. 

We are not against anyone but what we are asking is: Why are we giving the Police powers of court? Someone who even hates how I look like will never allow me to address a rally anywhere. So, why do you make this individual that powerful? Why don’t we leave the powers to an institution of court? 

I just want to caution ourselves that if we give the Police the power to say “no”, we would have, by default, given the Police powers that do not belong to them. I wish to appeal to Members that since this is the gist of the Public Order Management Bill, let us not give powers to police officers who may not even want you to come back to Parliament. You will be the next victim. 

MS AOL: Mr Chairman, the minister actually said that this law we are going to make will not apply during campaigns. He said it clearly. So, it should also be put in this law that it will not be applied during the campaigns. Honourable minister, I know you are not an elected minister so you had better take care of us. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, let us go step by step. As Members said, maybe some of us were not present yesterday when we debated this at length. Let us start from Section 32 of the Police Act; this is on the power to regulate assemblies and processions. It says, “(1) Any officer in charge of police may issue orders for the purpose of -
(a) regulating the extent to which music, drumming or a public address system may be used on public roads or streets or at occasion of festivals or ceremonies; 

(b) directing the conduct of assemblies and processions on public roads or streets or at places of public resort and the route by which and the times at which any procession may pass.” 
That part was saved as a regulatory role of the Police and there is no misunderstanding about that. 

Part (2), which was nullified, read as follows: “(2) If it comes to the knowledge of the Inspector-General that it is intended to convene any assembly or form any procession on any public road or street or at any place of public resort, and the Inspector-General has reasonable grounds for believing that the assembly or procession is likely to cause a breach of the peace, the Inspector General may, by notice in writing to the person responsible for convening the assembly or forming the procession, prohibit the convening of the assembly or forming of the procession.”

In my understanding, and in the understanding of Government, this is why there was consensus to delete clause 8(1)(c). This is because clause 8(1)(c) has some connection to what was nullified - (Interjections)- Please, listen to me. Clause 8(1)(c) was giving any other reasonable cause to an authorised officer to determine whether a demonstration or a public meeting will take place. 

My understanding of clause 8(1)(a) and (b) is that it does not amount to a prohibition. It only says that if an organiser wants to organise a public meeting in place A, which is already booked, for example, then that authorised officer tells the organiser to identify another place. To me, telling a group organiser to identify another place does not amount to a prohibition. (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA LUBEGA: I would like to thank you, hon. Ruhindi, for giving way. While I agree with the learned Attorney-General on (c), I want to remind him that (c) was conceded for different grounds. It was because one of the segments in that petition was that what you consider reasonable may be speculative. 

I am happy with his confession. However, ultimately, if a police officer considers it unsuitable, what does he do? The answer is in sub clause (3) – the officer is prohibiting. Much as the word, “prohibition” is not used, it says, “Where the authorised officer notifies the organiser or his or her agent of a public meeting that it is not possible to hold the proposed public meeting...” - mark the words, “it is not possible”, and that is in the opinion of that police officer – “...on the date or venue proposed, the public meeting shall not be held on that date or at the venue proposed.” 

Now we go back to the regulation. What does he do? He tells me, “It shall not be held”; is that not a prohibition, ladies and gentlemen? If that is not prohibition, what is prohibition? Prohibition is simply telling you that it will not be held. That is why we suggested that rather than empower this man to make that decision for whatever reasons – he may have good reasons and that is why we are making concessions on this side - let him go to court and say, “Look here, I am not permitted.” (Interjections) – I wish some Members could first understand before they say yes or no. 

Let the court look at the police officer’s circumstances, listen to the police officer’s reasons and after satisfying itself – I could come up as the applicant and say, “It is not correct; the person you are saying is going to hold that function there is actually dead” - the court will then say, “It is possible” or “it is not possible”. This should be done, rather than allowing the police officer who has no power to say, “No, do not” to say, “It is not suitable”. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, we may have a difference of opinion, and every one of us is entitled to his or her opinion. I am giving you my opinion. Mind you, we also have Article 43 of the Constitution - as you demonstrate or hold a public meeting, be mindful about the rights of others. 

Secondly, we have agreed that the regulatory function of the Police was saved under Section 32. Now you want to take this regulatory function to the courts. (Interjections) Let the authorised officer say, “You cannot hold a function here because it is already booked for others or you are going to interfere with the crowd and traffic”. If you get aggrieved by that decision, you go to court, and that is provided for. That is how institutions in a democracy function. (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, I listened very well. Hon. Kivumbi, in his amendment, referred to the fact that there is a constitutional judgement. I was patiently waiting for the minister to categorically state that what is being imported in this legislation was not the matter that was impugned in the Constitutional Court judgement, so that we could be assured. 

Mr Chairman, you know very well that Article 92 of the Constitution provides thus: “Parliament shall not pass any law to alter the decision or judgement of any court as between the parties to the decision or judgement”. I would have expected the minister to categorically address this constitutional bar. Apparently, he is rating himself and trying to circumvent this particular Article of the Constitution.

In the circumstances, knowing our history well, knowing well that some of us find ourselves where we are here now -(Laughter)- and knowing very well that even in remote areas - Before I ask a procedural question, I would like to say that we have a place called Kirama off the main road, the Lwemiyaga-Ssembabule Road; it is a very tiny road. We once had a peaceful procession among the woods and bushes but there was police with teargas to disperse us. These Members may look at it as if it is far-fetched, and I really wonder why you want to bring this on your doorsteps.

Mr Chairman, it is not in the interest of this country to try to legislate against a judgement of the Constitutional Court. I would like to ask: is it procedurally right for the minister not to address a question of a constitutional nature, that this clause is attempting to circumvent the ruling of the Constitutional Court?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, when the debate is not moving, it means there are issues that are not resolved. There is still a question. The Constitutional Court said the Police cannot prohibit; in other words, they cannot stop you from holding a meeting if everything is okay. What I am saying is that the Constitutional Court said the Police cannot prohibit the holding of these meetings. That is why subsection (2) was expunged by the Constitutional Court. 

The point being brought now is that sub clause (3) in clause 8 brings back that prohibition power. Is it true? Can somebody address the House on this? Is it true that if you read sub clause (3) of clause 8, it amounts to giving the Police the authority to stop or to say “no” to a meeting? If it does, would that take us back to the previous clause 2 of the Police Act? That is the debate now. Honourable member for Nwoya County, who is also the minister for political matters - (Laughter)

MR TODWONG: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The honourable members saying, “Aahh” are some of my former classmates. Unless otherwise, we are reading English to suit our personal interpretation - (Interjections) - I would like to read clause 8(3), (4) and (5) concurrently.

Clause 8(3), which my friend read, says that, “Where the authorised officer notifies the organiser or his or her agent of a public meeting that it is not possible to hold the proposed public meeting on the date or venue proposed, the public meeting shall not be held on that date or at the venue proposed.”  It does not mean it will never be held. (Laughter) 

Mr Chairman, if I may read clause 8(4) -(Interjections)-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, please, let the Member finish. This is a matter for debate. Honourable members, let the Member finish, then we discuss.

MR TODWONG: Thank you, Mr Chairman. If I may proceed - (Interjections) - I thought you were honourable members of the Ninth Parliament - (Interjections) - It appears like we are vendors.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let us have some order. Honourable Member for Oyam County South, let us have some order. 

Honourable members, I have always made this statement and let me make it again; civility demands that we listen to those we disagree with. It is only after listening to particularly those we disagree with that we earn the right to reply. In a House like this, what is happening now should not be happening. If the Member is speaking things that do not make sense, let him finish and then you earn your right to reply. What may be sensible to you may not be sensible to somebody else. What may be sensible to him might not make sense to you. 

What is the purpose of discussion? – No, I am in charge of the House. The point of order should come on properly premised grounds. You do not just shout, “Order,” to stop people; no. Let us have orderly discussion. If you had allowed hon. Todwong to finish, by now you would be discussing what he has said. Really, at this stage let us listen to each other. Listen to him, come up and bring your argument. The strength of an argument is not in the size of the person who is presenting it or how loudly it is presented. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, for the avoidance of doubt, I would like to link up these subsections so that they flow and we are at peace with each other. In sub clause (2) of clause 8, where an organiser has identified a venue which is already booked by another, he is called upon to identify another venue. If there is likely to be a problem with the crowd or traffic control, he is also advised to identify another venue.

For the avoidance of doubt, sub clause (3) should start by saying, “Pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, where the authorised officer…” so that it flows. Now what is coming out is as if subsection (3) is independent in itself and the authorised officer is taking a decision outwith the requirement with clause 8(1). So, we should start thus in subsection (3): “Pursuant to subsection (1)...” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think there is something that is not yet resolved. The phrase, “the public meeting shall not be held on the date or at the venue proposed”; that is the issue. Let us resolve that issue. 

MR TODWONG: Thank you, Mr Chairman, and I hope we are now cool. My submission is exactly on what you said. In the event that a party is aggrieved by a decision of an officer in charge, clause 8 (4) is clear on this. If one gets dissatisfied with the provisions in sub clause (4), they can still move to sub clause (5) – (Mr Odonga Otto rose_) – I am little more informed on this matter. I pray that our Members –(Interjections)– I hope I have made myself clear and that is how we should proceed.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I want to thank you. The question that you placed before the House was, in the mind of every English speaking citizen, very simple. You asked: Are the words in 8 (3) prohibitive or not? You specifically summoned the minds of honourable members to come and address you on whether the language in the sub clause is prohibitive or not. 

By the honourable member from Nwoya, who lied to this House that I was his classmate when that is not true –(Laughter)– coming here to say different things, is he procedurally –(Interjections)– The way I understand our rules is that there cannot be a point of order raised in the middle of a procedural point being advanced.

MR TODWONG: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think I was clear and I was using plain English, unless my friend who I went with to the same university with thought I was his classmate. Anyway, I said that some of those who were shouting were once my classmates and that, definitely, did not mean you. So, is he in order to insinuate or to just wish that I was once his classmate? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Medard Sseggona, hon. Richard Todwong was not your classmate at any point.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you. The point here is about the question you asked on whether the language is prohibitive or not. I expected that everyone speaking to this point would be answering that question. You see, if it is prohibitive, then it would be offending Article 92 and if it is not, then it would not. In my view, as long as it says, “you shall not”, then it is prohibitive. So, is he procedurally right? 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, yes, your question is a valid question but I would like to ask another question - (Interjections) - I have ways of responding and putting my points across, which are totally different from those of hon. Ssemujju Nganda, as you can imagine. (Interruptions)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Chairman, it is true that the Rt Hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi has his own ways. (Interjections) You can say all that, but I have never been involved in Temangalo, which is his way. I have never been involved in the Kazinda saga, which is another way –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What is the point of order?

MR SSEMUJJU: Is he, therefore, in order to circumvent the question you have put to the House by creating a new question and causing further confusion when we are dealing with a serious issue pertaining to people’s freedoms?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I have not heard the question to be able to assess whether it is different from the one I asked or not. I have not heard it.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I have been schooled in my long life never to argue – (Laughter) – with some category of people, lest I am mistaken to be at their level.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have respect for my colleague, the Prime Minister, particularly for his level of composure - (Interjections) - Yes, we are both learned colleagues. By insinuating that some Members elected to represent people in this House belong to a level well below the scale, and by using language that is lowering the honour and dignity of this House in terms of the collection of Members and the individuality of Members, is the Member for Kinkiizi West, therefore, in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I actually fairly and carefully listened to what the Prime Minister said. He said that he has been schooled not to engage with a certain category of people. He did not say people in this House. He said, “I am schooled not to engage in a discussion with certain category of people lest I be misunderstood to be like them or at their level.”

I am sure, being in charge of this House, the level and the kind of people that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister talked about are not in this House. (Laughter) Unless somebody can supply me proof to the contrary, I hold the view that, that level of people that the Prime Minister was referring to are not in this House. So, it is not referring to a Member of the House. If he is referring to some category of people who he has not disclosed, I cannot rule on whether he is in order or out of order here.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I wanted to put the question. Since the regulatory function of the Police was saved and the functions of the Police are very clearly specified in the Constitution, - to protect life and property, to preserve law and order and to prevent and detect crime - when you look at the formulation of sub clause (3), is it regulatory? Prohibition means to forbid; regulatory simply means to align the conduct of a group or individuals to be in accordance with the law. That is what “regulate” means. 

Sub clause (3) as it is framed currently, where the Police is required to perform its function during the exercise, by some people, of their rights, does it actually require the Police to perform their regulatory function to make sure that those who are exercising their rights are doing so within the law? To me, that is the critical question. If it was prohibition, it would be forbidding or saying, “you cannot do it” - (Mr Mwiru rose_) If you want to give me information, I will take it. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Chairman, and I thank my colleague for giving way. The information I want to give my colleague and the House is that the intention is actually for Police to proceed with the regulation. Police should have no role to play in as far as prohibition is concerned. 

For you to run to Article 212 and say what Police can do, by implication it will actually move towards prohibition. That is why the Rt Hon. Speaker has phrased a question, which was actually bringing us closer; what if in all this we appreciate that Police must carry out its work? We have no problem with that but we are saying in so doing, let them actually go to court, get an order and come and stop us. 

Actually, the process of going to court is as simple as the way it has been carried out under the Bankers’ Evidence Act. When they want to inspect your account, just one police officer moves to court on an application of a standard form, gets an order and inspects your bank account. That is what we are actually saying. However much you disguise what we are talking about, it will turn into a prohibition. 

Mr Chairman, you had brought us together and we were almost agreeable to the position that the Police must play a role. However, can we agree that since the judgement of the police officer can be misguided by either superior orders or any other factor, the police officer moves to court and gets an order? I know that what is making my colleagues afraid is the process – within what time will the police officer get an order. Under the Bankers’ Evidence Act, the police officer can go to court within 30 minutes and come back with an order. Thank you.

MS ALUM: Thank you, Mr Chairman, and I thank the Prime Minister for giving way. Mr Chairman, as you have guided on whether this is prohibition or not, I would like us to look at sub clause (3); it is about the date and the proposed venue of a public meeting. We are politicians, and I want to put this case as follows: We may be remaining with only four days to the polling date and the authorised officer tells you that on this date or at this venue, you cannot hold a public meeting. This means that the authorised officer is stopping you from using that venue and the process of getting an alternative venue is mentioned in No. 7. 

I would like to inform the Prime Minister that having followed all these steps of the authorised officer telling you that you cannot hold a public meeting on this date and at this venue, and you look for an alternative date and venue, yet you are remaining with very few days, won’t that be stopping you from holding a public meeting on such a day? I feel that will stop any Member or interested organiser from holding a meeting.

MR ANYWARACH: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, thank you very much for allowing this clarification. It is really legal and simple. As the honourable colleague has stated, 8(3) says, “Where the authorised officer notifies the organiser or his or her agents of a public meeting that it is not possible to hold the proposed public meeting on the date or venue proposed, the public meeting shall not be held on that date or at the venue proposed.”

I go ahead to read the outlawed Section 32(2) of the Police Act. It says, “If it comes to the knowledge of the Inspector General that it is intended to convene any assembly or form any procession on any public road or street or at any place of public resort, and the Inspector General has reasonable grounds for believing that the assembly or procession is likely to cause a breach of the peace, the Inspector General may, by notice in writing to the person responsible for convening the assembly or forming the procession, prohibit the convening of the assembly or forming of the procession.”

In the spirit of Article 20(1) and (2) and also in the spirit of Article 43 - unless the enjoyment of such rights contravenes Article 43 - why then should we give the power to determine whether the enjoyment of the rights is contravening Article 43 to the Police, which is not a court? Therefore, don’t you think the two provisions, the clause and Section 32(2) of the Police Act, actually mean the same thing and they are giving prohibitory powers to the Police? Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: The answer is “no” because we have already passed the principle, even in the clauses already adopted, that notice should be given to the Police. Why? This is so that the Police can perform its statutory duties. That is the idea. So, at any given moment, the Police have the constitutional duty to perform those functions that I read for you.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, my senior comrade, for giving way. Thank you, Mr Chairman, too. The role of the Police and their power, as provided for under Article 212 of this Constitution, by implication or directly, does not have what is reflected in sub clause (3) of clause 8. Here, if I notify the Police, I am simply telling them to come and protect life and property and to preserve law and order. You can protect life and preserve law and order when the meeting is going on without changing the venue. 

Mr Chairman, with due respect, I know our Police are trained to work in all places; there is no unsuitable place for the Police to work in. They can work in water, the marines; they can work in air and anywhere else. So, the intention of saying, “determine whether such and such a place is suitable or not for a meeting”, is not part of the Police. Therefore, I kindly request you – I know you are a learned friend, - (Laughter) - you are not my enemy.  If I say you are my friend, is that not okay, even if I am not a learned friend? Should I say you are a learned enemy because if we are not friends then we are enemies? (Laughter)

My point here is that no one can use these provisions in the Constitution to insinuate that the Police are given powers to prohibit a meeting. Article 212 only says, “Come and work here”. So, please, stop referring to this as a licence for prohibition. Thank you. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Okay. Thank you, hon. Fungaroo. Now – (Mr Ssimbwa rose_) - that is the last one, so that I can make my point.

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for giving way. The information I wish to give the Prime Minister is that my understanding of the section you are explaining is that it is not a standalone. It has origins from 8(1)(a) and (b). The meeting that is regulated under sub clause (3) is not for prohibition but to maintain law and order where there happens to be a breach of 8 (1)(a) and (b). 

We are looking at a situation where Ssimbwa has booked venue A and hon. Migadde comes and also requests for the same venue. Under such circumstances, the Police are coming in to say – (interjections) - Yes; the Police are coming in because it might be a place on the road. So, my understanding is that sub clause (3) is not a standalone section. We should not look at it as though it were alone and not complementary. It is complementary to enable the implementation of (1)(a) and (b). That is how I understand it.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you. I had an experience, and this is a mischief I thought the Prime Minister could help with. On the eve of nomination day, I booked a venue in Pader District playground for a rally. When everything was set, I transported people from all the subcounties but they sent a policeman to inform me that the NRM had booked the same venue – (interjections) - No, I am giving a practical situation and on this, I am being honest. So, when I called the other camp, they told me that they were not aware of that. A group of individuals just went to the DPC’s office and worked on a letter for the purpose of making that venue unavailable to me. So, how can we cure that mischief of some people deliberately denying someone a venue on the pretext that someone else had booked it earlier? 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: The point I was making is that we have already passed the principle of notifying the Police. I think that is agreed. I agree with hon. Ssimbwa that in 8(1), we are giving grounds on which Police may advise you –(interjections)– No, prohibition is like when hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju is prohibited from eating pork. (Laughter)  You see, that is “prohibition”. So, the principle of notice to Police is already agreed on. (Ms Amongi rose_) No, no, please, let me at least finish the presentation of my argument and then I will give my –(Laughter) 


We have already accepted the idea that if the Police receives a notice, for instance of a venue and a date, and they have already received another notice for a meeting in the same venue, then obviously – Imagine if Mbabazi gave notice of a meeting in Kireka and Police had already received a notice of a meeting by Ssemujju in the same venue, what do you expect the Police to do? What is their duty? Of course, they know what to expect because one of the parties may behave in a particular way. So, this is the idea here. 

Sub clause (3) is in the context that you have received notice that someone is going to hold a meeting at a given venue; when you receive another, as the institution of Government charged with those responsibilities that you read, it is their duty to inform you that, for example, this venue has already been booked so please get another venue. 

However, I think there is something coming up, which appeals to my sense of reason and logic, which is, of course, not well shared. (Laughter)  Supposing the Police does not have good reason to say, “No, this venue is not available”, how can we solve that problem? If we found a formulation that catered for a situation where the Police should not act without –(Interjections) – It is not prohibiting; I am not talking about prohibiting. In regulating or making sure that people have adapted to the rule of law in performing their rights and enjoying their freedoms, they should do so reasonably and not deny these people without reason from enjoying their rights. So, how can we take care of that? Otherwise, I think this (3), in the context of what we have already adopted, is actually not a prohibition but a regulatory function. (Interruption)  

MR SSEGGONA LUBEGA: Mr Chairman, I want to thank the Prime Minster for giving me way, and I want to thank him because I think he is leading us in the right direction under your wise guidance. 

The answer that the Prime Minister is looking for is partially in 8(2) – “Upon receipt of notification by the authorised officer, the organiser or his agent shall be invited to identify...” I remember in the committee we had proposed a register for these notices so that if you are talking about venue A, you can show me that it is booked by so and so. So, he invites the organisers for a meeting. That is in the right direction. 

Third, he is talking about two situations; first, that the organiser and the Police have actually not agreed. There is possibility where the police officer will tell me that venue is booked and I disagree with the Police and say that it is actually not booked, that somebody is simply cooking up a story. The Police have a legitimate and genuine concern but I also have a legitimate and genuine concern. Who is the arbiter? 

The Police being the regulator do not have the power to tell me, “no”; so, let them go to court and justify their reasons rather than tell me to go to court after they have made a decision. I have already stated that the Police does not have the power to make – (Interruption) 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, hon. Sseggona is a seasoned lawyer. To go to court, there must be a cause of action, and there are grounds which are trite for a cause of action to arise. You must be aggrieved in order to go to court to seek remedy. Do you want to tell me that in a case where these two have disagreed, the authorised person becomes the aggrieved person; that would be strange in law? (Gen. Moses Ali rose_)

MR SSEGGONA LUBEGA: He rose up to seek clarification from me. (Interjections) You see, Gen. Moses Ali, who I respect for his experience, needs also to listen to me, especially in matters of law.  (Laughter) 

A cause of action may be a creature of statute, and there is where we are creating one, based on our experience. I have stated the reasons why we are creating one for the police officer to be the one to go to court. He has a statutory or constitutional function to perform and here is Medard Lubega telling him he cannot perform it. He thinks Medard is wrong but Medard thinks the police officer is wrong; let him go to court. 

If you tell me that if you are aggrieved by a decision of a police officer, then go to court, you are assuming that he has the power to make a decision in the first place, and we are saying he does not have the power to decide in the negative direction and say “no”. The cause of action starts from the meeting where we disagree; he cannot stop me and I am telling him I will proceed. That is the basis of his cause of action. 

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you, Mr Chairman, and I thank the Leader of Government Business for giving way. To the best of my recollection, on 8(1) there are only two reasons for the Police to refuse. One of them is that the venue has already been booked by another person and two, that the venue is considered unsuitable for purposes of crowd and traffic control. Part (c) was deleted, which was for any other reasonable cause. (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I rise on a procedural issue. We are all aware that hon. Kyamadidi, by a letter signed by the Prime Minister and Secretary-General of NRM, was suspended for three months -(Interjections)- I seek your protection. He was suspended from NRM and from committees and activities of Parliament. He is sitting where he is sitting and he is not even sitting where the others are sitting. (Laughter) So, I am wondering, what is the impact of the letter of the Prime Minister on the submissions of hon. Kyamadidi, who the same Prime Minister suspended but has now given him permission to give information to him? (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, it is not every communication about everything that comes to the attention of Parliament and, of course, Parliament and the Speaker. In this particular instance, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has allowed the honourable member to give him information and we do not know what has transpired between them. (Laughter) So, please, continue. 

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you, Mr Chairman, for the wise ruling and I hasten to add that there are no permanent friends and enemies in politics; there are only permanent interests. 

I was saying that (c), which would bring in any other reason, was deleted. Part (c) read, “for any other reasonable cause.” So, it is only two reasons; one, that the venue has been booked or two, that it is unsuitable for purposes of crowd control and traffic control. In the event that those are the only two reasons, the information I want to give you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, is that there are no other reasons that the Police will give other than the two. Those are the only reasons for regulation.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Okay, Mr Chairman - (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali rose_) (Laughter)

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to inform the Prime Minister and honourable members that the impossibility - People who propose that the Police should go to court did not see very far. - (Interjections) - I am just giving information. They did not see very far because this is one officer at the station and there are four or five or six politicians who come to the station to seek for permission. Unfortunately, he comes and says, “no” to three or four of them, then you tell him to go to court and complain about all those to whom he said “no” to. There is no law on that. This is not seeing very far. I think there are also some questions. There are some people who order the Police – (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I may have my own judgement on the quality of debate, but the rules of this House do not permit me, in any way, to insult my own colleagues over their debate. 

We made proposals in this House in good faith. There are those that have learnt the law and there are those that continue to learn the law. By telling those of us who made that proposal that we do not see far, is the hon. Moses Ali, another learned friend of ours, in order to describe us as short-sighted?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister, you made the statement that the Members who made this proposal have not seen far. Would you like to explain what you mean before I make my ruling? 
 
GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I really try to compare these people with long-sighted people. People who are long-sighted are given glasses to reduce their sight and people who are short-sighted are given glasses to see far. That is all I mean. I do not mean to insult people. That is my interpretation. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If the statement you made inadvertently hurt people, what do you say?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I believe people are free also to be hurt by whatever other people say because even I may be hurt by whatever people say to me. So, it is freedom also of people to be hurt. (Laughter) They are free to be hurt. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Honourable colleagues, I want us to agree on this and I think we agreed. The idea, that it should be the Police to go to court and invite court to determine whether the venue on that date is suitable or not, is an impracticable idea. What happens then; do you continue with the meeting? (Interjections) So, that means that the meeting stops until the court has decided. If that is what you mean - (Interjections) - no problem. 

Of course, you give notice, and we said in three days, that you want to have a meeting in venue A. The Police tell you that they had already received another notice before yours came about another meeting by another group in the same venue on the same date. Now you are saying this second person, who was giving notification, should then wait until the police officer gets clearance from court on whether you can use the venue or not. That is what it means - (Interjections) – Yes, of course.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Chairman, and I thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. The information that I want to give the Prime Minister is premised on the fact that in accordance to what is being proposed here, if the organiser is not the one to go to court and it is the Police, it does not imply that the organiser will not go ahead with the meeting. If the Police have the capacity to bring the court order restraining the organiser from continuing with the meeting, that is when the organiser will not hold the meeting. That is the information I want to give.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can I just say something. Honourable members, what we are facing here is a typical case of that cat that got burnt by a hot iron; sometimes it even fears the cold one, and that fear is legitimate because if you are burnt once, you fear anything that looks like the thing that burnt you before. 

If you read sub clause (1) carefully, minus (c), and you read sub clause (2), then you will know that there is a consultative process inbuilt there. You first of all give notice and then the Police officer says, “No, it is not suitable because there are people who have booked that place.” They will then invite you and ask you to find an alternative place or get another date. This is a consultation process between the Police and the organisers. From there, instead of concluding that process, we instead jump to subsection (3). There is a missing link; there is no transition. That is what is bringing the confusion. There is no transition between the sitting of the Police and the organisers to agree on an alternative venue or an alternative date. It is not there. In subsection (2), that is where the organisers are invited by the Police to discuss alternative dates or alternative venues. In subsection (3), you are now talking about where the police officer says, “no”, and you now go to court. 

So, can we follow this process from subsection (2) logically; it will solve this problem. We have not found out how the discussion of the alternative venue and date has been resolved. The law does not find that out; it does not give the opportunity for that resolution and the results from it to be discussed. So, if we could do that transition, then the rest of this might not be - If they can both agree that in case of contestation, they can all go to seek an opinion of an independent person - all of them – since they are together. If you say that this venue is not suitable and I say it is suitable, let us go to court. Both of you go for some kind of arbitration – It is 48 hours. That is the proposal he is making, and that will make us move forward. Look at it again; there is a gap that needs to be cured to bring this together. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister was still holding the Floor.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, I think we are now moving together because the presentations being made now are all logical. As I said earlier, there appears to be something that needs to be attended to. The Police should not unreasonably act in a manner that denies an individual or a group of people to exercise their freedoms.

However, it should be noted that the Police have a duty to actually protect people in the exercise of their freedoms. That way, they will be performing their constitutional function, which we have been reading out over and over as provided for under Article 212. So, if the Police in clause 8 (1) say that there is already a notice for another meeting on the date and venue indicated, or that the venue is unsuitable for crowd or traffic control, they invite you according to sub clause (2) and explain this to you. They will say, “Sir, we already have a notification” and then they will ask you if you have an alternative place because there is already a notification for this one. (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Chairman, I want to thank the Prime Minister for yielding the Floor to allow me give him information, if only the chairman of the committee and the junior minister can allow him to listen. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there is a member on the Floor.

MR SSEMUJJU: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this is information for you. I want you to consider, and I want to give you practical experience. You earlier mentioned Kireka; one time I was supposed to hold a rally and the DPC – (Interjections) - I am just giving a practical experience, which is important –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, honourable member. Let him conclude what he was saying before you come in to give us information.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Okay, thank you. I was saying that we are now moving together, logically. It now appears to me, even as the Chair was saying, that we may need to harmonise the sequence of events in order to allow the Police perform its constitutional function as we allow Ugandans to exercise their freedoms.

I have a suggestion, and that is why I was consulting with my colleagues here - (Interjections) - These are ministers. Mr Chairman, can we sleep over this particular clause, do the formulation, and we can even consult because I am fully alive to the practice in this House where there is always goodwill. We always consult in order to have a law that suits everybody. So, can we sleep over this particular one only and then we meet with the relevant people tomorrow, those who can – (Laughter) – I mean those who will be able to, and then we formulate this in order to fill that gap? I so make the proposal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think it is important because it will tie that gap already being seen in the proposed legislation. This will not be a formal referral to a committee; it is about having consultation amongst ourselves. When we cure this gap, the entire picture will become very clear.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, as we get to have the consultations, there was a matter upon which I was trying to catch your eye earlier on. From the submissions on the Floor, it now appears that venues and places for holding meetings are under the Police. So, while you are consulting, it should be noted that even if you take, Kololo Airstrip, for example, it is not under the Police; it is under the Office of the President. They are the ones who give you permission to hold a meeting there. So, the Police cannot turn around to say that while they have given you permission, there is another group to sanction it. From the way we are debating, it is as if all public venues are under the Police, which is very dangerous.

Two, if it is a procession, normally processions cannot be done on the road for more than five hours. That is when the Police will come in to regulate by way of allocating time, say for some people to hold their meetings in the morning, mid afternoon and so on. For us to proceed as if these are solely provided by the Police and that it is them to give permission, we are giving too much powers to the Police.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, can we harmonise this position. Let us consult and agreed to come back in the morning. I am with my instrument for prorogation here and I could do this now, but because there is this business that needs to be completed, let us suspend our beds and mattresses and sleep over this matter.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is for the resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report thereto. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
5.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Public Management Order Bill, 2011” and passed it with amendments to clause 7 and considered in detail clause 8 but did not take a decision. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the motion that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question out and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as we agreed, we will make consultations and then tomorrow morning we will come back at 10.00 O’clock to proceed with this matter. Anyway we will come to that when we are concluding. Can we deal with item No.5?

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, there is a matter that we had started debating on and you ruled that the Ministry of Internal Affairs brings the search warrants in the course of today’s sitting. We thought we should conclude that debate, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not seen it.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, at that time the Minister of Internal Affairs said he had instructed his junior colleague to go and pick it and the headquarters is just about five minutes’ drive from here and the minister came back. May we proceed with that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think there was a motion that was moved that we defer debate on the issue of the minister’s statement until we have the search warrants here. We took a decision on that. So is the warrant there, hon. Minister?

MR BABA: No, Mr Speaker. My senior colleague was handling it and as far as I know, we have not received the warrant yet. When the House decided that this matter be adjourned until we get the warrant, that is what we took.

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, the senior minister said it clearly that the junior minister was off to collect the warrant and he is there. He said that the junior minister went to collect the warrant. That means that right now if they cannot produce the warrant, they are taking us for a ride and moreover if we do not specifically give a time frame then we are going to be taken for a ride.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want that warrant before this House closes today. While we wait, let us deal with item No.5.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE PETITION BY THE LORD MAYOR OF KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY, MAYORS OF DIVISION URBAN COUNCILS AND AUTHORITY COUNCILLORS SEEKING FOR THE INTERVENTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PROBE INTO MATTERS PERTAINING THE MISMANAGEMENT OF KCCA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that we had some discussions on this matter and there were some issues on the rules that prompted the Speaker to halt any debate on this matter, and send back the committee so that they could see if they could pick all the views and then come back to the House. I would like to hear if that has happened then we see how to proceed.

5.55
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Florence Kintu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. A meeting, as directed, took place today and in attendance were Florence Kintu, hon. Raphael Magyezi, hon. Terence Achia Naco, hon. Kenneth Kiyingi Bbosa, hon. Mabel Bageine, hon. David Muhumuza, hon. Carol Nanyondo Birungi, hon. John Bosco Mubito, hon. Roland Mugume, hon. Florence Mutyabule and hon. Betty Nambooze Bakireke.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was hon. Matte there?

MS KINTU: Hon. Matte Joseph Sibalinghana. Also in attendance were hon. Samuel Odonga-Otto, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, hon. Joseph Gonzaga Ssewungu, hon. Joseph Balikudembe, hon. Stephen Ochola, hon. Moses Kasibante, hon. Dr Michael Bayigga Lulume, hon. Dr Francis Epetait and hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda. Allow me, Mr Speaker, to give you our report. 

Background
On Tuesday, 21st of this month-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you take any minutes in that meeting? I don’t want any issues. Do you have minutes of that meeting?

MS KINTU: Yes, Mr Speaker, I would like to lay on Table the minutes of our meeting.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes. Meeting of when? Take it out.

MS KINTU: Dated today, the 22 May 2013. On Tuesday, 21 May 2013, the Deputy Speaker of Parliament, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah directed that the Committee on Public Service and Local Government sits today 22nd of this month to receive the views of Members of the committee who had dissenting opinions on the report of the committee that was tabled in the House on Thursday, 16 May 2013.

Proceedings

Accordingly, the committee sat today, Wednesday, 22 May 2013 at 10 a.m. in Room 018 at Parliament. The meeting had its required quorum because it was attended by 12 Members out of 17 Members. The meeting was also attended by several Members of Parliament and nine members of the committee.

The honourable members who told Parliament that they had dissenting views on the report were given ample time to present their views to the committee. They failed to do so and they wanted to engage the committee in technicalities, which had already been ruled on by the Rt Hon. Speaker. As such, we were unable to receive any minority opinion or report. We do not even know of any dissent to our report, as a committee. 

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, in our recommendations the committee decided to maintain its findings, observations and recommendations as expressed in our report. We, therefore, seek the indulgence of the Speaker to decide on the way forward. Allow me to lay on Table the report of the committee. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, this has been an issue that has been a bit difficult to process. That is the report from the committee on the opportunity that I gave yesterday. What should now happen is, we open debate on the matter.

6.00
MRS BETTY NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank you for your patience and transparency and I wish to thank you for the opportunity you accorded me and other honourable colleagues, who disagreed with both the method of writing the report on the mismanagement of KCCA and the contents therein.

It is my sincere hope that your order to have the entire Committee on Public Service and Local Government reconvene to harmonise the report was intended to create harmony in the committee, and also to preserve the integrity of this august House. 

Mr Speaker, yesterday you allowed me to present in any form so I wish to request for protection.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the Member speak because we gave her the opportunity to give the -

MS NAMBOOZE: It shall be recalled, Mr Speaker, that I moved under Rule 193(3)(1) of our Rules of Procedure. And if my request had been granted, the Clerk of Parliament would have been the one to inquire into the conduct of my committee and give a report to this House. However, you sought for an alternative solution to this matter by ordering the committee to reconvene and harmonise and in case of a dissenting view, the dissenters would write a minority report. 

Mr Speaker, I am sad to report that the committee has failed to utilise this great opportunity because the Chairperson, hon. Florence Kintu and her Vice, hon. Raphael Magyezi took the matter personal; and instead of being the impartial chairpersons they are supposed to be, they took a defensive mechanism, became dictators and the meeting degenerated into a shouting in front of the whole public – (Interjections) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you just observe the Speaker; if he takes off, you also take off. (Laughter)

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, as I was saying, in the meeting today, all the rules governing committees of Parliament were violated. It was only after a prolonged persuasion that even the prayers were recited, in a meeting that started two hours late and informally.

Mr Speaker, the request in my petition, which was also granted by your honourable Chair is that minutes of our committee meetings, concerning the proceedings of the KCCA petition would be available for Members and this would form the basis for harmonisation. And for the first time since I joined Parliament, I have today seen a motion being moved in a committee meeting by hon. Raphael Magyezi, seconded by hon. Mutyabule and adopted without debate. This motion was to have the meeting closed prematurely. It, therefore, comes as a surprise that in a meeting that was closed in the presence of everyone, including the media, that now we are receiving minutes and a report made and signed.

Mr Speaker, this is an honourable House; how could a meeting that had been closed prematurely come up with minutes and observations and recommendations? In essence, no meeting of the committee was convened today; what took place was a convergence of MPs to engage each other in bitter exchange. Unfortunately, the match was led by the chairperson.

Mr Speaker, it is the Rules of Procedure that guarantee harmony in this Parliament. It is these rules that protect the Office of the Speaker and the offices of the chairpersons and all Members of Parliament. It would be very sad if we started manipulating our own rules. And for that matter, I have five questions I wish to raise here. I am seeking for your guidance.

Mr Speaker, why are the minutes of the proceedings of this committee kept away from the Members?  Why are the chairperson and her deputy taking this matter personal? (Laughter) Can the Public Service and Local Government Committee solve this impasse unassisted? And – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that a point of order?

MR MUBITO: Mr Speaker, I am a Member of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government and I attended today’s committee meeting. But I feel insulted when hon. Nambooze continuously makes allegations and lies against our chairperson and vice- chairperson. These allegations are not true – (Interjections) - Mr Speaker, please protect me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members, order!

MR MUBITO: I personally attended the committee meeting and all the allegations and accusations against the chairperson are untrue. Is she, therefore, in order to continuously make such untrue accusations, which, as committee Members, we have not witnessed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is a question of fact and I was not part of that meeting. The allegations being made – I am sure an opportunity will be given to the Members to respond to them.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling and I want to end by saying that justice should not only be dispensed but it should also appear to have been done – (Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us not delay this process, let her finish and you will talk. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I am asking, will the stakeholders, especially the petitioners, after all that has taken place, feel that Parliament has dispensed justice? These questions must be answered. Mob justice has never been justice; mob justice is injustice. People might have the numbers here, but the Rules of Procedure are very clear on how meetings should be convened, how recommendations are reached and how Parliament reports are supposed to be brought and presented here. 

A report of Parliament minus the minutes of the proceedings is not a report of Parliament according to our Rules of Procedure. It was your guidance, Mr Speaker, that the minutes be availed. You singled out this particular matter and indicated yesterday that you find merit in this request because of the matter concerning minutes. How can we harmonise this without the minutes? 

Some colleagues stayed behind after they declared the meeting closed. They conspired to write a presentation, which they have now brought here. I find this very unfortunate; I am so sad for my country; I am so sad for this Parliament –(Interjections) – yes, I have the right to say these words. After the chairperson has declared a meeting closed, in front of cameras, basing on a motion which was moved by hon. Magyezi, how can they turn around and bring a report of Parliament? 

I, therefore, request you, Mr Speaker, that even where we were hard pressed, hon. Mugume Roland and I held a brief meeting in which we came up with our observations about the said report which was presented here as being the report of the committee. I wish to request you to allow me to present it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which report is that, the minority report? 

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, in the circumstances, without the minutes, there was no way we could come up with a minority report. But we sat and made observations about the document, which was brought here by Members purporting that it was the report of our committee. We have observations about that very document which was submitted here. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, my instructions were fairly clear yesterday. I said, let the committee go and sit at 9.00 O’clock today and harmonise whatever was lacking and also allow people who had differences of opinion on the content of the report that was presented on the 16th May to share with them the areas of dissent so that when they come to the House – if the opportunity was not available for us to have it in writing, it would be presented orally by the people who dissent to the main report. Those were my instructions. 

MR MUGUME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you ruled yesterday, we were supposed to start our committee meeting at 9.00 O’clock. By 9.00 O’clock, I was at the venue, but we saw the chairperson at 11.30 a.m. and I am telling you the truth –(Interruption)

MS KINTU: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Is the honourable member representing Rukungiri Municipality in order to say the meeting started at 11.30a.m. yet we called the meeting at 10.00a.m. owing to the fact that Members left here very late and that can be attested to by Members of the committee? Therefore, is he in order to allege that the meeting started at that time?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unfortunately for me, even the report which is submitted does not contain the commencement time of the meeting. So, I am not able to rule on that fact – the time is here. Accordingly, the committee sat today Wednesday, 22nd at 10.00 a.m. in Room 018 and several people have signed to this fact. So, please let us be orderly while we discuss these matters. 

MR MUGUME: Mr Speaker, I am surprised! Hon. Kintu, I respect you because you are a mother and a Member of Parliament, but you should tell the truth –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you should address the House through the Speaker.

MR MUGUME: Mr Speaker, our point as a committee was one: we wanted to see the minutes of the meeting. We requested for the minutes from the chairperson for almost two hours. For us as a committee, the moment we get the minutes, we will not have any other problem. Up to now, we are still requesting for the minutes and we have not seen them – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, there are minutes that were laid on the Table here. 

MR MUGUME: That is why we need this issue to be investigated and I can assure you, Mr Speaker, we will get the truth - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have ruled on that subject. I cannot be ruling on one item every day; I cannot keep repeating myself – (Applause) – I am above the age of 18. So doing things of this nature can make me look like I am below 18 years and I do not want to do that. I have ruled twice on the subject of the authenticity of this report. I raised issues and said if there are issues, which are not contained in the report that Members can raise as dissent to the main report, go and bring them out. That is what I said. So, this issue of investigations -

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I once again would like to thank you for the transparent manner in which you have handled this matter. Following yesterday’s ruling, we thought it prudent that for purposes of harmonisation, even though we are not Members of the committee - First of all, our Rules of Procedure allow Members who are not subscribed to particular committees to attend meetings of such committees as ex-officio Members. We do not have a right to vote but we have a right to speak our views as ex-officio Members. The drama I witnessed in the committee on Public Service this morning amazed me. I went to the committee - unfortunately the chairperson of the committee had started the same style again. What the chairperson started with, even before prayers, was to demand that non-members of the committee must go out. Secondly, she demanded that the press must get out. So, we sought clarification: what was so confidential –(Interruption)

MS MUTYABULE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Dr Epetait or “Appetite”- (Interjections) - was one of the Members from the Opposition side who came to attend the committee meeting. If there was anything that went wrong, hon. Epetait was part of it. In fact, he talked loudest. Mr Speaker, is the Member in order to come here and reverse the whole issue when he was the ringleader? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was not in that meeting but I suppose the testimonies are what you people witnessed. Because I was not there, I cannot rule on it, unfortunately.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for your wise ruling. My argument was in regard to the proposal of the chairperson to throw out non-members and yet yesterday’s ruling was that we go back and harmonise our positions. In fact, when later the committee accepted to have the ex-officio members in attendance as well as the media, I was the first to speak out my mind and I submitted so many issues. The issues that I submitted to the committee have all been left out according to the chairperson’s brief report - that we never said anything. I talked about the procedures in KCCA. The fact of the matter is that there is a problem that requires to be sorted out in KCCA. I attested to that and I said that there is a problem with the law and on that I also agree with the committee’s report that the law requires an amendment. Secondly, I said the Executive Director ought to recognise the role of the political leadership. I said the Executive Director appears to be doing her –(Interruption)

DR OMONA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I feel so hurt when a matter like this, which provides us an opportunity to discuss about the moving on well of our capital city, comes and we waste a lot of time unproductively. Mr Speaker, you guided yesterday that there be a meeting of the Members of this committee to harmonise their positions. It is also true that not every meeting must have everybody agreeing with a certain position. That is why if you look at this report, which has just been presented by the chairperson of this committee, there are those who have signed that they agree with this report and there are those who have not signed. 

Mr Speaker, I remember you said yesterday that if there are those who have dissenting opinions, you will give them an opportunity to present them in whichever form and I think this was to give leeway - What I am seeing today reminds me of one Roman Senator called Cato the younger who used to debate until dusk before Parliament would close. 

The procedural issue I am raising is -In fact, a report of the meeting today has been presented to this House. And, Mr Speaker, you have also given opportunity to the honourable members who have dissenting opinions to present them here in the House and we are not seeing it. Unless this is some sort of tactics, we must go ahead and discuss the issues that are affecting KCCA and our city. I think this is what we have before us. Is it procedurally right, for the hon. Epetait, who is not even a Member of this committee, to begin debating the report that we are going - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are serious things about KCCA. What has been pointed out to those who have read this like I have, are serious issues. Yesterday I tried to summarise and I said there are two issues: Is there a problem in KCCA? Yes. Can this Parliament do something about it? Yes. We have not agreed on what Parliament can do about it, but it should do something. The only way that this Parliament can do something is to have these discussions. We have tried to move this way to accommodate everybody on board so that we can give – this is not a debate that will take one or two hours. This debate has to take long for it to be exhausted completely. 

So, if an honourable member wants to speak for 15 minutes to the subject, I will be able to allow that because that will be the only way for you to speak out on the issues that are not contained in the report and those issues that you disagree with as compared to those in the recommendations of the report – I am ruling on a procedural matter and you are again standing on a procedural matter? Can’t you wait for me to finish? Some Member raised a point of procedure upon which I am still trying to guide but you are all shooting up on procedural matters before I even finish guiding the House.

I am restrained by the Chair that I seat on and sometimes I also have characteristics like yours – (Laughter) - but I am always restrained. If this House cannot tone down on our characteristics, it will not be very helpful. Let us respect the dignity of this House by following some form of order. That is all I am saying.

Okay, what I was saying is that we will be able to debate this matter until it is exhausted before we conclude. That is why I am trying to bring everybody on board. So, hon. Francis Epetait, who was part of – I am receiving here a list of people who want to speak to this matter and they are from both sides. Hon. Member for Kampala Central, you know that they cannot send the list to you; it has been sent to me and it has Members from both sides of the House. 

Most of the Members who have expressed interests in speaking to this issue are the stakeholders because they represent people from the Kampala City Council Authority areas. They have asked to be given ample time to debate this matter. Why are we stifling this process?

Honourable members, we have tried to bring a report before Parliament that can be debated and which can be a basis for our discussions. You are free to either pass or reject that report and adopt your own recommendations as a House because this report is not yet a full decision of the House. Hon. Semujju Nganda, please, there is a report before the House and I have already ruled on that. So, can we now proceed? Yes, Member for Buyaga.

MR TINKASIMIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to raise this point of procedure. When the chairperson of the committee read the report and laid on Table the minutes of the meetings, I was the one who raised a point of procedure to the effect that she had just laid a file and not minutes. I recall you ruled that the file contained a set of minutes. So, I got interested to go and read the minutes to find out the number of meetings the committee had had.

I want to inform you, Mr Speaker, that I was shocked to only find minutes dated 12th   May with attachments of attendance lists for 14 meetings. There were no other sets of minutes in that file. 

In circumstances, Mr Speaker, where people are throwing doubt on the report, how are we going to proceed to debate such a report without reading the minutes that were supposed to be in the file that was laid on Table?

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, you have ruled on this matter, not once and not twice that there is an authentic report before this House. We have all been waiting to see how best we can help KCCA. That is why when hon. Betty Nambooze was picked to present a petition by the Lord Mayor of Kampala, the Speaker directed that it should be handled expeditiously. Mr Speaker, is hon. Bernabas Tinkasimire in order to keep challenging your ruling about the authenticity of the report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have ruled on this subject. I have ruled on this subject and I am not going to rule on it again. 

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you so much for permitting me the opportunity to raise this point of procedure. I have two points: One is that I appreciate the difficulty of the position in which you are seated but I also have utmost trust in your wisdom to steer us with clarity in accordance with our rules. Rule 208 of our Rules of procedure requires the production of minutes of meetings. As we talk, we don’t have those minutes. 

Two, doubt has been cast onto the report and that doubt goes or affects the integrity, not only of the report but also of this House. A combination of the two defaults – no minutes and no trust in the report – doesn’t this require a thorough investigation. 
Mr Speaker, let me take you to Rule 8 of our Rules of Procedure. In that rule, it is not provided for specifically what you have to resort to when doubt is cast on the report, but the rule provides that in case of any doubt and for any question of procedure not provided for in these rules, the Speaker shall decide, having regard to the practices of the House, the constitutional provisions and practices of other commonwealth parliaments in as far as they may be applicable to Uganda’s Parliament.

Mr Speaker, in light of that one and the ugly debate that we are witnessing today, isn’t it procedurally correct that you adopt an acceptable procedure, in accordance with the practices of other commonwealth countries to establish, first and foremost, whether this is a report or not? It is not simply a question of making a ruling; it must be a ruling that continues to confer dignity, trust and honour – (Interjections) - I would learn many things especially from hon. Baka and hon. Katoto, it is not about the law 

MR KATOTO: Mr Speaker, yesterday you did say that anyone who was not satisfied with the report should go and sit in a committee meeting and they decide upon the issue. When I check on the signatures of Members who attended the meeting and on the signature of Members who attended the other meeting and who made a report, they are almost the same. 

So the hon. Betty Nambooze Bakireke, Mr Speaker, in my opinion, overlooked your ruling because she should have signed this report and then come here and say, ”Please I was not satisfied” but she did not sign here nor on the other report. Now how can we know and satisfy ourselves that she attended? For sure, we have to respect the proceedings of this House because you complain, they send you to attend, you do not attend and now you come here to complain. So how are we going to - (Interruption)

MS ALUM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, when you heavily and rightly guided the House and the committee in particular, you said that we should go and harmonise and that the meeting should begin at 9.00 a.m. Today the meeting did not begin even by 10.00 a.m. The chairperson and the vice-chairperson were not there yet some Members of the committee were already there.

Secondly, you said the dissenting opinions of the Members who did not sign the report must be heard. The meeting started in a chaotic manner -(Interjection)- Protect me, Mr Speaker. When the meeting started in a very unusual manner, hon. Nambooze tried to bring in her dissenting views by first of all querying the issue of the minutes. The vice-chairperson who was outside came in and moved a motion for the closure of the meeting.

Mr Speaker, I was there and the chairperson ruled that the meeting was closed. I moved out and other Members did the same. I am surprised to see that there is a minute under the report of the committee. Is it, therefore, in order, having all this happen in today’s meeting, for hon. Katoto to begin saying that Members who did not sign are impeding our progress yet your ruling was not followed today? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have a procedural point and a point of order that have been raised. Can I deal with those first? Let me take one more procedure then we - Let me deal with the procedural issues. I am going to rule on all of them.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am seeking your advice pursuant to a specific rule: Rule 194(1) of our Rules of Procedure. Before I read it out verbatim, I want to say that we have very high respect for you and when you speak in terms of guidance, we all honour that advice because you have interest in the progress of the deliberations of this House.

Yesterday you advised us, pursuant to the errors, which were pointed out on how we proceeded in regard to the constitution of the report. I am one of the stakeholders of this report and I came out openly to say that in regard to what we have so far heard out of the report, there is a lot of misrepresentation in that report. I said this in very good faith. You recommended that we harmonise by going back to that committee and the people who were not heard be heard. 

Mr Speaker, how can we begin effective scientific debate over a matter that is in question? Under Rule 194(1) which I beg to read verbatim: “A member dissenting from the opinion of a majority of a committee may state in writing the reasons for his or her or their dissent, and the statements of reason shall be appended to the report of the committee.” How can you append those minority views on a nullity in question?

So, I want to conclude by proposing that we are all sinners but there is an omission, which is concerning all of us. We cannot proceed to debate a report where there are so many misrepresentations. We, therefore, beg you, Mr Speaker, to re-direct us because hon. Nambooze cannot present the minority report by appending it to a nullity. There is no report as circumstances stand now.

MR BAKKA: Mr Speaker, you are the custodian of our Rules of Procedure. We have been waiting for three days to debate this report. You have made a ruling in respect to the authenticity of the report. Issues are now coming up, semantics of procedure are coming up and now what I can hear is that they want a thorough investigation on the report.

Mr Speaker, I am seeking procedural guidance from you. Now that your ruling has been ignored by some Members of this House, some of us are ready to debate the report. We know the report is authentic. There are now two sides. We are ready to debate and now Members are calling for a thorough investigation. Shouldn’t we go for a vote to determine whether to proceed with the investigation or debate on the report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have some issues to make statements on. The first point, which was raised, was the question of minutes. We received a set of minutes on the 16th May and a copy of those minutes was attached to the petition of hon. Nambooze - three minute sets. Yesterday we received a bundle of other minutes and I just got a note from the Clerk that the minutes are with her. Yesterday they were laid here under my direction. 

Honourable members, yesterday minutes were laid and the copies are with us. This is from the clerk at Table. So the question of minutes does not arise because they are available there. I do not know how many sets are there; can you, please, count the sets of minutes we have there? 

Honourable members, while the sets are being counted, we have also heard testimonies from the committee Members that meetings were indeed held from January. There are Members who say they had several meetings. The only problem that the honourable member for Mukono has is that, the final meeting that looked at the draft report and approved it had no notice given. Hon. Nambooze raises the issue that the final meetings that led to the discussion of the draft report and its approval were not attended by her and she did not receive any notice. Is that correct, hon. Nambooze? Does that mean there were other meetings that you attended?

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, there were several meetings and I attended some of them. But, Mr Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, please, I just asked – 

MS NAMBOOZE: I am seeking your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please, I am the one who asked you the information I need – because I am in the middle of a ruling.

MS NAMBOOZE: I am seeking your guidance, Mr Speaker, so that I can give you –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I just asked you if it were the last meetings that you did not attend because that is the information she gave to me, in writing, that she attended all the other meetings except the final ones where the approval of the draft report and the decision was taken. Is that correct?

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, there were no meetings to evaluate the evidence which was brought to the committee, draft the report and come up with the final copy. Those meetings never took place.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But were there meetings that listened to the petitioners and other witnesses?

MS NAMBOOZE: We had meetings to interview witnesses and we even had internal meetings in between to schedule business. But we have never had meetings to evaluate the evidence that was laid before the committee, draft a report – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I agree with that because it is the issue you raised. But certainly those meetings that you attended have minutes, and those are the minutes which have been laid. By the way, how many are they? They are 15 sets of minutes. Hon. Nambooze attended 10 of them because she has signed them. 

Let us now go to the root of the issue. There were 15 meetings and hon. Nambooze attended 10 of them. So, the question of minutes at this stage does not arise because the minutes are there and that is why I said yesterday that if there were other minutes – because you know the proceedings of the House; we have had situations here, where reports are presented – there was even an instance where a report was presented and yet it was not signed. So we said let the Members who attended the meeting sign in order to facilitate the process, instead of prohibiting it. But we have also had situations where minutes are laid the next day; of course, the difference is that there were no contestations in those ones. But now we have the minutes there – 15 meetings of the committee. So there is no issue about the question of minutes. 

Secondly, the question of doubt. I have spoken on this twice but for the benefit of those who want to hear it the third time, let me say it again. The report that was presented was signed by 10 committee Members, and they were from both sides of the House. You can shake your head, hon. Sseggona, but that is the fact. Just wait; I am checking the issues you have raised and I am trying to see how we can move forward. The report was signed by Members of both sides of the House and there were initials on all pages. Out of 17 Members, 10 members signed - Just hold on, honourable, you asked me to rule on this matter.

So, I openly put the question here, asking if there was anybody whose signature or name was indicated as part of the people who signed and yet it was either forged –I asked, for example, hon. Santa Alum who is on the other side. 

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, it is not you to investigate; the rules are clear.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sseggona, I am sure we all share the kind of respect we have for each other and I am quoting the same rules that you are using. I am raising the question of authenticity; where the authenticity is an issue - this document is not an issue! 
Honourable members, this is for the benefit of those who were not there; and that is why I am going through this again. So, when is it unauthentic? Does the complaint touch on the report as it is? It does not; that is my ruling. Let me state it clearly for the record and for those who want to challenge it outside this place. 

MR SSEGGONA: You can chase me out of this Parliament but-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Can we have some order – please sit for now. Honourable member for Rubaga, please sit. The honourable member has also quoted Rule 8. Rule 8 is the basis of a series of things that are gathered and is called a compilation of the Speaker’s rulings. That is a situation where the rules are unclear. Hon. Sseggona raised this matter in the House and that is why I am addressing it. 

Hon. Sseggona raised a question on Rule No.8; that rule arises in a situation where there are not rules that cover a particular subject. But in this particular case, the rules are very clear on what should happen. So Rule 8 does not apply in such circumstances – hon. Nambooze, this was raised by hon. Sseggona, I am not raising it myself. He said that I can use the authority in rule 8 to take a position, and I am saying that Rule 8 only applies where there is no clear provision. I am just dealing with the issues systematically like I always do. 

Now, hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi raised the issue of Rule 194(1) which has been the subjection of my speech for I do not know how many sittings. But for his benefit, let me say something about it. 

Rule 194(1): “A Member dissenting from the opinion of a majority of a committee may state in writing the reasons for his or her or their dissent and a statement of reasons shall be appended to the report of the committee.” 

I received a letter from hon. Nambooze signifying this intention; I was here when I received the letter. I read the letter to the House and told them the best way to handle it was the way we had handled a similar matter before, where we allowed the Leader of the Opposition to come and speak at a certain time on a particular matter that had no clear rules provided for. That was taken care of in that way. All we want is that no views will be supressed; we must not use the rules to supress views. 

And hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi is not a critic of the main report. A minority report is a summary of the areas of disagreement where a committee has a series of decision that it has taken. Like in this case, I think there are about 17 recommendations they have made. I do not think all of us disagree with all the 17 recommendations. So point out the areas and say on this, “I disagree” and that would be the basis of your minority report. 

Where you agree with the majority, you do not dissent. I have had the benefit of presenting in this House a report that had two minority reports. They were both presented on the Floor and the Members articulated them. In fact, they both signed on the main report but they pointed out the specific areas where they disagreed with the majority decision. That is how we do minority reports. You signify to the chairperson that on such a matter, I disagree and I will present a minority opinion on it. 

But in this particular case, the honourable member who had notified to me that she wanted to present a minority report was not in the country. In the letter she wrote, she said she had just landed from outside the country; she was at the airport. I do not even know how she signed the letter, but the letter ended up here while I was sitting here. 

So I said that in the spirit of hearing everything, let the Member point out those areas and I will give her an hour or two to articular them to the Members. We have reached a stage where that report has been presented to the House. Clearly, that is how I can guide on this process. The reason I referred this matter to committee yesterday was to try and deal with this situation. Now, if there was a problem in the committee that cannot be put on the Speaker because the opportunity was accorded to the Members. So this business of – 

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have guided us so well. From what you have stated, I gather that your spirit was to bring harmony and I am very happy about it. But I think there are two fundamental questions that we have got to decide on. With your indulgence, Mr Speaker, let me state that, one, I respect the fact that when the Speaker is speaking, he must be heard in silence, and the Speaker always speaks for us – (Interjections) – I have the Floor and I need protection from the likes of hon. Kakooza. 

There is a complaint with respect to the authenticity of the report. Under Rule 193(3)(1): “In case of a complaint as to the authenticity of the report, the Speaker shall halt the debate on the report and refer the matter to the Clerk for investigation who shall report back to the House before the next sitting of the House. 
(2) Upon receiving the report from the Clerk, the Speaker shall inform the House of the findings and a decision will be taken on both the complaint and the report.”  

What we witness here today – you did that in the best interest of the House and I congratulate you on that. But in pursuing that goodwill, you asked the suspects to handle a matter between them and the complainant. That would do very well if we had achieved harmony. We have not achieved that goal which you did in good faith and I have never doubted your understanding of the law; your application of the law; and your good faith. I am only suggesting, Mr Speaker, that where harmony fails, let us resort to our rules. In the past, we have done it, under your wise guidance.

May I suggest that having failed to harmonise our positions, we go back to our rules and you refer as directed by the rules. Your sister, the Speaker of this House, sat where you are seated and made a wonderful quotation. She said, “I have no eyes to see, no ears to hear except as directed by this House.” And this House, Mr Speaker, I very humbly persuade you, is directing you through the rules to make this. I humbly request you. 

MS ROSE NAMAYANJA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to agree with hon. Sseggona that actually we depend on our rules and our rules are very clear. In a situation where a Speaker makes a ruling, in accordance with the rules, whatever he made - and yesterday when he made that ruling there was nobody who stood up or quoted any rule to challenge his ruling. 

Rule 78(2) is to the effect that: “The decision of the Speaker or Chairperson upon any point shall not be open to appeal and shall not be reviewed by the House, except upon a substantive motion made after notice”. I am quoting the Rules of Procedure of the Ninth Parliament of Uganda. If I am aggrieved by the ruling of the Speaker, I can refer to this very rule to challenge his position. That is the procedure I am questioning. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you saw that we were proceeding very well. When the matter of KCCA came up, even the microphones rebelled. (Laughter) I am not so sure whether there are things in KCCA that cannot be discussed. It is possible that there are unthinkable things happening in KCCA; unspeakable things happening in KCCA; but this House must think about them and speak about them because this House is the only place. This House passed the law which is now being criticised for its inability to harmonise the situation in KCCA. We passed that law here. This House is now being asked to regulate the very basic things; it should pronounce itself on them. For example, I have seen in the report that the council of KCCA has not sat for two years. They have sat in one meeting - I do not know whether it is true but it is in the testimonies of the witnesses. 

The other thing is that Shs 26.9billion has been spent in allowances so far at KCCA. This is what is in the report. This petition was brought by the Lord Mayor not some concerned citizen. The Lord Mayor, who is the political head of this institution, together with other councillors, brought this petition to this House. These are the small facts. But to come to the House and then the House is completely unable to do exactly what the prayers of the petitioners have asked, to look into their concerns - because they presented their prayers, one by one, for the House to look at prayer 1, prayer 2 and take a decision but it is becoming impossible!

Honourable members, it does not matter what side of the aisle you are sitting on. It does not matter which side of KCCA you are on because I do not suspect that any members here have any side in KCCA, although the discussion is beginning to reveal that there are sides on these issues. But the sum total of what we should be doing as the honourable House is that the person who by an Act of Parliament, we have authorised to head the institution, and another person, who by an Act of Parliament we have authorised to head that institution, one of them has come back to this House and said, “There are problems and some of the problems arise from the law you people passed.” And what are we doing as parliamentarians? We want to say, “Procedure.” We want to avoid this. That is exactly what we are doing. We want to avoid all this, bury our heads in the sand and KCCA continues the way it is. That is what we are doing right now. So, whatever decision we take, it is not for Jacob Oulanyah as Deputy Speaker; no it is not for me. But there should be a decision of the House that this is how we resolve the issues that were brought to this Parliament by KCCA. 

In the past, petitions were brought directly to Parliament - Yes, I am advising you on the origins of petitions before many of you were practising these issues of politics. (Laughter) Yes. Before, petitions were brought directly to Parliament and they were debated and finished just like Bills. But that has changed. Why? Because you want to give the committee an opportunity to interface with other people who may not have access to the Chamber of Parliament; people who are called strangers. Madam Jennifer Musisi is a stranger to this House; the Lord Mayor is a stranger to this House. They cannot address this House. They can only address this House through petitions. That is why the process of them coming to speak directly to Parliament was reduced to committees. And the record I have seen is that, all of the petitioners have appeared before the committee and they have spoken, and some of the things they have spoken are contained here. 

The contestation is that, some Members were not in the final meeting in which this final report was signed. Some Members did not attend that meeting and they had no notice of such a meeting. So, there is even doubt as to whether there was a meeting. That is what the concern is. 

But the fundamental question is, when we referred the matter to the committee, you went there and you still did not agree. Now, you have an opinion that is before this House. It was read and it is on the Hansard of this House. We can choose to look the other way and treat it like it never happened; that would be our choice. We would treat it like we have never heard of this problem. But if any mess should continue in KCCA, which we have failed to resolve by this apparent and impasse, then that is a problem we are imposing on the people of this country. I should have done that today, but I am not going to do it because there is still pending business. Though we don’t know yet how we will move on between today and tomorrow in regard to this mater, I am going to direct as follows. 

This matter, if there is dissenting opinion or if there is a view that is not represented, whichever way, in the majority view of what has been contained in this thing, that view has to come out. The question is, how will it come out? The way it will come out is: The Members already know the areas where they have disagreements. Ten people have signed up to what they agreed on, whatever the circumstances are. But there are also people who don’t agree with what the 10 Members have signed up to.

Now, there should be an opportunity accorded to – because hon. Nambooze was ready to give her dissenting opinion to the committee today except that process was mismanaged from what I have heard in regard to how the meeting of the committee was conducted. I am now going to ask the committee that has handled this matter, and the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to ponder over this matter so that tomorrow – please, listen carefully. Is the Chairman of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs here? Okay, I need you to help us with this process. We need to agree that we have a working document, which we will entertain in all the discussions we will do. That working document is the report that has been presented to us here – please it was presented and it is already captured on the Hansard. So, it is that document that you will go back with to the committee – and can I say at 9.00 O’clock again?

I will strongly recommend that this House is unanimous on the issue that there is a problem at KCCA. This House is also unanimous that there is something that Parliament must do about this. In all that, we now have a document here that has recommendations, which could be a basis of our discussions. Go and look at it – honourable members, please listen to me. You cannot start on nothing tomorrow. We have a summary of the prayers of the petitioners and the minutes are there, hon. Member for Kampala Central, you can even verify that.

So, chairperson of the legal committee, I hereby ask you to sit with the Committee on Local Government tomorrow starting at 9.00 O’clock and see if we can move this matter forward.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I agree with you that the matters of KCCA are very important for this country and it is obvious that something is wrong in Kampala, which needs to be attended to.

I think that the only issue that seems to be at the heart of the problem now is that there are people who are Members of this committee, but who do not agree with the report. 

According to our Rules of Procedure, a monitory opinion must be part of the main report. This has not been done. There is no minority report – (Interjections) - you know, Mr Speaker, I really try my best to listen. I always give that gentleman – (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, I had the benefit to attend this House. During the sitting, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister drew the attention of this House to the content of Rule 78; hon. Namayanja did that same thing to the effect that the Speaker’s ruling is final.

Mr Speaker, you have directed on the same matter, which directive I construed to be a ruling that the two committees work together to pronounce themselves on this matter. But the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, well aware of this rule, is trying to discuss your ruling on the same matter. So, is it procedurally right for him to still continue debating your ruling?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you cannot call these proceedings any ordinary proceedings. So, begin from that point. This is a very ordinary and typical parliamentary sitting; when senior members of the House begin to yell at the top of their voices – (Laughter) - with the short ones jumping higher and higher, then you know there is a problem!

Anyway, what we are trying to do is to find a way of dealing with this situation by concretizing what should happen in the course of tomorrow morning. So, for the record of this House, I can restate the recommendations that I had in this House:

The first one is that the law be amended to avoid ambiguity, provide a nomenclature for the governing body that is different from the present organisation. That is what they said and it was read to us here, for those who don’t recall what the chairperson of the committee said.

It was also recommended that the law be amended to clearly distinguish the roles of the various organs of Kampala City Council Authority, which we can do. We are not voting, this is just to remind us what we can do.

The committee also recommended that the law be amended to streamline the political governance of KCCA in line with Article 5 (4). That is the recommendation so that you go and think about these things also; those who did not hear. 

In 4, the committee recommends that the minister should exercise his powers under Section 79 of the KCCA Act to ensure that organs of the authority are appointed, as by law established. These are arising from prayers of the petitioners. Implementation of these recommendations should be part of the annual report of the minister. 

The other one was that, the committee recommends that Government expedites re-organisation and restructuring of the city, including the division urban councils, to conform to section 4(2) of the KCCA Act, under which division urban councils ceased to be local governments. The new structure should be that of a corporate entity under the Central Government, while protecting the sovereignty and franchise of the people of Kampala, as provided by the Constitution Article 1(4).

The other one is, the committee recommends that the Public Service Commission re-examines all the staff of KCCA and weeds out people who do not qualify for the given posts in accordance with the specifications of each job. This is what they have also said.

The committee recommends that these allegations be - that one you need details; allegations that should be dropped.

The other one is that the committee recommends that the allegations of safe houses should be dropped. That one is about somebody managing some safe houses.

The committee recommends that the re-branding of KCCA be upheld. The committee recommends that the minister tables in Parliament the Bill to provide for the Land Board for KCCA in any case not later than 60 days from the date of this resolution taking into account concerns raised by the residents.

The committee recommends that in future such embarrassments should be avoided. This is about the relationship between the two heads.

The committee recommends that these allegations be dropped.

Now 15. The committee recommends that a forensic audit be carried out on KCCA in general to cover the activities of both the technical, managerial and political leadership of the city. That is another of the recommendations.

The committee recommends that the minister should use his powers under Section 79 to prevail over the authority and ensure that meetings of the authority and committees are held.

The committee recommends that the President of the Republic of Uganda exercises his constitutional responsibility under Article 99(1) of the Constitution, which provides that the Executive authority of Uganda is vested in the President and shall be exercised in accordance - That is the recommendation.

The committee recommends that the President take over KCCA and finally, the committee recommends that reforms be undertaken to amend the KCCA Act and to strengthen the policy and management structures of KCCA and they list what should be done.

That is what has been brought to the House. It was read here and I am sure, hon. Members, those of you who have listened, there are issues that are calling upon this Parliament to do something. The petitioners are begging this Parliament to do something so that is what has come from these recommendations. Go and ponder over them while we have this meeting of the - Let me first hear from Legal.

MR TASHOBYA: I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to express my surprise and reservations on this matter. First of all, I do not know under what rule you will refer this report to be handled by the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and the other committee.
Mr Speaker, I am saying this because there is an independent committee of Parliament, the Local Government Committee, that had a petition and did investigations and came out with a report before you, Mr Speaker. It is upon you to pronounce as to whether there is a report or not. If there is a report like you ruled, I do not see any way Members of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs committee have to do - We were not part of the investigations! We were not part of the work they did. We would be dragged into an issue that we have no conscience to do. 

If the issue is to bring some people’s views, maybe what was not done today should be given time maybe to be done tomorrow. That the people who did not present their views today be given an opportunity in the same committee to go and present in an orderly manner and then tomorrow they come and present a report here in Parliament. But, Mr Speaker, to drag us in this problem is unprecedented and I think is not necessary.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, the reason I was asking this is because there are issues of parliamentary affairs, which I raised in some of these proceedings and which I thought, being the person in charge of the committee that is in charge of the Parliamentary Commission, you would be able to handle. That is why I was -

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I do agree with you that issues regarding KCCA are very important and dear to all of us. In this Parliament, we have Rules of Procedure that guide the business of our Parliament. Under Part 17 page 167, it says that operations of committees generally -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which Rule is that?

MR OKOT OGONG: I am talking of Part 17 page 167 on rules that guide committees generally. Under 182, it says that rules to apply generally to all committees. You may read that. The most important is ahead. I now refer you to 190 about decisions by the committee. Okay, I will read 182 and it says: “In committees, these rules shall be observed so far as may be applicable. In (2) it states that the chairperson or other person presiding at the meeting of a committee “shall maintain order in the committee and decisions on all questions of order and disorder in a committee shall be dealt with under Rule 79.”

When I proceed to 190, I am aware that this committee has been meeting. As you have stated, they met 15 times and in those meetings, they came out with decisions as per our Rule 190; decisions by the committee. “Decisions of a committee shall be arrived at by consensus; and in the absence of a consensus, decisions shall be by the votes of the majority of members of the committee present and voting.” I understand that in the committee decisions were taken. And, Mr Speaker, under Rule 193: “Report to be signed by the chairperson and Members.” Let me read it – (Mr Sseggona rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sseggona, he is on a procedural point.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I understand that we are honourable members of Parliament and we are guided by this book I am holding. And for us to have order in this Parliament, we must go by our rules, as you have stated it. And, therefore, I am seeking guidance from the Speaker basing on our Rules of Procedure. Rule 193 reads, “A report of a committee shall be signed and initialled on each page by at least one- third of all Members of the committee, and shall be laid on the Table.”

Mr Speaker, I have had the report and more than one-third of the committee Members signed it. I am seeking guidance taking the Speaker through what I want to get from him. Rule 193(2) says, “Members of the committee making a report shall be collectively responsible for decisions contained therein and shall not debate the report on the Floor of the House.” So once you are a Member of a committee, you are not supposed to debate the report on the Floor. And you are given a rider here that once you do not agree – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, would you like to – 

MR OKOT OGONG: Okay, Mr Speaker. Under Rule 194, a member is allowed to dissent and once there are dissenting views, a minority report is presented together with the main report. But in this case, the main report has not been presented and a Member has already complained that she should be given opportunity to present a report. Therefore, since all procedures have been followed, what is remaining – (Interruption) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. First of all, I am very glad that I lost an election to become a Deputy Speaker because I have seen this is a very difficult job. (Laughter) With people like hon. Okot Ogong, they make life even more difficult. (Laughter) I rise on a point of order. Mr Speaker, you have got a good exit route – a win-win situation for the whole House – and you have directed that the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs works in line with the current committee to get a new direction for Parliament. This is a not a new phenomenon: the Anti-homosexuality Bill was removed from the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and given to the Committee on Human Rights. Is it, therefore, right for hon. Okot Ogong to bring an orthodox litany as though he had been sleeping in the last three hours? (Laughter) Is he in order? Am I allowed to move a motion that he no longer be heard?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the situation the Speaker find the proceedings in, any Member who has a new idea on the way forward should guide the House. And hon. Okot Ogong, although he took a long time, he was beginning to say what he wanted to say. Please, state the way forward that you had in mind.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, under Rule 194 – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the way forward?

MR OKOT OGONG: The way forward is that since we also want to hear from other Members, we should give them the opportunity to raise a minority view and present it on the Floor so that - Yes, personally I want to hear the minority view and I will form my decision through getting views from other Members. Therefore, I would appreciate if they could sit down, get a clear, precise minority report to Parliament. Thank you.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think you guided us well. Rule 188(1) of our rules provides that, “Subject to sub-rule (3), an instruction to a committee may empower a committee to consider matters not otherwise referred to it.” I want to suggest that we take the consensus in your proposal; that the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee in conjunction with a sister committee looks at this matter as you guided. But my only concern, in addition to the concerns of my chairperson, is time; we may not be in a position to conclude this business tomorrow. If only you could increase the time because we are trying to build a consensus. 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not intend to dispute your ruling – luckily enough you had not ruled; you were just about to rule. For us to maintain the integrity of this House and that of committees, and for us not to set a precedent of committee undermining others, and committees clashing – [Mr Odonga Otto: “Order!”] - Mr Speaker, I have been listening to Members attentively from the beginning; it is my prayer that I am listened to like I have been listening to others.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, hon. Milton Muwuma is trying to insinuate that you have made a wrong decision to direct the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to help the current committee. But – I have been here for 12 years and you have been here for, I think, only seven years – there are enormous precedents in this House where the Speaker has directed another committee to take on a Bill being considered by another. I have just given the example of the Anti-Homosexuality Bill; it has now migrated from the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to the Committee on Human Rights. Yes, there was even a select committee set up by the Speaker after a report was presented by a different committee. So, are you in order to impute bad motives on the Speaker and to bring unnecessary controversies at a time we are about to wind up? Mr Speaker, is he in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have asked the honourable member to confirm whether he is in order; I am sure he is going to say he is in order. (Laughter) That one is for sure. 

But, honourable members, let us have some order; he was still on the Floor. Just like I said, when the point of order was raised when the honourable member for Dokolo was on the Floor, it is a spirit that is guiding us in these discussions. So let us not be very hard. 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that ruling. You said that anybody who might have a proposal on the way forward should raise it and that is what I am coming to. I propose that for us not to create a scenario of committees suspecting one another, and since you took us through the recommendations of the committee as you read out one by one – these were from the report that was presented. So, could you, Sir, use your powers to direct the Clerk to give the honourable member with dissenting views the minutes so that she can come up with her own report and present them on the Floor of the House tomorrow and we debate? 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I rise to move a motion under Rule 15 of our Rules of Procedure. I seek your consent, Mr Speaker, that I move a motion to suspend Rule 194 in respect of its requirement that minority opinion must be attached to the report so that hon. Nambooze or anyone else who may wish to give an opinion, which is different from the report be allowed to present it tomorrow, so that we have the opinion of all the people who have had a point on this – (Interruption) 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: The Speaker has already ruled; is it because you are a Prime Minister –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me handle this directly, hon. Member for Aruu – 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Yes, but let me first raise the point of order. Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order –(Interruption) 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I therefore beg to move. 

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, let me read this Rule under which the Prime Minister is moving. It provides: “Any Member may with the consent of the Speaker move that any rule be suspended in its application for a particular motion before the House and if the motion is carried then the rule in question shall be suspected.”
 
The Prime Minister could only move a motion to suspend the rule if we were debating a motion on the Floor but there is none. So his motion is misconceived. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, a motion is a proposition to the House for a decision. The proposition before the House for decision is the report on the petition – it is what we are debating anyway. Let me read: “Presentation, consideration and adoption of the report of the committee of Public Service and Local Government on the petition...” that is what is before the House. So, hon. Sseggona, please, with all the respect, there is a matter before the House on which we must pronounce ourselves on. The matter is that we consider and adopt the report of the committee on public service. That is the item that was called for us to take a decision on. 

What the Prime Minister raised is what I also raised yesterday when I made reference of this matter to the committee, without mentioning the rules. I ordered that the committee should meet to give Members who have contrary opinions on this matter to articulate their issues and those issues should be brought before Parliament. 

So, honourable member for Mukono, I would like to ask you one question. Do you have a dissenting opinion on this matter before the House? 

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, there is no report upon which I can present a dissenting view because when we went to the committee – (Interruption)

MR MUGABI: Mr Speaker, I am touched by the consistent refusal of Members to deny the fact that you have ruled that there is a report in this House. As far as I know, you made a ruling yesterday that this House has a report. So is it in order for the hon. Member for Mukono Municipality to persist that there is no report yet you ruled that there is a report? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me state this and if you have a strong view about what I am going to say then the avenues to the other places of adjudication is very open. Let me state it now; I have read clearly the rules and I have asked questions about Members who signed up to this report and they have confirmed and there are minutes of 15 meetings of the committee. I have ruled that this is a report of the committee. This is the third time I am stating it. This is the report of the committee of public service- no, I am saying that when they go there they can treat it as a working document but here it is, a report that is properly presented before the House. 

This is a report of a parliamentary committee. If you have contestations about whether this report is a report or not, then we cannot resolve this matter here. The avenues to the other places are open. If you want to challenge my ruling - I also know these rules and I also apply them squarely and fairly. This is a report. Nobody who has signed this report has questioned it. The people who are questioning the report are not part of the people who wrote the report. I am spending all my energy trying to accommodate those who did not have the opportunity to give views on this. That is my ruling and if you disagree with it you know what to do. 

This is a report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Governments and it was presented to this House on 16 May 2013. If there are issues with it, let there be issues. If there are challenges about that ruling, let there be challenges. Without challenges things can never move. Let those challenges be there but nothing can be done to say that this is not a report. It is a report of the House as per my ruling and my allowing it to be presented.

I had recommended that this matter be stood over for this opportunity to be accorded to the Members who dissent to give their views. I am actually following the rules here; you are not but as Speaker, I am following the rules. Hon. Member for Kyadondo South is not following the rules but I am following the rules. 

So, let this matter be handled tomorrow and opportunity be accorded to whoever has a dissenting opinion to this report. That is the Speaker’s ruling. Hon. Ssemujju Nganda, you know what to do. You cannot just shout a ruling of the Speaker. So, that is what the Speaker is doing for your information.

So, Chairperson Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, I still think you people should handle this issue because there are issues that are about parliamentary affairs in it- that is what I am saying. They should come to the committee with their different opinions.  
MS ROSE NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, I appreciate the concerns. But the Chairman of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs was very explicit. He said that they have not been privy to the issues that culminated into the recommendations of this committee. So, it would be imprudent on our part to imagine that they are going to sit down and look at issues that they never considered at the beginning.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what I am referring to the committee is very specific. And even if I was not in this Parliament and was just told, I would still be able to entertain that matter tomorrow and be able to guide. What I am referring to the committee is, let the two committees sit and let them entertain dissenting opinions if they are there. That is what I am referring to the committee and not anything about legality. It is none of that. What I am saying is, there is a report. The procedure says the minority report must be attached to the report. I waived that procedure and I said let them present to that committee. Why? Because there is this particular situation that the chairperson did not handle today’s meeting properly. That is why I want the Chairman Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to help me. And it is only that- please sit with the committee and if there is no dissenting opinion then there will be none tomorrow. Just convene the meeting and that meeting will be under the chairmanship of the Chairman of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Mr Chairman, you have to help the House.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Can I be protected, Mr Speaker. I still have the same problems I expressed just a few minutes ago because I want you to understand our problem. We have not been part and parcel of these investigations - (Interjections) - why don’t you listen. If the purpose of the meeting you are directing that we should have is to accord the Members who have not expressed their views to do so, why are we being brought into this meeting? Yes, I agree that those people who have minority views should bring them up, but what does the legal committee have to do with the minority views of those people? If those people have the views they want to express, why don’t they go to their mother committee and bring their views? Or if they think they cannot get the attention from their mother committee, why can’t they write their report and come here on the Floor of this Parliament and present it? What precedent are we setting? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I have a lot of respect for hon. Tashobya, at a personal level but also for his distinguished position he plays in this Parliament. I have listened to him very well and hon. Tashobya knows it very well that he is the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and that he does not carry this committee on his back. If he is indisposed for one reason or another, the committee is wide and can be able to have this meeting. 

The point of order I raise is that having ruled the way you have ruled, as a learned friend, he knows very well the functus officio rule that once the Speaker has made a ruling it stands and it cannot be challenged? Is the honourable member in order to try to drag the Speaker back into the controversy and challenge the ruling of the Speaker? Being the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, he ought to know better that he can’t challenge the ruling of the Speaker. So, is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me be clear on this. I have not yet directed anything to anybody. I was only consulting on the process of doing that. What happened yesterday was all about giving orders and rulings. That is why I said, “I so order or I order as one, two, and three.” But I haven’t done that yet today. That is why I am entertaining all this. I have just said something about what I propose. I haven’t taken a decision on this matter. And what I want to propose is that, the two committees should handle this matter. Maybe, that is what I should be doing now but in which case, if I did so, it would be a directive. However, I would not want my directive to be in vain because if the Chairperson of the Legal and Parliamentary Committee of Parliament is already giving me this kind of response, it means he won’t be able to move.

Honourable members, I am going to give Members who have a dissenting opinion the first one hour of the debate. In the meantime, I am also directing as follows: That the Clerk to Parliament looks into the allegations, not of the authenticity of the report, but at the following issues: 

    (i) The minutes of the committee meetings – confirm with the people who drafted those minutes and inform me about that.
    (ii)  Whether the report that was circulated was truly certified by the original signatures of the Members and so it being the report of the committee; confirm to me whether what was circulated was submitted to your office.
    (iii)  The attendance list of the Members of the committee in the register book of this committee with the specific dates on which the meetings were held.

Please give that piece of information to me by 11.00 O’clock tomorrow. We will be able to proceed with debate on this matter in the afternoon before we prorogue Parliament. So, this matter is not going to be referred to the committee anymore – (Applause) – because the committee that should have be an arbitrator in this process has declined to do so. 

Accordingly, any Members with dissenting opinions will be given the first one hour of the sitting of tomorrow so that they can present the minority opinion. That is my ruling on this subject. Thank you. Please, let us move on to the next item.

Yes, hon. Minister of Internal Affairs, you were asked to present the Search Warrant to Parliament, not so?

6.00
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Hillary Onek): Mr Speaker, my task is very simple. As directed by you, Mr Speaker, I have before me here, a copy of the Search Warrant. I have five documents with me here: The first document is the Order of Court requiring The Daily Monitor to produce the letter and here it is.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What date is it?

MR ONEK: It is dated 16th –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are those the copies being circulated? Okay, honourable members, take note, the copies are being circulated. What is that first document?

MR ONEK: The originals are delivered to the recipients.  I have a copy of what is left.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is up to the Speaker to decide. Yes, continue.

MR ONEK: The document was issued by the Chief Magistrates Court at Nakawa. It is indicated Criminal Application No. 1981 of 2013 arising from the CID Headquarters E/197/2013: Uganda V. Simon Freeman, the Executive Director, Monitor Publications, Don Wanyama, the Managing Editor, Wanambwa Richard and Risdel Kusasira both reporters at The Daily Monitor. I now lay the document on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that a court order? What is it?

MR ONEK: This is the order that court issued requiring The Daily Monitor to produce the letter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, it is a court order but dated when?

MR ONEK: It is dated 15 May 2013.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the record capture that. Yes, can we have the next document?

MR ONEK: The next document is the Search Warrant in request for the letter from The Red Pepper newspaper offices. The Search Warrant is reference SCC 70 of MCA at 72 CPC, the Republic Uganda in the Magistrate Court of Kampala at Nakawa.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is Section 70 of the Magistrate’s Court Act and Section 7(2) of the Criminal Procedure Code.

MR ONEK: Exactly. So Detective Assistant Superintendent of Police, Boninpa Emmanuel of CID Headquarters was directed by this to carry out a search and this document has been received by The Red Pepper publications, which signed for it; the search warrant.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR ONEK: Similar documents for a search addressed to the same officer for The Monitor publications were also delivered - A search warrant was delivered on 20 May 2013 and received and acknowledged by Monitor publications.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR ONEK: Uganda Communications Commission-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is just a letter.

MR ONEK: Wrote a letter notifying KFM that because of the search operations in the premises where they operate, they should temporarily suspend their operations and the letter is here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What date is it?

MR ONEK: The date here is 20 May 2013.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

MR ONEK: A similar letter was written to Dembe FM and of the same date, 20 May 2013 signed by the Executive Director, Godfrey Mutabaazi of Uganda Communications Commission.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR ONEK: I think those are the documents that we have in our possession. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we had deferred discussions on this matter because of the absence of these documents that are now before us and in our hands and they have been laid on the Table of Parliament. Any contributions on this? The time now is 20 minutes after 8.00 p.m. so we need to regulate how much we will - I will start with the Member for Kasambya.

MR MULINDWA: Mr Speaker, mine is another procedural point. When we were proceeding in the House today, some queer sound happened in this House. We have only one life to live; you and all the other Members. I think we need to particularly know what happened from the Minister of Internal Affairs and Security because there are several policemen here who were guarding this Chamber. We need to know what the cause was, who was involved and what the purpose was.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is okay, I can answer that, hon. Member for Kasambya.

MR MULINDWA: Mr Speaker, tomorrow before we proceed, a statement must be made by the Minister of Internal Affairs to this effect. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member for Kasambya, that is not a matter for the Ministry of Internal Affairs; that is a matter for the Parliamentary Commission and the Office of the Speaker. I think you saw the Sergeant-at-Arm came here immediately after that incident to brief me on what had happened. There was a short circuit arising from an overload situation that caused that problem and he informed me that this first line of microphones will not be working. They will take the opportunity when the House adjourns to fix everything. So that is not a matter for internal security or any other person. 

Can I start with the Member for Buhweju? Please let us debate these matters. Are you tired? Let us deal with this. Honourable members, just look at me. I am the one who has sat here, I have not moved but you have been up and down, so please.

8.27
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the minister for responding to our demands and your directive that the papers that led to the closure of the FM stations and media houses are laid on Table and he has done that.

My earlier concern, which I had when we still had a hot debate, is about the letter that is alleged to have been written by Gen. Sejjusa and maybe in the hands of The Monitor publications. Wouldn’t it be better to simplify the situation for the country by The Monitor publications giving that letter to the Police and the investigating officers to solve the problem? This is because what we are going through was an allegation that Sejjusa wrote a letter but it is not being traced and it is said to be with The Monitor publications. So, the minister has done his part and wants to know, did Sejjusa write or not? The only solution to that question is if The Monitor publications, which published the letter can first produce that letter to the Police and it will be laid on Table and everything will be - That is my concern, Rt Hon. Speaker.

8.28
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I would like to thank the minister for tabling these letters. Yesterday, colleagues did raise this red flag regarding infringement on press freedoms as well as attempting to stifle free debate and expression in this country. We had no problem with the minister informing the country that indeed they did seek a court order and a search warrant was granted. 

Reading through the command of this warrant, it is clearly a search warrant. I would like the minister to explain to the country where they got the permission to close down these media houses.

Secondly, the minister alleged that the gist of these closures, which I insist are unlawful, was the said Sejjusa letter, which indeed The Monitor and other media houses did not author. In the wisdom of Government, the person who received from a source that has not denied authorship must produce the said letter. I would like to ask the minister to actually educate this country on the wisdom of that process because it is very easy to hide behind national security to commit injustice onto Ugandans, and I view this as part of that hiding behind national security because national security is about Ugandans and not about the government.

For the government to start alleging that national security is about Government and not about the people is very wrong, and I would like to submit that the minister has not convinced me that the closure of these media houses was lawful because I do not see it anywhere in this warrant. It is only extended illegality hidden behind national security and this House must rise to condemn this kind of illegality by the state hiding under the yoke of security to infringe on people’s freedoms and stifle free debate in this country.

Mr Speaker, we are trying to nurture a young democracy and I am very worried about the trend; that every time questions about governance and succession are asked, the state is so agitated that they are ready to do anything to scuttle debate on matters relating to governance and succession. I would like the minister to inform this country whether it is unlawful for anybody or any institution to discuss succession and the appropriation of state power by certain sections of this country onto themselves, and again stop anybody from talking about it. I challenge the minister to inform this country whether that is lawful so that we do not actually commit an illegality to face the same fate as these media houses. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

8.32
MR BENJAMIN CADET (Independent, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When the minister says that the closed media houses should assist in getting and disclosing the source of the letter before they are re-opened, I think that is not right because – depending on the papers, the said author acknowledged that he was the source of the letter. And I believe that instead of closing the media houses, we should look at the fundamental issues. Every year we have seen in the newspapers the government advertises for people to join armed forces but the original people are still there. And there are no rules which stipulate when they will retire. And automatically, these new ones will need promotion while the old ones get scared and conflicts are bound to arise. Now, these are serious issues which will not be solved by closing media houses. And it is my prayer that since the author of the said letter is there, do not go for the messenger who simply published what was there. (Interjection) And he is a Member of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, I will conclude by saying that whereas the search warrant is there, I doubt if it is a crime to publish what someone else has given to you. And to me, when you are in the business of giving information, it becomes catastrophic if you begin disclosing your sources of information. I was in South Africa and when I was leaving the airport, I saw very many books that are being written and the latest on the market is about how President Zuma has sold South Africa. But the authors of those books are still there and the media houses that published them are still there. So when somebody comes and talks about a particular topic and so on and then you close their media house, it is dangerous and sets a bad precedent for the country. Thank you.

8.35
MR STEPHEN BAKA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Mr Speaker, I rise up to seek a few clarifications from the minister. First of all, I thank him for presenting the report and for bringing the search warrants. My first question is: Is there due consultation with all stakeholders before the police force does such things? I can see the due process of the law was followed; there were search warrants, letters from UCC and all that. But were consultations on the consequences of such actions done? Internationally, our image is currently not good; yesterday we were hit in all international media with consequences that are now – if you looked at our tourism, I think it has already been affected. Tourists travelling to Uganda must have stopped somewhere like Nairobi or somewhere in Tanzania, wondering whether they should reach Uganda. But even locally, the sons and daughters of Uganda who earn from those businesses, what happens to them? 

In my view, this is a small matter that could have been handled through other means other than alarming the people. As I talk now, we keep receiving very many calls from our voters, wondering what is happening in Kampala. They think maybe Government is about to collapse or something of that kind. 

So, although the law allows you to do all these, there is something genuine you are looking for and the law permits you to carry out whatever processes you are doing but what about the consequences? Do you sit down and anticipate them, especially in light of negative impact to the country? I need that response from the minister.

8.38
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When some people went to the bush, they went to fight in order to restore the rule of law, freedom of speech and freedom of the press. But now we are seeing the press being gagged, and yet in this House we passed the Whistle blowers’ Act here and the law that allows the security to listen to all conversations because of al Qaeda and al Shabab. So, these people know the author of the letter – who is a member of parliament – hon. Sejjusa. They know him but why are they harassing the press? They simply wrote what he wrote and said and he has not denied that he authored the letter.

Actually hon. Sejjusa should be praised because he is the man who brought up an issue – that there is trouble. And it does not require one to have a degree to believe that some people went to Mbuya Barracks to start shooting. Moreover this is a man who is the chief coordinator of security in this country. He knows what happens in this country. And some people are claiming that people came to Mbuya and started shooting. And the man is now calling for an investigation to find out what happened. Do you prosecute him? Surely, this is a nationalist who is concerned about this country. He says that if there is trouble it must be investigated. And if he is the chief coordinator of intelligence in this country and says we should find out who could have attacked Mbuya – and I want to tell you, Mr Speaker, that even a fly cannot enter Mbuya. Even a civilian who wants to go and visit someone they know in Mbuya, he or she will be stopped several kilometres away. But to say that people went and attacked Mbuya – even Gen. Ali here could not believe that; that people could go and attack Mbuya! And they think we can believe that? So if hon. Sejjusa came and said, “Let us find out if indeed what took place in Mbuya is a fact and I, being a chief intelligence coordinator, do not know about it.” Is that a crime? Do you have to rush and close The Red Pepper or The Monitor? Surely, Sejjusa is there – (hon. Bako rose_) - I will take the information. 

MS BAKO: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, before 1986, there was a government in this country and then in 1976, a new government came in through the power of the gun. And, therefore, it occurred to this country that in 1996, there were moves to elective politics, where Ugandans could choose whoever would lead them. And, therefore, freedom of expression and freedom of the press is one key tenet of good governance. This has fallen short of this Government; the simple implication is that once you have come to power through the bullet, your ability to logically engage with other views is diminished, therefore, once a rebel, never a democrat. 

MR WAMAGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, whatever is taking place in this country is scaring to would be investors and people who would come to this country and visit national parks. We should take this issue seriously; let the press have the freedom to publish the information they get. The press shouldn’t be gagged. And hon. Sejjusa should be applauded for saying that there is a problem and that problem should not be ignored. 

8.42
MR RICHARDS OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In this saga, I am still wondering, what is the role of UCC? Yesterday, this House was informed that UCC was contacted and they said they did not know anything about this matter at all. But today I see letters which indicated their knowledge and involvement. 

Now, my question is, who is not telling the truth or who is not involving the other or who is not doing his or her part? When we sit here, we address a very wide audience. Now, just yesterday, someone confessed that UCC does not know anything about this saga, how is it that today we have letters purported from UCC? Somebody should answer me –(Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I thank my colleague for giving way. If you read the letter from UCC which was supplied, No.4 and No.5 on the closure of KFM and Dembe FM, in the first place you note that the heading for the letter for location of KFM Ltd is on page No.4. The heading is, “Location of station of KFM Ltd”. The third paragraph says, “We have received communication from the Inspector General of Police that the premises that KFM Ltd has designated as its location of station and, therefore, where it currently operates, has been sealed off as a scene of crime”. So the sealing off took place before UCC wrote the letter. 

The next letter with the same heading talks about location of station of KFM Ltd and in the third paragraph, it is talking of Dembe FM. Imagine, these two letters are themselves suspect; how could UCC write to Dembe and the reference is “Location of station of KFM Ltd”? 

These two letters are dated 20th May, the very day the search began; this gives a big cloud of doubt. These are letters which were written today and backdated and in haste because the Speaker directed that the documents come here today before the sittings end. So, they have amateurishly fidgeted and came up with these letters which have the same reference while talking about two different stations. The stations were closed before UCC communicated. 

MR OPOLOT: Thank you for that information. Mr Speaker, that observation which casts doubts on the documents by UCC need to be taken further and, therefore, this House should interest itself in it. 

And, Mr Speaker, I say this in light of the earlier discussion that we had here. When people debated the Public Order Management Bill, it was informed by certain experiences and if it is true that this letter is appearing today and was written today, then it is very unfortunate for this institution and other institutions that were used to produce such a document. 

8.48
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Mr Speaker, I want clarification from the Minister of Internal Affairs. Gen. Sejjusa is a Member of Parliament; he is a high profile Army Officer with responsibilities in the Army. I have not seen any complaint from Sejjusa that any letters published by The Monitor were not authored by him. So on what basis is the police acting to cordon and search? Is it on the complaint of Gen. Sejjusa? 

I have read in the press where Gen. Sejjusa’s offices have been sealed off. If he has not come out to deny the letter which contained his concerns, it means he is the author. And therefore his office or his home is a scene of crime. 

I am concerned with the way police are treating the media houses especially by closure. It seems they derive their powers from the Police Act that after identifying a place as a scene of crime, that is when they informed the UCC about the seal off.  My concern is how these premises would be scenes of crime; Dembe FM Ltd and Monitor Publications when Gen. Sejjusa is available. 

Finally, hon. Minister, aren’t you responsible for giving information on the whereabouts of Gen. Sejjusa because he is a civil servant. You are supposed to account for his whereabouts so that he can provide the information you need on the letter. 

8.50
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia-Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to applaud other Members who have come up with comments concerning the letter and the closure of the media houses. The issue at hand is a letter that was written by Gen. Sejjusa who is a Member of this House. At the same time, I have a presumption that this letter was written in good faith because he even mentioned that he has spoken and written for the cowards who are in the force. And I believe he had been one of the brave people down there to have come up with such a letter; a letter whose contents Government would have investigated and then put everything at rest. 

Issues of this nature began when they attacked Mbuya Barracks. It started as a rumour and later there was denial until the minister came here and made a statement on how Mbuya Barracks had been attacked, claiming that people from within had been used to recruit and that they would investigate among themselves. But they have emerged to a level that we are now seeing one of their own at a very high rank coming out with issues that could clean and professionalise the Army. 

Out of what we thought was a letter from the best part of his mind, written in good faith, came his disappearing. We are wondering whether he is in exile, whether he has extended his stay outside Uganda or whether he is yet to arrive. Probably the minister will clarify that. 

One thing I want to find out is whether the search warrant necessitated for these media houses to be closed because at the end of the day, we are now failing to understand whether these documents we get from courts give us the true meaning; whether the search warrant necessitates the closure and where is the population getting protected? We are creating anarchy within the communities. 

People from the lowest levels of the communities are beginning to wonder what exactly is happening and we are causing insecurity within ourselves. We are becoming insecure on an issue that could have been investigated; an issue that the government would have just kept quiet about and Gen. Sejjusa comes here and nobody touches on it and the issue disappears along the way. And then the security would know how to handle him internally other than making the whole publication come up as a very big issue. 

I have a feeling that the issue of Gen. Sejjusa and the closure of the media houses is diverting us from something that would be cooking and arriving very soon. The talk was Gen. Sejjusa and later it was the closure of the media houses. So we are now diverting from something that would be cooking under there, and which will emerge and take the community and Members of Parliament unaware and then we realise that the Gen. Sejjusa issue will also disappear.

What I want to state on the Floor of the House is that let the Minister of Internal Affairs, basing on these letters which I see, which do not say anything that warrants the closure of media houses, come up with a date and tell us that from the investigations so far, from the search and the failures which have arisen out of the closure of the offices, they have a particular date on which they are going to open these media houses. I would be very grateful if he could tell us that these places will be open. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

8.55
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is unfortunate that we are related to this incident as a country. I am mainly concerned with the point where the minister said that this is classified information and perhaps this is why Government has moved very fast. Actually, Gen. Sejjusa, a senior Army Officer, is the one to keep custody of the secrets. But now if The Daily Monitor has put across what it has been given, it is unfortunate that The Daily Monitor and The Red Pepper have become the victims yet the person who is supposed to keep the secrets of the UPDF is still living and is available. It is very unfortunate!

Mr Speaker, I am also disturbed by the statement within the bigger statement of the minister where he confuses the words “closing”, “halting” and “temporarily stopping”. To the business man, or woman in this case, the two newspapers and the radio stations are losing money. So, whether you say you have closed, whether you say you have halted, whether you say you have temporarily stopped their operations, to them it means the same because they are losing money and the public - (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you colleague for giving way. First of all, I do not know where the minister is extracting the words “temporary closure” from because the regulator who, on the face of it- and I must say purportedly- ordered the closure of the stations, is saying this is therefore to direct that Ddembe or KFM ceases to broadcast. So, there is nothing like temporary.

Secondly, when you look at the search warrant we are given a search warrant arising from 1981 of 2003 Criminal Application and it is a case against four individuals: Simon Freeman, Don Wanyama, Wanambwa Richard and Risdel Kasasira. There is nothing like a search warrant against a single journalist or presenter of KFM or The Daily Monitor. So, you have no business with those two radio stations. 

Thirdly- and I am happy that the minister for ICT who regulates these people is here- when CBS FM was switched off, I was the minister for information in Buganda Kingdom. We talked to Mr Mutabazi and he said, “I have not ordered the ceasing of operations for CBS.” And this is the same thing he was saying in respect of this. In this letter there is nothing like a reference to a meeting that sat involving not only the board but the disciplinary committee to suspend the operations of these two radio stations; nothing, but simply a letter.

The fourth point is that a person is entitled to express all information whether false or true. Read the judgement of Andrew Mujuni Mwenda and Charles Onyango Obbo v. the Attorney-General, a decision of the Supreme Court. 

Where is Gen. Sejjusa? Is he a fugitive? Tell us. Gen. Sejjusa was telling us about the possibility of this Government assassinating people opposed to the “Muhoozi project”. He was saying that senior citizens, including the Prime Minister, are on the hit list. We have consistently said that governments in Uganda kill, starting with Idd Amin’s Government which my brother Gen. Moses Ali happily served. (Laughter) We have told you that this Government kills. There are suspicions that a Member of this House, the hon. Cerinah Nebanda, was killed. Now the chief spy of this Government is telling us that there is a plan to kill people and you do not want us to hear about this.

Finally, these papers and radio stations have advertisers, workers, and a long list of vendors. Where are you placing them? And how do you turn a search warrant into an occupational permit? 

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: Thank you very much, colleague. If the issue was really too much for Government, my view would have been that since Government has a Ministry for Information and  UPDF has a spoken person- a line of them- they could have gone to the media and counteracted that information.

What is happening is not good for a young democracy like ours. And if we continue, some of us who still have a strong belief in our Government feel very bad. I rest my case. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. May I have the minister responding to some of these issues? There are two ministers: the one of ICT and the one for Internal Affairs. Do you have some responses on this?

9.01
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is obviously a very important debate. I do not intend to make any substantive contribution because I think there will be more reasons to discuss this matter after police have completed their investigations and we have become beneficiaries of the report. 

Suffice it to say, Mr Speaker, that yes, I have seen the documentation and I thank the Minister of Internal Affairs for giving full information. This has really been full disclosure, consistent to the methods of work of the Movement.

The specific point on ICT, Mr Speaker, I would like to say that it is true that police went to search. It is also true that Uganda Communications Commission advised that it would not be possible for the radio stations to effectively do their work while the police were also fully investigating. Yes, we often have quarrels with some of these radio stations, however, in this particular situation, the radio stations were closed not because - (Interruptions)

MR SEMUJJU: Thank you, hon. Minister for giving way. In this case, do you intend to compensate the two radio stations that you closed because you wanted to search The Daily Monitor Newspaper premises?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as I indicated from the very beginning, this is not going to be an exhaustive contribution on this subject matter. There will be time to make a meaningful contribution when there will be a report already submitted by the police.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, hon. Ruhakana Rugunda and the Minister for ICT. Mr Speaker, I am perturbed by the casual manner in which the minister is handling this business. He has very well heard the chain of defendants to people who work in these institutions. He has also very well heard the fundamental freedoms being curtailed to the extent of gagging the public. He very well knows the importance of media. But the way he is treating it that in due course they will be coming up – well aware that in civilised countries, it shouldn’t have been this Parliament to ask him, it should have been a routine on the part of Government to update the citizens as to what catastrophe has befallen the country.

Mr Speaker, are there people in charge of this country? Does the honourable minister want to tell us that he lost control and so he is waiting for other sources to inform him? For how long must Ugandans suffer in silence as a result of these behaviors and conduct? Are we in good hands when the country is degenerating as we look on to the extent that the minister can take us for granted to victimize The Daily Monitor Newspaper and the radio stations and to gag the people by denying them the right to access information? Is the honourable minister really proceeding in the right way?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Minister.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, hon. Theodore Ssekikubo is not being fair. No one is taking this matter casually. If that were the case, no one would be here after 9.00p.m. discussing this subject matter. So, when we are dealing with a very serious matter of this nature, let colleagues not misinterpret the position of Government.

Mr Speaker, Government takes this matter very seriously. That is why, through her spokesperson, hon. Mary Karooro Okurut, came up with a public response immediately this matter came up. In fact, a number of other government departments’ spokesperson, for example, the UPDF, have made statements. So, let nobody suggest that Government – (Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi rose_) Ndugu Lukyamuzi, why don’t you let me make my point?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Further clarification! You are the right minister – (Interruption)

DR RUGUNDA: You can come in after I have made my point. So, really if I make only one point this evening, it is to rebut what Ndugu Ssekikubo has suggested that the NRM Government is taking this matter lightly. On the contrary, in fact it is because this is such a serious matter that such firm and strong measures have been taken. That is why we should avoid operating on speculations. We should allow investigations to take place before we can meaningfully and exhaustively discuss this matter. I am now ready for Ndugu Lukyamuzi’s point.

9.08
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Hillary Onek): Mr Speaker, this is a very sad period for our country.  This is because these speculations, which later culminated into these letters, gave impression of a divided Government, a divided army and so forth. I do remember some colleagues expressed concern, like hon. Abdu Katuntu and Gerald Karuhanga made a statement. Really the situation must be arrested because it can bring instability into the country and is likely to affect our democracy and our progress. I fully concur with them on that.

I am not a security person, but I have listened to your advice, concerns and opinions. I believe those are concerns of everybody. So, whatever you have given to me will be further discussed in Government – (Interjections) – so I can’t know whether you will need to hear from me or not.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Having listened to the two ministers since yesterday and having looked at the documents that have been presented by the two ministers, one being the senior and the other a junior cabinet minister, permit me to move a motion in the following terms, under Rule 15 – no, no –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, we have a saying in Acholi, which says that when the Elephant is very angry it destroys trees not knowing they will be the ones to be used to roast it later.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you for appreciating the reasons for my anger, Mr Speaker. I am moving a motion that the two radio stations, KFM and Dembe FM together with the two newspapers namely: The Daily Monitor and The Red Pepper newspapers, be opened and be allowed to operate forthwith.

Two, that the Uganda Broadcasting Council appears before the relevant committee of this House to deliver a report on what transpired leading to the closure of these two radio stations.  

Three, that the relevant committee of this House submits a report to the House within 15 days. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are moving under what rule so that I get to know whether I have the powers to do it or not?

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I am moving under Rule 50 of our Rules of Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rule 50 –

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I am moving under Rule 50 of our Rules of Procedure that the following motions may be moved without notice and when you look at Rule 50 sub rule (1) (k) “Any motion which in the opinion of the Speaker is a matter of emergency.” For the benefit of my colleagues who were talking about quorum, quorum would only be called into play at the time of voting on contentious matters.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I guided this House that we need to act within our rules and within the laws that govern our operations. Is Parliament an institution that can direct the Broadcasting Council to open a radio station? Can it direct the Police to open a radio station? I do not want to act in vain.

Honourable members, we have heard what the Constitutional Court has said about some of our statements and decisions that we make. Well, it is a decision of the court. Yes but what we are saying is, we do not have to interfere with certain things. Now this is a matter of Police investigation. It came in the debate of the late hon. Nebanda and these issues were really contested. So I will not be able to entertain a motion that will bring the final conclusion of our debate into disrepute of Parliament. A motion of this nature; to ask a particular institution to do a particular thing in the circumstances we are operating in would not be entertainable by this House.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the circumstances, I would like to seek for your procedural guidance. You have enforcers of the law abrogating the Constitution and other Acts of Parliament which are subsidiary laws relevant to the matter we are handling, and the only benefit this House would have would be a substantive statement that either clarifies the position of Government or corrects the mistake of Government. The statement made by the Minister of Internal Affairs clearly does not, in any way, help the situation.

The procedural point I am seeking, Mr Speaker, is, in the circumstances, wouldn’t it be right that this House pronounces itself on the abrogation of the Constitution and the subsidiary laws and seeks Government to indeed abide by the laws that are created by the other Arm of Government; this Parliament? That is what I am seeking to be guided on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please. This is a procedural point. The issue of whether a constitutional provision has been complied with or not is not a matter for this House really. We have a Constitutional Court mandated under the Constitution to deal with those issues. Can Parliament surely pronounce itself on whether an act is unconstitutional or not? Can Parliament do that? Really, let us get a bit serious about this matter.

Honourable members, there is no way I can sit here and allow this Parliament to sit as a constitutional court to declare acts of people unconstitutional. That would be an error. You said we should declare this an abrogation of the Constitution. That is what you said, hon. Member. With all the respect for your legal opinion on these legal matters, we cannot and we should not even be caught thinking about declaring constitutional conducts of other people unconstitutional because there is an institution designated by the Constitution to do that.

This House is adjourned to tomorrow 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 9.17 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 23 May 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 
