Wednesday, 8 May 2013

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. We have a bulk of business we should have handled yesterday but we did not due to some technical difficulties. However, we are ready to proceed today. Thank you.

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE IMPACTS OF MASSIVE CHARCOAL BURNING IN NWOYA DISTRICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just hold on to that one; we agreed that we shall handle that at the end. Is that okay with you, honourable minister? Okay, let us go to the next item.

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL) (Ms Sarah Kataike): Mr Speaker, in accordance with rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I beg to lay on the Table the Health Service Commission Annual Report for 2011/2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the appropriate Committee on Health for analysis and eventual report to the House for discussion.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS REGULATIONS, 2011

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is the chairperson of the committee present? Has this report been presented and received by the House before? What should happen is that after the presentation of the report, we should proceed to have a debate and either adopt or reject the regulations. This is because we cannot get into the details of amending the regulations; we can either adopt or reject them as a whole. That is the procedure.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a member of that committee and I would like to inform the House that we presented the report last week on Thursday. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The chairperson of the committee presented the report; not so? Okay, that makes our work easy. Did we debate it? It was not debated? Okay, are there any discussions pertaining to that report? If there are no debates on the subject, I will proceed to put the question for the House to adopt the report.

I now put the question that the House adopts the report of the committee on the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Regulations, 2011.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE PUBLIC ORDER MANAGEMENT BILL, 2011

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the chairperson of the committee ready so that we just go straight to Committee Stage? If the chairperson is not ready, can we stand over this matter? I know that there were matters that were referred to the committee and to the best of my knowledge, they have had discussions and they are ready to proceed. However, it looks like they are still finalising with one or two things. In the circumstances, can we move to the next item?

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE BUILDING CONTROL BILL, 2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the minister ready? The chairperson might be ready but the motion has to be moved by the minister. Who is going to move the motion for the Bill to be read the second time? Where is the Minister of Works and Transport?

2.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Dr Stephen Chebrot): Mr Chairman, I would like to move that this item be read another time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is it?

DR CHEBROT: We are not ready to proceed today because the chairman is not present.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the chairman of the committee is there, and you know that this is your Bill for which you have a justification. The committee is ready to present its report in respect of it; so, can you now move a motion for the second reading of the Bill and justify it as well.

DR CHEBROT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to move that Bill entitled “the Building Control Bill, 2012” be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, it has been seconded by the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development and the Minister of State for Health. Thank you.

DR CHEBROT: Mr Speaker, the object of the Bill is to consolidate, harmonise and amend the laws relating to erection of buildings and to provide for building standards. It is also to establish a national building review board and building committees, and also to promote and ensure planned decent and safe building structures that are developed in harmony with the environment and other related matters. 

The Bill is divided into seven parts including three schedules as indicated in the Bill. Part IV of the Bill, clauses 34 to 45, deals with control of building operations. Clause 34 provides for prohibition of building operations without a valid permit. Clause 35 provides for application for a building permit. Clause 41 deals with remedial action on defective buildings and also provides for a building in a state of disrepair, dilapidated state and also any building that shows signs of disrepair. Mr Chairman, I beg to move.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. This Bill was referred to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. Mr Chairman, would you like to brief the House on what your findings are about the Bill.

2.40
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Samuel Ssemugaba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Building Control Bill, 2012 was read for the first time in March 2012 by the Minister of Works and Transport. The Bill was then transferred to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure for consideration and subsequent reporting to the House. 

Pursuant to rule 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the committee received and considered the Bill as per Article 90 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 and rule 144 and 147 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. I am now pleased to present to this august House the committee report containing our findings, recommendations and areas for possible amend. 

Methodology

The committee received and examined the Bill in various meetings held with different stakeholders including the following:
a) The honourable Minister of Works and Transport and the technical staff of the ministry;
b)	the Uganda National Action of People with Physical Disability;
c) 	Kyambogo University School of Engineering;
d) 	Uganda Home Builders Association;
e) 	the Uganda Architects Association;
f) 	the Uganda Engineers Association;
g) 	Uganda Safety Consult Ltd;
h) 	Shelter and Settlements Alternatives.

Background to the Bill

According to studies carried out by Makerere University, Uganda has one of the highest construction accident rates in the world. The study was carried out by Makerere University College of Engineering, Design, Art and Technology and headed by Dr Richard Irumba, a lecturer at the Department of Geomatics and Land Management. 

The report states that 92 per cent out of every 1000 construction workers are involved in fatal accidents, while 4,200 sustain major injuries on the site per year. Comparatively, in South Africa, there is a 19 per cent fatal construction accident rate and only 14 cases get involved in major injuries per year. In the USA, 13.3 per cent fatal accidents occur, while the United Kingdom registers only 3 per cent in fatal accidents.

The study reports that the main causes of construction accidents are:
    (a) Poor designs of structures;
    (b) poor construction materials;
    (c) inadequate construction materials; 
    (d) congestion as a result of high building density amidst many workers that increases the risk of accident occurrence;
    (e) extended working hours for some of the major accidents at the construction sites;
    (f) non compliance with building regulations and standards.

The study also found that those accidents at construction sites occurred on buildings especially after reaching the fourth level. The reason for this may be due to accumulated construction materials on the site at that level, which may not be held by the structural designs at the foundation level and scaffolding systems including safety belts and nets.
	
The study revealed that Kampala Central Division registers the highest number of accident victims with 92 victims in 25 sites (2010/11); followed by Nakawa with 33 victims in 11 places; others like Makindye registered 17 victims out of 11 sites, Lubaga 15 victims, and Kawempe 8 victims out of 7 sites per division. It is such a trend that creates a need to have building control legislation in Uganda.

Objective of the Bill
The Bill seeks to provide for an enabling environment for building works and specifically to:
    (a) consolidate, harmonize and amend the law relating to the erection of buildings;
    (b) provide for building standards;
    (c) establish a national building review board and building committees;
    (d) promote and ensure planned, decent and safe building structures that are developed in harmony with the environment; and
    (e) other related matters

Salient Features of the Bill

1. Scope of the Bill
The Bill establishes an institutional, legal and regulatory framework for building control. The Building Control Board and building committees are the key institutions provided for under the Bill. Clause 9 of the Bill proposes the following functions for the board:

a)	To monitor building developments;
b) 	To ensure that the design and construction of buildings and utilities to which the public is to have access cater for persons with disabilities;
c) 	To oversee, inspect and monitor the operations of building committees;
d) 	To prepare and submit to the Minister reports relating to any matter under the Act as the Minister may require;
e) 	To hear and determine appeals of persons dissatisfied with decisions of a building committee; and
f) 	To perform any other function conferred on it by the Act

2. 	Funds of the Board
The funds of the board shall consist of:
    a) Money appropriated by Parliament for purposes of the board;
    b) Fees charged for services rendered by the Board under the Act;
    c) Grants, gifts or donations from the Government or other sources made with the approval of the minister responsible for finance.

    3. Functions of a Building Committee 
The building committees shall have the following functions:
a) 	To scrutinize and approve building plans;
b) 	To issue building permits and occupation permits;
c) 	To ensure that the design and construction of buildings and utilities to which the public is to have access cater for persons with disabilities;
d) 	To review decisions on applications for permits for minor building works submitted to a building control officer under Section 39;
e) 	To ensure that the Act is complied with; and
f) 	To perform any other function assigned to it by the board.

Observations and Recommendations 

Absence of a Building Code 

While the Bill makes good proposals for construction management in Uganda, it is coming at a time when the sector does not have a building code that sets the standards for construction. The committee would like to note that while the Bill empowers the minister to develop a building code, these discretionary powers ought to have been exercised long time ago.

The committee recommends that the minister should ensure that a building code is put in place before the Act takes effect in order to guide stakeholders in the sector and to ensure the effective implementation of the objects of this Bill. 

Strengthening Oversight by Building Committees

The committee observed that the common practise by district approving authorities is to grant approval as long as the design of a building is made by a registered architect engineer. Limited attention is put on the details of the drawing in cases of structural changes. The committee is concerned that even with a good law, the absence of proper scrutiny by technical people may not address the rampant accidents and poor quality work. 

Our recommendation, therefore, is that the building committees be strengthened to ensure oversight and effective supervision if the object of this Bill is to be met. Oversight checking would involve not only the suitability of building plans but also the structural soundness, heat and sound insulation as well as fire protection measures.

Creation of Partnerships with the Private Sector

The minister should consider engaging professional practitioners in the private sector to help local governments like it is done in other countries. In some European countries like Germany, for instance, checking of structural designs is mandatory. For this purpose, a number of registered engineers of long standing experience are licensed to carry out this activity. The local authorities assign a checking engineer to every project within their jurisdiction. 

In Germany, the cost of checking is borne by the developer. The engineer does not only provide drawings, he has to provide elaborate calculations on which his design is based. On bigger projects, a structural analysis is presented and checked before the drawings are produced and presented for check-in.

In conclusion, the committee recommends that subject to the committee’s proposed amendments, the Building Control Bill, 2012 should be passed. The committee takes note that once passed into law the Bill shall go a long way in strengthening building standards, ensuring conformity to building regulations and establishment of a code of conduct for stakeholders in the building industry. With that, Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Honourable members, the motion before the House is that the Bill entitled, “The Building Control Bill, 2012” be read the second time. Therefore, debate should ensue on the principles of the Bill. Debate is open.

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker, the report is dated May 2013. Rule 193 says, “A report of a Committee shall be signed and initialed on each page by at least one third of all the Members of the Committee, and shall be laid on the Table.” The procedural issue I am raising is: is the chairperson equal to one third of the members because this report has only been initialed by the chairperson. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, the purpose of that rule is to ensure that there is no tampering with a final report that has been adopted by the committee. We raised these issues with the members who signed the report and they confirmed that they did not have the opportunity to sign on all the pages but this is the report that they have signed. So, that purpose is fulfilled. The spirit is to make sure that there are no forgeries but no member has since raised that something was altered in the report. So, that is why we have proceeded with it like this.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, a member could have raised it and that is why we are still raising it because this is going to be a permanent record. If we had followed the rules, I do not think anybody would have raised it. Tomorrow, another person is going to raise that there were never one third of signatures on the report. I think we should be able to cure this now. We should allow the members to initial on all the pages and we have a copy here for our record; otherwise in this format, we still have a problem. Mr Speaker, what you have mentioned is right, that was the motive, and we are not saying the report has been doctored but we want to cure that problem that you have raised. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, ensure that the copy that will be laid on the Table is duly initialed as according to the rules, but we can debate the principles of the Bill. Proceed. 

2.55
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this very important Bill. This Bill has been long awaited. I remember it was brought in the Seventh Parliament but it has dragged on and on and I am happy that today, we are going to debate and pass it. 

This Bill is very important because we have seen how people come up with all types of houses and ways of building. You find that there are very many accidents happening because, first of all, people do not follow the building code as per what should be done and secondly, they can design anything and put it up. So, this Bill will help us design the buildings accordingly - if we want storied houses, how many floors should they be; if it is a bungalow, how big will it be. 

Also, during the process of building, we should ensure that we follow up to make sure that construction is done according to the bills of quantities. Quite often, because the constructors would like to save money or even steal materials, they put less cement compared to the quantity required and even the iron bars required may be smaller than the ones needed. As a result, we experience these accidents. 

The speed at which some houses are built is too fast. You may find that a solid house is already complete within one month and yet if you are building a very big house, the foundation must take some time. If you are at foundation level, it must take time to dry before you set up the real building but because they hurry, they make a lot of mistakes. So, in that way, we shall be safe if we follow this Act. I would like to urge that this Bill, when passed, must be followed strictly so that we do not fall victim of the mistakes of the past. 

Mr Speaker, I am extremely happy about the inclusion of accessibility right from the beginning. I have not seen the composition of the board but I would like to urge that when forming the board, let there be a person with disability, particularly physical disability, so that they can really remind the board members of what is required.  

Mr Speaker, the major problem has been the design and plan of the houses. Normally, engineers follow what is designed and what is planned but if accessibility is not considered and included in the initial design and plan, say the provision for ramps or wide doors so that a wheelchair can go through, they will not do it. Therefore, we want to see that all the planners who are designing houses ensure that they provide for universal accessibility. That means that you put a door, which is large enough to accommodate the fattest person and high enough to accommodate the tallest person. Switches should also be put in such a way that a person in a wheelchair can easily reach them. 

These must be included right from the beginning so that by the time they start building, these are all there. This is because quite often they say they do not have money for additional things to cater for disabilities. Therefore, if it is included right from the design up to the bill of quantities, it will be very useful. 

Let us hope that when we pass this Bill, our houses will be well designed and planned so that we know which building goes where. Quite often, some buildings are constructed in wetlands and that is where accidents happen because with time they sink. I think where to build and which kind of buildings should also be included so that when you want to put up a storied house, you know where to put it and when you want to put up a bungalow you know where to put it and not mix everything to make the place look ugly.

Mr Speaker, I support this motion and I urge everybody to support it so that this Bill passes without any problems. Thank you very much.

3.01
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for coming up with this report on a Bill which, in my opinion, is long overdue. We have registered a lot of losses in the lives of those who are working at various construction sites and even losses by the developers themselves.

Mr Speaker, at first I got worried when the committee, in its first recommendation about the absence of a building code, noted that it must first be in place before the Act takes effect. However, later in their final conclusion, they said the Bill should be passed into law.

On the matter to do with a building code, it is very unfortunate that even the people who we expect to have the expertise in building have grossly misinterpreted simple things like mixing ratios. When they say for this material you should mix the mortar one to three, they take it that it must be one heaped wheelbarrow to one bag of cement and yet it is supposed to be in volumes. If it is volume x of cement then the sand should be three times that volume; instead, they take a wheelbarrow to be the standard for mixing. I want to agree with the committee that this is one of the main reasons why we have had very weak structures that have led to several accidents. Even if a building is completed, still the occupants may end up being buried in such weak structures.

We also need to find mechanisms for supervising these contractors. It is not enough just to produce a meticulous building plan and bills of quantities which are to standard; it is one thing to produce these but another to have them implemented on the ground. We would like to see a situation where all structures get the due supervision that they deserve if we must get quality. We have often times seen some contractors, in the absence of supervision, putting up a column or ring beam maybe with one or two iron bars if you are lucky, instead of say four iron bars. Other times, they just cast concrete without any iron bar and at the end of the day, the developer loses out and the occupants are in danger. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to say that as of now, Kampala City is in a mess. Even when a building plan may be so professional, the contractors go and change it on site. They go and put something, which looks like what is in the building plan, or make unapproved amendments to the structure. Sometimes I get amazed; you find somebody’s gate is facing the road on this side and another person’s toilet is directly opposite the gate. I can assure you that if this kind of law were in existence and if we could try to enforce it now, I do not know whether it can have any cure for certain areas within Kampala; the mess that we are in would require some kind of affirmative action. It is very embarrassing to find somebody’s toilet next to a neighbour’s bedroom.

I would like to propose that this Bill be passed into law and it takes effect as fast as possible. The Ministry of Works must reassure us how soon they can come up with a building code because that is one way we can surely save lives. I do support that the Bill be passed into law. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.06
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank hon. Ssemugaba and his team for this wonderful report. I was reading this Bill in my office and I was wondering and asking myself, if you look at this building where we are and you think about the engineers who designed and built it and you say we raze it and construct another one now, it will hit us before we even finish this session. I am telling you that can happen. You can guess the reason but we are going to bring it out later on.

Recently, I visited Bushenyi with the Committee on Health. We reached a health centre called Nyabubale in Igara, which is represented by hon. Raphael Magyezi. I entered a theatre and came out with sand. This sand was used to put bricks together without any cement at all. I came out and said, “the person who constructed this house stole the cement.” You know, Mr Speaker, I do not know how to hide my emotions. When I said that, I saw some people touching their mouths. I said, “Somebody stole cement for this health centre and it is going to kill pregnant mothers here in Bushenyi.” 

Mr Speaker, what is “killing” me most is that the district engineer of Bushenyi and whoever was responsible for effecting payment said the building was very okay. This is an indication that there is a very big probability that this engineer received some money from this contractor. We need what we call corrupt-free minds in this country if we are to have buildings that will not collapse.

Secondly, there are the damp courses that we are using when constructing buildings – the damp course you put before you start putting other bricks; all houses here are absorbing water because I am told those things do not work. Everybody who has constructed a house knows this. I think the National Bureau of Standards has betrayed us somehow because how are these things coming onto the market. 

I know the National Bureau of Standards is managed by human beings and not goats. These fellows have been trained to know which material works and which one does not work. So, the quality of materials we are using is very bad. If the National of Bureau of Standards betrays us, it means all these engineers are going to be using the wrong things because not all engineers are trained to know the quality of things they are supposed to use.

I want us to agree that when you consider very many buildings – You have talked about Kampala and I do not know why you have forgotten Mbarara Municipality because when you go there, and I know some of you have gone there, you will see very many buildings coming up. Hon. Semugaba, I thought you should have also gone to Mbarara to see what is going on. 

We have so many industries that produce iron bars but using scrap. I do not know whether this is allowed. I also do not know whether that is how other countries do it. I still have a problem with that. There is a building at Bukoto near Kadic Hospital as you move down to Ntinda, that building that collapsed and killed people; when you look at how twisted the iron bars are on this building, you will cry and say that this country needs saviours at the National Bureau of Standards and among the contractors and engineers. This country belongs to us; it is up to us to either kill or save it. I believe that if engineers are watching these proceedings wherever they are, if they opt to keep killing us as they eat money with the contractors, Ugandans are going to be finished. 

In the circumstances, I support that this Bill be enacted into law. However, I would like us to enact a law that can penalise those district engineers who approve such buildings. Such people should pay a price for okaying buildings that have collapsed just because they had eaten something. You are a contractor who has been given a contract by Government of Uganda and you have opted to build a substandard building; what should be done to you when this building starts hitting people when it is almost completed? If we provide repercussions for these fellows that are giving us substandard work, I will be the happiest man. Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for giving time to talk about construction. I thank you.

3.11
MR KABAJO KYEBALABYE (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity to speak on this subject. First of all, I would like to register my support for this motion as I thank the committee for working hard to produce the report. 

I believe this Bill is very important for this country in terms of developing infrastructure. It is important because it will help us ensure the quality of buildings being put up and all other infrastructure in this country. I also assume that this important legislation is not for buildings only but it will extend to other structures like bridges.

This law will be important in helping our investors and everybody who invests in construction to ensure that we get value for money. As of now, many of us are not really getting value for the money that we put into construction.

The law will further ensure that visitors coming into Uganda feel safe while here and in places like hotels and offices. If these buildings are constructed in accordance with this law and the building code, I am sure any user of such buildings will feel safe. I am sure we all feel safe while in this Parliament because it was constructed according to proper standards. That is why while we are here, we do not feel like it is about to collapse. All buildings in the country should be constructed according to such standards.

I also would like to point out the difference between physical planning, which relates to the issue of whether your bedroom is next to somebody’s toilet or whether the opening of your gate faces somebody’s toilet, and building control. Many of such issues are more to do with physical planning than building control. Those two areas are related but different. You will realise that physical planning in Kampala, for example, is being done by KCCA, but once a structure is approved, the builders are supposed to follow the building code in accordance with the provisions of the Bill we are now developing.

The other aspect that I would like to talk about – and I hope it has been covered by the building code in this Bill – is the issue of engineers, masons, carpenters, plumbers and other people engaged in the construction sector. We have many people without proper training working in the construction industry. I know as Uganda, we have accepted this state of affairs to exist. But as time goes on, we will need to have professionals in every field, no matter whether one will be a boda boda rider or taxi conductor. I was actually happy to recently hear the Police issuing instructions that every boda boda rider has to have a proper licence. That will make us feel safe while riding on those motorbikes. But that should also apply to building; if, for example, a person is doing plumbing work, we need to be sure that they know what they are really doing. We also need to know whether they have gone to school and got proper papers to support what they are doing.

In conclusion, I would like to say that the Bill comes at the right time in the development of this country as we move towards the implementation of the Vision 2040 of this country. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we try to keep our remarks very brief so that we equally share out the time available.

3.16
MR VINCENT SEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to say that the Bill has come at the right time. We are even late because many things have happened. You will recall that we have seen many buildings being demolished by KCCA because they had been constructed in the roads reserves and for other reasons. I would like to thank the chairman and his committee for the work done. Of course, I must not forget to say that I also support the motion. 

On page 1 of the report, the committee talks about poor and inadequate construction materials. I want to think that the committee wanted to talk about the quality of construction materials, which some members have alluded to here. I notice that the report did not emphasise this issue well. We should emphasise the issue of quality of building materials.

One of the issues that the building committees should pay attention to should be the quality of the materials used in construction. What we have been getting from the media - not only in Uganda but also in other parts of the world – is that one of the causes of the collapse of high buildings under construction has been about the quality of materials used. They mention the issue of quality and lack of building materials. In Uganda, we have seen people altering cement, re-packing it and using it for building. We also have people who import building materials like iron bars, which are not inspected by the Uganda National Bureau of Standards, and we are not sure about their quality.  

We should also emphasise the issue of the delays. Many of the developers have been let down by the bureaucracy in the process of approving a building plan. This Bill should include the time factor so that we can make it easy for developers instead of using the law to limit people who want to do development. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.20
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the committee for bringing up this Bill. I have a few observations – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us keep our remarks very brief, otherwise I will start timing. 

MS KABAALE: First and foremost, the Bill considers construction of new buildings, but there are also buildings which are being renovated. In Mulago, for example, they are carrying out renovations but we do not know how this Bill affects such renovations. Sometimes those buildings also do not meet the standards. 

Another thing is the issue of buildings which are supposed to be condemned. We beg that this Bill has a component of the lifespan of a structure. If it does not, it means that people can construct a building and keep renovating it even when it is supposed to be condemned. 

Another issue is the timeframe of construction. If you use Kamwokya Road going to Ntinda, there is a building which is about seven stories high and it has taken barely seven months to be constructed. I wonder whether the engineers have taken into account the timeframe in which storied buildings should be constructed. 

Lastly, many workers die when structures which are still under construction collapse. We believe that this Bill should cater for the workers by adding a clause indicating that workers who die under such circumstances are compensated. We know that buildings are very expensive to construct and builders should have work permits but most people in Uganda just work as casual labourers and when they die under such circumstances, the owner of the building just walks away. So, we beg that you include a clause catering for workers’ safety. Thank you.

3.23
DR BALTAZAR KASIRIVU-ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I want to thank the committee for the report. My biggest concern is that after we have passed the Bill into law, what will happen on the issue of implementation and enforcement. We have always passed laws here and many of them have not been implemented the way we think. 

The Building Control Act may be put in place, but we also have other laws which are related; for instance, the Physical Planning Act is already in place. Usually, you get land and look at the physical plan which was laid for an area and in relation to that physical plan you determine which type of building you want to put up. That is where this law becomes relevant. However, even the Physical Planning Act has relatively remained unenforced. That is why we have many buildings being put up in areas which otherwise they should never have been put up. Mr Speaker, you have heard colleagues saying that you can have a house and in front of its gate is the toilet of another person.  That means that either the place was not planned or the plan was not followed. If it was not, what happened? So, the same thing could happen to this very good law when it comes in place and we do not enforce it. 

Mr Speaker, there is a problem. We have got the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development; how do they relate to this Building Control Bill after it becomes an Act? When the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development was created, housing had been part of the Ministry of Works and there was some form of pulling of ropes – what remains in Ministry of Works and what goes to Ministry of Lands and so forth. I am not sure whether the chairperson of the committee in their interaction with the Ministry of Works and the Ministry of Lands and Housing were able to sort this out. I remember it was given to the Ministry of Public Service but the Ministry of Public Service did not have a formula on how it should be sorted out. So, has it been sorted out, Mr Chairman of the Committee on Infrastructure? 

If that issue has not been sorted out, then implementation of this law – I have information that they want to say that Ministry of Housing will deal with houses and Ministry of Works will deal with the buildings. Now, what is a house and what is a building? We need clarity on this so that when it comes to implementation, we do not give a headache to those who are going to implement this law. I rest my case.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We are going to have to limit the time because many Members want to contribute and the people who are contributing are taking long. 

3.27
MR PHILLIP WAFULA-OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): I support the motion. I also want to thank the committee for the good report. I have issues on setting up building plans and collapsing buildings. 

The committee has been able to identify some issues on collapsing buildings but in this country, while we are legislating, we do not seem to be legislating for ordinary poor people in the villages. Many people do not put up good houses using proper designs because they are expensive. Architects take a lot of money so some people just go to friends who can do something or some do not even design at all. There are hotels in this town which seem not to have been designed properly but they are big structures of the CHOGM fame. My thoughts and suggestion to the minister is that we should consider having off-the-shelf designs for poor people which they can buy. Some countries do it. We could have such designs so that a poor person can skip that cost of paying for an architect. 

Secondly, there is the issue of building materials. I do not know which Government department in Uganda does research on cheap and affordable building materials for poor people. I have only seen cement and burnt bricks. Burnt bricks have become very expensive because there is no firewood to burn them. We are not doing research; we are not helping people to improve on their houses in the villages. Where I come from, we used to sleep in those small grass-thatched tents but people cannot even afford grass because there is no grass. There is population pressure on land and there is no land from where they can get grass. So, where are these people going to sleep if we do not address them in our policies and in our legislation? 

Thirdly, there is the question of the skilled people who should be helping in supervising and building proper houses in the countryside. One time I was promised by Government that there will be vocational schools in every constituency. I do not know how far that policy has gone; the minister will have the occasion to tell us. It is important that we spend a little more resources on giving vocational skills to our people more than we do with university degrees, which we are overflowing with graduates who are not very useful to the country at the moment. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

3.32
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak Count, Amuru): Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate the chairperson and the committee for this very important Bill. We really needed this Bill many years ago. 

Currently, most of the buildings that are being put up in so many districts may not measure up to the standard. There are new districts that were properly planned; for example, they may have planned that a particular street is for storied buildings or another street is for accommodation and mansions. However, you find that the people who acquire plots in those particular areas, because of the little resources they may begin putting up any kind of building they feel like without following the proper plan. 

Mr Speaker, I really feel that when we pass this Bill into law, it will help Ugandans to reorganise and set up and guide the technical people to do their work properly. Recently, we visited Rwanda; Kigali is really properly planned. We visited an area called the economic zone; anyone who needs to set up an industry in Rwanda must go to that particular area and the structure is properly drawn for them. So, you would have no authority to go with your own plan to set up an industry in that particular area. 

Coming back to our country, Uganda, you find that someone may have little money and the technical people may condemn a particular structure to be demolished because it is substandard but because the person is connected to powerful people – There is a case in point that happened in Gulu. Technical people condemned a certain building to be demolished because it was not built according to the set plan. However, phone calls came in from everywhere saying, “Leave this structure; do not tamper with this structure. The moment you demolish the structure, you will get it rough.” So, when we pass this law, I really feel we shall empower our technical people to do their work appropriately without interference from the politicians. 

I thank the committee and I beg this august House to pass this Bill to make sure that our buildings are properly regulated and managed appropriately. 

3.34
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Representative, Central): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I support the motion for passage of this Bill into an Act of Parliament. I thank the chairperson of the committee and all members for a job well done. The report is clear and precise and it is a reflection of our efforts put into this important piece of legislation. I have two points to make. 

The first one is to request for implementation machinery. Maybe I should say that experience is the best teacher. About 10 years ago, I embarked on a project to construct a house in one of the divisions of Kampala City. When I first submitted building plans, I was told I would have to go back after two months and secure or obtain the approved building plans. I paid for the building plans, I paid the inspection fee and I also paid the supervision fees. After six months, nothing had been done. 

One of the engineers then told me that one of the committees responsible for approving the plans could not sit because they had no sitting allowances. (Laughter) I asked whether I could give them money for sitting allowances so that they could approve my plans but also give me accountability. These guys agreed and I gave them the money but they did not give me accountability. After one year, nothing had come. 

My engineer then advised that since we had paid some money, we could start. I said okay, we judge the word by deeds; let the construction take off. Construction took off but after three weeks, some guys came and picked the spades and some wheelbarrows from the site. I was not around but my workers followed this up. They went to the then KCC office and paid some money. The spades and wheelbarrows were returned and the construction continued. 

After one year, I demanded for supervision. I said, “Look, here is the receipt for what I paid at KCC. You were supposed to come and supervise the construction but none of you ever came; what happened?” They told me that they had cars but did not have fuel. I wonder whether fuel had not been catered for in the payment I had made. 

These guys had been given money to do supervision before they could approve the plan but with time, they gave me approved building plans and yet none of them had ever seen my face. I wonder whether these people had some form of remote supervision by which they could be able to see the location of my house and then give me approval. 

So, Mr Speaker, this is a very serious matter. We are talking of many problems they cited but we have not explained how the machinery for implementation of this law is going to differ from the old legal regime. Regulations are there, but even the current regulations are not being followed. So, how are we going to be sure that the new regulations will actually be applied?

Lastly and dearest to my heart is the question of accessibility of physical structures, that is, accessibility to these private and government buildings. I am happy to note that this Bill, among other things, attempts to address the question of accessibility to physical environments and takes into consideration my tribe. By my tribe, I mean people with disabilities and I also know that elderly persons need these services and the sick too also need an accessible environment.

Mr Speaker, I can see many provisions being enacted in this Bill, but I want to say that there are some gaps and at an appropriate time, I pray that you give me an opportunity to move two amendments to this important Bill to be able to make a good and lasting contribution for the good of this country. Thank you so much.

3.39
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want, first of all, to appreciate the effort that has been made by the committee and the recommendations they have generated and those from the debate on the Floor. I just want to draw your attention to a few areas that the committee also hints on. 

In Uganda, despite always operating at the post-mortem level, this Bill has been long overdue. We have had a lot of cases that have come up because of accidents on buildings. This is something that would have been handled a long time ago but nevertheless, it is here now.

One of the areas that I have just checked and realised is the recommendations on clause 9 where the committee opened up the cost for a person who is applying for a licence. They have left it very open and that is going to create an area where the public will be cheated. We really need this Parliament to come up and state the cost when applying for building and occupational permits. Let us state these costs because when we leave it open, the committee can decide to come up with one charge to run across the whole country and yet we have some areas that are more developed than others. It would be very bizarre for somebody who is building deep in the village in Busia to be charged the same amount of money as a person who is building a commercial house in Kampala. I would urge that when we come to the real debate, we amend that part and put a certain fee, depending on the level of development in the area where somebody is making the application.

When you look at clause 35 of the Bill - application for a building permit - we have not really catered for how to prevent engineers at the district level from being part of the architects. This is because when you look around all the districts in Uganda, you will find that most of these district engineers are the same people running companies that are designing and making architectural designs. How are we going to demarcate the two so that we do not have conflict of interest? I would advise that if somebody takes up a civil service job and is working for Government at the local government level, to ensure that implementation is done in the right way we should not have that person affiliated to any company so as to reduce on areas where we may have weaknesses.

In Uganda, the aspect of monitoring buildings has not been there. I would say that we should continue monitoring the development of these buildings. People construct very good foundations when they are starting buildings but along the way as they move on, they begin mixing up materials and other things that weaken the building and then it collapses along the way. Can we have continuous monitoring as the building is mushrooming and growing higher. Can we have these teams or committees from the sub county or village level to continue monitoring up to the level where we can say it is now ready for occupation.

As I conclude my discussion, I pray that this Bill is passed with a few amendments that will arise and I support the amendments that have been put forward. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, all the submissions I have heard are summed up with one statement, that the Bill is long overdue. That means that the House is agreeable to the principles of the Bill as I have not heard any divergent opinion. I have sampled all those I expected to speak against the principles of the Bill and they are all in agreement that this Bill is long overdue. I think it is time we move this Bill to the next stage so that we can deal with it in the details that are required for enacting the law. I put the question that the Bill entitled, “the Building Control Bill, 2012” be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE BUILDING CONTROL BILL, 2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The Bill will not be able to go to Committee Stage today as we had a Bill that was already at Committee Stage. Let us go back to the matter we had stood over now that the House is properly constituted with the chairperson in the House.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PUBLIC ORDER MANAGEMENT BILL, 2011

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you will recall that yesterday we deferred this discussion in the Committee Stage to today to allow some consultations to take place between the minister and the committee. Can I have a brief from the chairperson of the committee as to whether this has happened so that we can move forward with the clauses of the Bill. Mr Chairman or the honourable minister-

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Chairman and honourable members, I just want to confirm that the Deputy Attorney-General and I did appear before the committee this morning and we did go through the assignment we were given. I leave it to the chairperson to report the outcome of that consultation on the clauses we were asked to handle.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Following the direction of the House yesterday, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs met with the Minister for Internal Affairs to consider clauses 3 and 6 that had been referred to the committee for consideration. Mr Chairman, allow me to read the report.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, if you have analysed it, the time for dealing with what you have decided will be when we come to those clauses. We do not require a report; what we need to confirm is that you consulted and you have reached some minimum agreement on those clauses. When we come to those clauses, you rise and make the proposals that you agreed on in the committee. That is how we should proceed.

MR TASHOBYA: Much obliged, Mr Chairman.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Chair. You have said that when we reach the clauses – Is it possible to have a copy so that I can follow what they agreed on since it is going to be said word by word; I mean the framing of the agreed position.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, by the time we get there, the copies will be available. Are the copies being made available to the members? You are saying they are in the printery? Okay, by the time we get there, the copies will be available.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the clauses you are talking about were stood over after we discovered that those clauses had implications on other clauses. So, I think it would be better for us to understand them because we will be referring to the same clauses as we move on. That is why we need to have the chairman of the committee to present what they have agreed on. It will help us to handle the clauses that we are going to handle. I think we are going to clause 7 or 8.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You stood over clauses 2, 3, 6 and 7 for purposes of these consultations; not so? Okay, now that the consultations have been carried out, what next? Can we still stand them over? I am saying this because if they consulted, they must have resolved the issues that led to those clauses being stood over.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Chair. Like the Leader of the Opposition has said, when we tried to go beyond clause 6, we still found reference to the very issues on the same terms that we had stood over. That is why we could not go past that clause. When you look at clause 7, for instance, you still find something called “public meeting”, which runs through. So, until we dispose of what we call a public meeting, which had been attempted to be sorted out in clause 3 – if we do not first get that meaning right, we will have to still stand over any other clause with that specific reference. 

Unfortunately, almost all the clauses in this Bill talk about managing a public meeting, whose definition has not been agreed upon in this House. So, I would like to implore the Chairman to let them give us the meaning they agreed on so that we can refer to it as we handle the subsequent clauses.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is what I had proposed. I said that those clauses were stood over because of things that were not clear. Now that they have had consultations, I am sure the issues have been cleared. Now I am saying, can we go back to those clauses, deal with them and if we find difficulties, we will deal with those difficulties when we are there. That is what I said. I think that would be the best way forward.

You stood over those clauses because of the complications associated with them. Now you have consulted on those difficulties and you have come up with certain suggestions. Can we now go to those clauses that were stood over and we resolve them, if they can be resolved after the consultations that we gave time to. That would be the proper way to proceed. We cannot go ahead, honourable Leader of the Opposition; you have just said that we could not proceed because the definitions in clause 2 affect what is ahead. So, we cannot go ahead without resolving the definitions in clause 2.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I appreciate the fact that some consultations were done. We are already at Committee Stage but we do not know the outcome of the consultations because we do not have copies of the write-up from those consultations. It is likely that the outcome of the consultations may again drag the Committee of the whole House into another rigorous debate. 

It would therefore be better to first get the outcome of those consultations and internalize them so that we can see which areas of the Bill will be affected by the harmonized position. This will help us to limit the debate while at Committee Stage. As of now, I even do not seem to see the chairperson ready with copies of the write-up on that harmonized position.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, it was a particular clause that was stood over. That means all that was required was for it to be redrafted. Now they have met and I am sure they have looked at it again and redrafted; can we hear what they redrafted? If it is not acceptable to us, then we shall say so. Mr Chairman, clause 2.

Clause 2

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Clause 2 is the interpretation clause. Which words needed to be resolved in clause 2? Chairman, do we have any discussions on clause 2? I thought clause 2 is the interpretation clause where public place, public meeting and all the others are defined.  

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to report that the committee considered clauses 3 and 6. Clause 2 had been differed to be considered by the House after going through the entire Bill. However, if it is your decision, Mr Chairman, that I read a definition of a public meeting in terms of what we agreed on today, I am obliged to do that. In clause 6 -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is it clause 6 or clause 2?

MR TASHOBYA: It is clause 6, Mr Chairman. What was referred to us were clauses 3 and 6.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, we go to clause 3.

Clause 3

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that clause 3 be redrafted as hereunder: “The underlying principle of managing public order is to regulate the exercise of the freedom to assemble and to demonstrate together with others peacefully and unarmed and to petition in accordance with Articles 29 (1) (d) and 43.” The justification is: to clearly provide for the purpose of the Bill and the constitutional spirit in which the Bill is promoted.

It is also proposed that the word “regulate” be defined as follows: “‘Regulate’ means to adjust conduct or behaviour to conform to the requirements of the Constitution.” The justification is: to clarify the meaning of the word “regulate” within the context of Articles 29 (1) (d) and 43 of the Constitution.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that clear, honourable members? The proposal is for the deletion of the existing clause 3 on the principle of managing public order. The proposal is that that existing clause in the Bill be deleted and be replaced with what the chairman has just read: “The underlying principle of managing public order is to regulate the exercise of the freedom to assemble and to demonstrate together with others peacefully and unarmed and to petition in accordance with Articles 29(1) (d) and 43 of the Constitution.” 

They propose to define, in the same clause, the word “regulate” as follows: “‘Regulate’ means to adjust conduct or behaviour to conform to the requirements of the Constitution.” That is what is proposed in clause 3.

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, you had assured me that I would have a copy. Maybe let the chairman lend me his copy because I cannot follow. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, the routes in this House are very heavily marked, so be careful where you pass. Have you now got a copy, honourable Member for Serere? 

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, unfortunately, my neighbours also had no copies and they grabbed that one. So I have no copy as of now. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Chairman, the Bill we are discussing is a very important Bill concerning freedoms not only of Members of Parliament but the entire country. Is it procedurally right for us to continue when we do not have quorum?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, when we come to making the decision, we will have to ascertain whether we have quorum or not. Is there any debate on the amendment proposed by the committee?

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I thank the committee for the proposed amendment. The other day, somebody was arrested for holding a placard and demonstrating. Now, when you say, “to demonstrate together with others”, how about when you are demonstrating alone?

Secondly, we are looking at an underlying principle, the principle of managing public order; in which circumstance? Under the circumstance in which you are assembled and are demonstrating peacefully and unarmed; why do you need regulation when you have assembled to demonstrate peacefully and unarmed? I need an answer. 

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Chairman, when the powers of the Inspector-General were annulled under the constitutional petition by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi prohibiting any demonstrations, the legal system was left with nothing to guide peaceful demonstrations and assemblies in the law. That is why we had to come up with this to guide peaceful demonstrations, and this is why regulating has to come into effect. 

This is further provided in the Police Act, Article 31(2), which was not touched by the court in dealing with that particular case. So, the Police still have powers to regulate under the Police Act and so we had to bring it under this law as one requirement. I wish to submit. 

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have just heard from the honourable minister that there was need to regulate peaceful demonstrations. In an event which is peaceful, what is there to regulate or guide? 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, first of all, let me make reference to hon. Magyezi’s observation, where this expression together with others comes from. Let us look at the Constitution, Article 29. It does not exclude an individual demonstrating alone because the opening expression of that Article says, “Every person shall have the right to demonstrate together with others.” You can demonstrate alone or you can demonstrate together with others. I think that is clear. - (Interjections) - The opening expression of Article 29 says, 

“Every person shall have the right to- 
d) freedom to assemble and to demonstrate together with others peacefully and unarmed and to petition.”  
It does not mean that you cannot demonstrate alone. It means that you can actually demonstrate alone and you also have the right to demonstrate with others. That is the interpretation of this Article. 

Let me now proceed to the second one. The second issue is the crux of this Bill. The only problem is that maybe due to the prevailing circumstances or what we are going through, the intention of the Bill is not quite grasped. It is intended to protect you and me who may be demonstrating. This is why we have even gone ahead to define what a public meeting is. We are not talking about any meeting. 

When you also look at the definition as proposed by the committee, modifying what the minister gave about a public place, it says, “A public place is intrinsically a potentially volatile area”. This means that people come into a public place and you can even start with two but you end up with six, ten, thirty, one hundred or even one thousand. All that means that if you are in a public place and you are having a meeting there, that meeting needs regulation for purposes of protecting and safeguarding the interests of the participants in that demonstration. That is the focus and purpose of this important ingredient of regulation. 

Hon. Kivumbi went to the constitutional court and you remember very well that at the end of that important ruling – What was being challenged during that time was Section 32 of clause 2 of the Police Act because it was giving absolute powers to the IGP to prohibit a demonstration or an assembly of some sort –(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way and thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to inquire about the similarity or the difference between regulating and protecting. Are they the same? In my understanding, when talking about regulating you are talking about rules, you are talking about standards; you are saying that something must fall within the limits as defined. “Freedom of assembly to demonstrate together peacefully unarmed” - these are the standards; you do not go there when you are armed. But if the person is not armed and the things are okay, what are you regulating when the meeting is already regular? 

In my view, what is required here is to protect because even for a well constituted regular meeting where people are proper, they can face the danger of, for example, terrorism. So, the objective here should be to protect the meeting which is a regular meeting, well constituted according to the law. So, you can only protect those people from danger and not regulate because the meeting is already a regular one and it is proper. I rest my case.  

MR RUHINDI: Well, hon. Fungaroo was not seeking clarification from me. He provided the clarification himself by saying that of course the ultimate is protection. Why do you regulate? You regulate so that society can be peaceful, you regulate so that the participants can be protected. That is the purpose of regulation –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we have some order!

MR RUHINDI: You can make your own substantive contributions. I am not stopping you from doing that. I am only making my humble contribution and I am entitled to it. 

My submission is that the Constitutional Court ruling nullified Section 32 of clause 2 of the Police Act which gave absolute powers to the IGP to prohibit a demonstration, an assembly or a meeting. Section 32 of clause 1, which gives powers to the Police to regulate demonstrations, was saved and they actually emphasised that. The focus of that ruling was that the powers of the Police to regulate were saved but not to prohibit, except where you cannot regulate a riot. When a riot occurs, the Police also have got powers to disperse the riot and the rowdy crowds but not to regulate the riot. 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. A properly constituted meeting is a regular meeting because the standards have been followed, but in this properly constituted meeting there can be danger; people can be injured and these people need to be protected. So, regulation is different from protecting. If we provide only for regulation here, the onus will be on the organisers - your meeting is not well regulated and it is not according to the procedures – and yet the responsibility of protecting the people and ensuring their safety lies with the Police. We should make this rule so that if the Police do not protect me and my regularly constituted meeting, they must also carry responsibility. Therefore, in this particular case of a well-constituted meeting, we should delete the word “regulate” and replace it with “protect”. Thank you.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, may I advise hon. Fungaroo to recommit clause 4 of the Bill, which was passed the last time we met, because the expression “regulate” was passed in that particular clause and we were instructed to go and have it defined and that is the report the chairperson has made. So, if he insists that the words should change, he is free to recommit that particular clause. Mr Chairman, with those few remarks, I think I have made my point. I do not need to go further.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, honourable Attorney-General, for giving way. I want to be educated by you, our dear Attorney-General, over how you would want to regulate what belongs to me. If I have decided after this plenary to go and sit in Centenary Park, for example, with two others and we just sit and have tea, peacefully, and I am not even seated badly – (Laughter) - why on earth do you want to start regulating how I should sit? Mr Chairman, I want to be educated; what do you want to regulate on what already belongs to me?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, my reading of this clause is that it gives the underlying principle. What is the underlying principle of managing public order? This is what this clause is trying to state. This is what is being suggested as a definition, as a statement of the underlying principle. 

If there is a difficulty with the word “regulate”, can “facilitate the orderly exercise of those rights” suffice? What if you say, “the underlying principle of managing public order is to facilitate the orderly exercise of the freedom to assemble and to demonstrate together with others peacefully and unarmed and to petition”? There is a principle. What is guiding these persons who want to manage public order? What should guide them?

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. I would like to re-echo what the Attorney-General has put forward, the matter of hon. Kivumbi in the Constitutional Court. What is clear is that in Section 32(1), which spells out the powers of the Police, that power to regulate was saved – (Interruption) 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Chairman, I have a copy of that court ruling and I can just quote for you what two of those judges said. This is Justice Okello, as he then was. He says, “the above section clearly empowers the Inspector-General of Police to prohibit the convening of an assembly or forming of a procession on a public...The right to freedom of assembly and to demonstrate together with others peacefully is a fundamental right guaranteed under Article 29(1) (d) of the Constitution of this country. The above subsection therefore places a limitation on the enjoyment of that fundamental right. While I agree that such a right is not absolute, any limitation placed on the enjoyment of such a fundamental right like this one, must fall within the limit of Article 43(2) (c) of the Constitution...”

He goes ahead to say that what is required to maintain law and order is not to prohibit a lawful assembly or formation of a lawful procession in any public place on subjective reasons as this is not regulating the assembly or procession but a denial of enjoyment of rights in contravention of Article 29(1) (d) of the Constitution. He further observes that the Police is not as powerless as the minister wants to tell us. You can read the whole of section 33 (1); the Police still have powers to regulate under the Police Act and this is fully provided for. When you read section 33 of the Police Act, it clearly spells out what the Police can do in the event that a rally turns out to be ugly; they can stop it. So, what does this Bill seek to further provide that is not already provided for elsewhere in the Police Act? 

That is why we have been insisting, and humbly, that what the Attorney-General and the minister can best do in the circumstances is to move an amendment to the Police Act and not make a separate law because we will go provision by provision and not pass it. Let us save time and do the simple thing - bring an amendment to the Police Act where you feel it is inadequate.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, you could guide us based on what you have just said. If such a provision was already in the law, what would the principle of managing public order if it was to be stated here? What would that principle be - to do what? 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Chairperson, I am hesitant to add that there is no inadequacy in the laws of Uganda that require us to make any other law. We may make an argument but because we are not comprehensively debating the whole Bill, going section by section, I have moved a set of amendments which I am going to circulate and when we go through all the amendments that I have proposed, everyone will realise that it is waste of time to insist on making this law as these issues are catered for elsewhere. There is no inadequacy. That is what the judges said in totality. The Police still have adequate power to do anything based on other laws of the land to stop a gathering but not to prohibit it.

What is being sought for under “regulation” here and what this Bill seeks to do is to reinvent, and as we go further you will realise that that is the intention. I suggest that we first debate clause 8 because if we do so and pass it, then this other- Actually, if we sort out clause 8 and it is passed in this Parliament without contradicting what the judges said, then I will rest my case. Let us first debate clause 8 because it anchors-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, we will get to clause 8-

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: But before we get to clause 8, on this one I want to contend that the regulation being sought, for all purposes and intent, serves no purpose. I want to humbly make a case to the minister and the chairperson to withdraw this Bill at this stage and go and bring an amendment to the Police Act; actually, it is not even called for as it is adequate. There are adequate laws in this country and this is not called for. Be humble enough, it does not take a village for you to move an amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What we are discussing now is clause 3. We cannot go beyond the discussion on clause 3.

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Chairman, I just want to emphasise the underlying principle. We all agreed that the assumption is that demonstrations will be peaceful and unarmed; what if they turn violent or riotous? That is when we need the Police to come in to regulate. In the event that it turns riotous, the Police must come and exercise this law- (Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, no authority is granted to a Member to access the microphone before that Member has been allowed by the Speaker. That is a standard rule because you affect the recording of the Hansard by giving information in the middle of another statement. It might be difficult for us to read the Hansard and understand it in future. So please, let us use the microphone only when you are authorised so that we can have orderly records.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I am very happy that hon. Muwanga Kivumbi is in possession of the constitutional ruling in which he was a party. In the lead judgement, and I am going to make reference to this, of the late Justice Byamugisha on page 13, and this is in her concluding remarks or judgement, she says, 

“In the matter now before us, there is no doubt that the power given to the Inspector-General of Police is prohibitive rather than regulatory. It is open ended since it has no duration. This means that the rights available to those who wish to assemble and therefore protest would be violated.” 

In expressing, in the strongest terms possible, that there is no regulatory framework in the Police Act, this is reason enough for us to think in terms of the importance of this Bill that is before Parliament. That is one.

Secondly, in this same ruling she cited a case, which was also cited in the Onyango Obbo case under the judgement of the late Justice Mulenga. This is the case of Mark Gova & Another v Minister of Home Affairs & Another. It is a 1999 Supreme Court ruling of Zimbabwe in which criteria in terms of limitation on fundamental rights were laid out, and these were followed in this case and in the Supreme Court case of Onyango Obbo. This is the criteria, which is also in consonance with Article 43 of our Constitution: 
    • “The legislative objective which the limitation is designed to promote must be sufficiently important to warrant overriding a fundamental right.
    • the measures designed to meet the objective must be rationally connected to it and not arbitrary, unfair or based on irrational considerations.
    • the means used to impair the right of freedom must be more than necessary to accomplish the objective.”

Those are the criteria, which were applied and which are in answer to Article 43 of our Constitution. That is why if you were to state your line of using the expression “facilitating”, to me it goes beyond just facilitating to the world where you have got to regulate because when you facilitate, by and large, in my opinion – (Interjections) – No, I am not lost. Mr Chairman, it is not legally effective. If you have got to be legally effective, the word “regulation” is certainly more appropriate than the word “facilitation.”

MR FUNGAROO: Mr Chairman, I have seen people going to Mars when there is still space on Earth. I want us to come back to our senses and understand this thing from a practical perspective. There is a group of people who were well organised and well behaved according to the law – refer to the case where Dr Besigye and his supporters were coming out of court –(Interjection)- It was even before Walk-to-Work was born. A group of people holding sticks emerged from around CPS and started beating them. In such situations, is it not the demonstrators turning into rioters? You get the point, Mr Chairman. The people demonstrating had not turned riotous but some people from somewhere attacked them. What is the problem? Is it about regulating the already regular demonstrators or protecting them against such attacks?

What we are trying to do is to ensure the safety of good and well behaved citizens participating in a regular and well constituted demonstration from the danger of being attacked by a foreign group that may not have been part of them. If it comes from within the demonstrators, it means that was not a proper demonstration. My problem is not about regulating but about protecting these people.  So, the right word for you to use here should not be “regulation” but “protection”. (Interjections) 

Yes, hon. Semujju Nganda here and other people were attacked, just this year, while at Kawempe. They were attacked by a group of people who were neither policemen nor members of the armed forces of Uganda and they beat them up. What I am trying to point out here is that people in properly constituted meetings can be attacked. So, how will this law protect good citizens participating in such regular meetings? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What we are discussing now is not clause 3. We are not talking about clause 3 anymore because clause 3 talks about the underlying principle of managing public order; it does not talk about what you actually do but about the principle that should underlie managing public order. That is what this clause is about. Do you get the point? 

What is being pointed out is that there exists a gap in the legislative framework that we have now. This is because the initial power that was put in the Police Act was to prohibit, which was nullified by the court. The power that has been left to stand is the Police power to regulate. Now, this clause says that the underlying principle of managing public order is to regulate those freedoms mentioned. So, let us discuss it in that context. Do not go beyond that, otherwise we may not move forward.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The learned Attorney-General – (Interjections) – I beg for protection, Mr Chairman. The learned Attorney-General who is –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think you need more protection from behind.

DR BAYIGGA: You know, when you see the learned Attorney-General attacking by pointing a finger, it is very dangerous, Mr Chairman. You also know that it is very unusual for a learned Attorney-General to labour to argue a point in trying to convince members to agree to some view. When that happens, then that is a problem.

My point is that the underlying principle should be to protect those enjoying the right because that is what is in the docket of keeping law and order; it is to enable the inherent right to assemble to be enjoyed by those assembling. That is exactly what we can settle for, if it is necessary.

I also want to bring it to the attention of the learned Attorney-General that inherently, people who have assembled can develop disagreements that can boil down to riots easily. Even in this Parliament, we can have severe disagreements. You might have also watched pictures on television of Members of Parliament who have removed their shoes to hit each other or even box each other due to disagreements while in Parliament. So, potentially, people who have gathered can develop disagreements that can become riotous.

Can the learned Attorney-General imagine a situation of that nature occurring in this Parliament and he would wish to involve the Police? What about when we have a public hearing involving Parliament; for example, when a committee gets into such a situation out of the precincts of Parliament? Would you like to involve the Police in regulating such? This committee is a microcosm of what Parliament is. So, the people who have assembled to enjoy their inherent right to assemble and discuss their issues with others, that right needs to be protected and that is what we can settle for. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I do not know why the minister and the learned Attorney-General are insisting on clause 3, which talks about regulation when the Police Act, under Section 33, already takes care of this. It gives the Police the right to regulate a rowdy meeting. Why are you insisting on this clause? Unless you are saying the clause is to pass for implementation by another group; otherwise, if it is to be executed by the Police, they already have powers under that Section 33 of the Police Act. 

I do not get the reasons why you are insisting on the inclusion of this clause into this Bill. Is there a hidden agenda? The laws for regulation of meetings are already in place. This is just duplication of laws and wastage of public funds. We are here debating a clause on a law that already exists. I rest my case.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We need to be consistent and logical. Look at the definition of the word “Regulate”. It talks about adjusting conduct and behaviour to conform to the Constitution. You cannot adjust conduct or behaviour which is already consistent with the Constitution; it must be a disorderly conduct, it must be misbehaviour. The moment it is in order or conforming to the Constitution, then to apply the term “Regulation” is simply inconsistent; it is a contradiction. We are talking of an assembly that is peaceful; we are talking of demonstrators who are unarmed. By that definition, we are talking of an exercise that is consistent with the Constitution. 

When you asked the Attorney-General; what is the rationale – (Interjections) – let me develop my idea. Why do we need this Bill? He said, “We need to protect the interests of the participants of an assembly.” And for me, I understand that. Consistent with Article 43, in the exercise of your freedom to associate, the freedoms of others and even yourself must be protected. But protection cannot be equated to regulation, unless we change the definition of regulation. 

To apply regulation to an assembly, which is peaceful is simply inconsistent and illogical. Therefore, I think the minister and the chairman did not fully develop this and we should allow them to first go back and harmonise it; we can move to others. But I do not see how we can apply inconsistent things here. 

MR MUWUMA: Mr Chairman, this morning, 13 Members of Parliament and I were attending a closing ceremony at Namboole. The training attracted police chiefs and other police officers from other countries like Rwanda, Burundi, Tanzania and Kenya, among others. They were training them on how to handle terrorism related challenges. One of the scenes they demonstrated to us – and I wish hon. Otto or hon. Ekanya were here. But they are not here because they remained the other side to attend the final session. 

Some of the scenes they took us through are situations where a demonstration can be cleared and well-known by the law enforcement officers, then it is infiltrated by wrong-doers or terrorists. They were being trained on how to counter such a situation. Among the drills they went through, was how to combat such a situation; after you have granted people to freely associate and interact, wrong-doers – (Interruption) 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much. I want to inform the Member that in addition to having the situation he is describing, in a public meeting, you may have peaceful people but the catch- word is the term, “public place”.  If you are going to meet people in a private area and you conduct your meeting peacefully, then that is not our concern. But we are talking about a public place; if it is a public place, it means it can also be accessed by others. That is why it is important, for your own protection and the protection of others - (Interjections) - no. Regulation is already provided for. What we are attempting to do in (3) and (4) is to define what “Regulation” is. 

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you, hon. Muwuma, for giving way. The information I want to give is contained in the judgement of the case that has been repeatedly referred to. Justice Mpagi in answering the issues of regulation and what Police should do in case a situation like the one you are raising happened, said, “Where individuals assemble, where Police entertain a reasonable belief that some disturbances may occur during the assembly, all that can be done is to provide security and supervision in anticipation of disturbances. It is the paramount duty of the Police to maintain law and order but not to curtail people’s enshrined freedoms and liberties on mere anticipatory grounds which might turn out to be false.” That is what the judge said. 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, hon. Members, for the information. What I am trying to say is related to what the chairman of the committee and hon. Ssemujju have said. There are situations, which in their initial arrangements were peaceful; people had a good agenda for their gathering. But in the course of the function, they may be invaded. Police are always challenged to handle such a situation. In that case, how do you sieve out the wrong doers within a gathering? 

So, it is within this spirit that the aspect of regulation comes in. How do you tell – (Interruption) 

MS ALASO: Thank you, hon. Muwuma, for letting me seek this clarification. I am wondering, the situation you are describing, where someone sets out with good intention and somehow the wrong people come in during the course of the good intention; would it be synonymous with somebody who opens a shopping mall with good intention for people to come and buy things from it; then the following morning, without his or her knowledge, a terrorist comes in and attempts to hit the shoppers and destroys lives and property? 

If that be the case, that the two situations are synonymous, would you go about this second situation by saying all investors, like we popularly call them, should not open up shopping malls because we fear that terrorists will hit or you let them go on and create an arrangement where the shopping malls will be safe by protecting them? Wouldn’t that be the right way to go rather than close the shopping malls?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Member for Kigulu, please wind up. 

MR MUWUMA: Mr Chairman, I want to make an appeal that the spirit within which this aspect of regulation is being promoted here is not to witch-hunt but particular situations – like for legal assemblies mentioned here, when problems occur there, at what point does Police have to come in? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, points of clarification and points of information are within the discretion of the Member holding the Floor. Once the Member has declined, you do not need to stand persistently because they have declined. Let us observe these rules. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Mr Chairman, the freedom to assemble and to demonstrate peacefully is enshrined in the Constitution of this country and there is no doubt about it. The minister actually alluded to the fact that the Police Act itself has a lot of provisions for the Police to regulate meetings. Mr Chairman, it seems the minister, together with the chairperson of the committee have become very adamant. 

I have two suggestions to make. If you do not want to take this proposal to replace the word “Regulate” with “Protect” so that the intention is clearly known to Ugandans, I would like to suggest that you replace the word “Regulate” with “Endanger” so that it reads, “The underlying principle of managing public order is to endanger the exercise of the freedom to assemble and to demonstrate…” so that at least the intention – (Laughter) – because really, there is nothing more we can suggest as Members of Parliament. We have used simple English. 

Mr Chairman, it defeats my understanding because what I know is that the role of the Police is to provide security for any meetings that I may want to hold; for any assembly that I may want to hold and for any demonstrations. It is very clear and the words are not minced. So, I would like to request that we simply replace it with “Endanger” and move on to the next clause.

MR TODWONG: Thank you, Mr Chairman. My colleagues from the other side make me suspicious but nevertheless, once upon a time, I was a student leader and I can see my comrades here. We used to call assemblies to discuss students’ welfare and during the discussion, you would hear chants of the words “we go, we go” and it has been very synonymous with students’ protests. The whole crowd would then start moving, going nowhere and throwing stones. At that stage, if my colleagues say we protect such a crowd, what shall we be protecting them from?   

Secondly, the thinking process of the human mind is not static. My colleagues are saying that if an intruder comes into a crowd, the first option is to arrest, the second option is to isolate and there are many other options but how about if the problem starts from the assembly and from within the convenience of the assembly? What kind of protection would you seek and from who and why? So, Mr Chairman, unless otherwise, I think this is a very clear and straight English word, that “Regulation” means to adjust conduct or behaviour to conform to the requirements of the Constitution, which are in Articles 29 and 43. Thank you.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have been trying to go through clause 3 again and I have read it over and over again, trying to convince myself as to whether we want this provision on our law books in this country – because, seriously, the underlying principle of managing public order is to regulate the exercise of the freedom to assemble and to demonstrate together with others peacefully and unarmed and to petition in accordance with Articles 29(1)(d) and 43 of the Constitution. Reading it, already, the aspect of regulation is provided for in the Police Act. Section 33 is clearly provided for. The other leg of this particular clause is recitation of the constitutional provisions. So, what are we doing with this particular clause if we are to be specific? 

MS SANTA ALUM: Thank you very much, hon. Member, for giving way. The information I would like to give you is, coming from the submission of hon. Todwong, Article 2(12) talks about the functions of the Police force and (d) says, “To preserve law and order” and (c) says “To protect and detect crime” and if the work of the Police is to protect and even detect crime and the hon. Minister says that if somebody enters into an assembly and begins causing chaos, at what point will the Police enter? What are we really talking about? 

The information I wanted to give you is that this is well catered for, right from the Police Act and even the Constitution. Thank you very much.

MS NALUBEGA: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. I want to quote clause 33 of the Police Act in reference to what hon. Karuhanga is trying to inform this House about. “Powers to stop, to order and to disperse assemblies and processions unlawfully convened; Where an assembly convenes or processions form in contravention of the prohibition under section 32, the Inspector-General or an officer in charge of Police may require the assembly to cease to be held or the procession to be stopped and may order the immediate dispersal of that assembly or procession.” Mr Chairman, even clause 34 talks about unlawful assemblies. So, we do not need any other separate law. The Constitution, which is supreme, has already provided for a peaceful assembly, where people are unarmed and this is an inherent right of Ugandans. That is the information I wanted to give.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, would you like to wind up?

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, that is why I am not very surprised but also, I am a little disturbed that the learned Attorney-General chooses to use the authority from Zimbabwe, which unfortunately, appears to be the only country with this law. I do not know whether it was also a coincidence that you found it very useful to refer to Zimbabwe, the only country that has a Public Order Management Act, as the authority –(Interruption) 

MR RUHINDI: I rarely do this but it is for purposes of ensuring that hon. Karuhanga understands the context in which I cited some parts of the judgement that was referred to me and to hon. Muwanga Kivumbi. I did not create what I said, what I said was a reference by practically all the judges in the Muwanga Kivumbi case and practically, all the judges including the one who delivered the lead judgement in the Onyango Obbo case in the Supreme Court. Is it, therefore, in order for hon. Karuhanga to insinuate that I am creating my own story about Zimbabwe? What is important is not the form but the substance. What was important was that they used the Mark Gova case to give you criteria that you should use in applying these laws. Therefore, is the hon. Karuhanga in order to insinuate that what I said is my own creation?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, I listened to both hon. Kivumbi and the Attorney-General when they were discussing this matter. They were all referring to cases decided by our own courts; the Constitutional Court and the Supreme Court arising from the decisions of the Constitutional Court. The authority cited is the authority imported in the judgment, both in our own Court of Appeal as sitting at the Constitutional Court and in our own Supreme Court and therefore, they found it a persuasive authority to use our own courts as they are the ones that use them. 

So, you have been misleading in what your conclusions were in relation to what the Attorney-General is saying.

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, if I could conclude, now that it is apparently clear in the face of this particular clause that the first leg of the clause, which is to regulate is well spelt out in our laws particularly the Police Act and the second leg is basically recitation of the Constitution, isn’t it, therefore, important that we save the Ninth Parliament’s time, we see away this particular Bill and amend where we have to amend? 

Mr Chairman, it is my humble submission that we can save time to amend where we have to and we proceed as a Parliament that people believe in. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Initially, you asked us what the underlying principle is. I was thinking, as a very lay woman, that the underlying principle should be a merger of the provisions of Articles 29 and 43 of our Constitution but specifically, I take issue with the crafting of these proposals; Clause 3 where the minister is attempting to say, beyond regulating, that we simply exercise.

If you look at Article 43, what is there in the Constitution is that we enjoy, we do not just exercise. Now the minister wants to limit us to exercising because he wants to use the word “Regulation”.

I am very concerned because I am looking for words that guide me in understanding this crafting. You want to regulate people who are peacefully assembled, so, I thought that the Constitution already set out criteria for what is acceptable. Is the minister now trying to design his own criteria even after we have met the constitutional criteria for us to enjoy those rights? The constitutional criteria are that we should be peacefully assembled and that we should be unarmed. That is already regulation enough; the Constitution guided us. Unless we go for a crafting that is more positive, I do not see this regulation being desirable in this law because like my colleagues have said, the regulation is already there.

I would also like to be guided as to whether in legislating, we are going to just make belief. There is no word in this proposed amendment which says “unless the gathering turns riotous” but the minister would like to make us believe that in this one, the gathering will turn riotous. If he thought it would turn riotous, why didn’t he put those very words? Instead – (Interruption)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Even if the meeting or assembly turned riotous, there is a Riot Act in this country, so, you do not need to put another Riot Act. We already have that in existence.

DR LULUME BAYIGGA: Mr Chairman, we know very well that in all gatherings that we have had, non-uniformed Police are present. I presume this is to protect or to detect people who could turn riotous. So, I do not think that it is honest to say that you need a regulation yet, usually, Police would want to detect any kind of bad elements within any gathering that we have had and they are always there. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, I am agreeable to what my colleagues are saying. I would have wanted the minister to state his fears concerning a possible riot, whereupon we would refer him to the existing provision in the Police Act that addresses his fears. So, for him to hide here and insinuate that we will turn riotous and not even accept to borrow from the existing provision or not accept to be satisfied by the existing provisions in the Police Act is actually very dishonest in this proposal.

My own take is that this would be very redundant as it is covered elsewhere. If we want to re-craft this, we should do so with a mind to facilitate us to enjoy it; not to regulate the exercise but to facilitate people to enjoy. That is what would be consistent with the Constitution. Otherwise, I think that this whole thing should be dropped and I would like to move an amendment that we delete these amendments by the minister. I beg to move. (Hon. Nandala-Mafabi rose_)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is a motion.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am supporting the motion to delete. Mr Chairman, I am supporting the motion because there are already laws, which cater for regulation. I do not know what the minister means by “underlying principle.” From hon. Kivumbi vs the Attorney-General, the judgment says on page four, “As already pointed out, the Police have powers, under other provisions of the law, to maintain law and order or deal with any situation, for instance, that one envisaged under Section 32(2) of the Police Act.”

If the minister is worried about this, there are already laws to deal with this. If you envisage a problem, there is the Constitution, the Police Act and the Penal Code and that is the reason I am saying we should delete it. I thank you.

DR OMONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have been seeing my teacher, hon. Alaso, laughing but I want to say that the art of management was actually scientifically proven necessary. I want to begin by saying that I think by deleting - if you say that we completely delete clause 3, and delete the principle of the Bill, then what is the Bill for if this is deleted?

I do not support that but let me say that I think it is important to have regulations. I have heard arguments of having “Protection” instead of “Regulation” but let me say that the regulation actually serves a number of purposes and prevention is just but one of them and others include comfort.

Let me just give an example. Hon. Fungaroo feared the science of Mars – but let me come down to earth and give examples of where regulation is important. Let us take the example of traffic on our roads. There are laws about driving. One is that you must have undergone training and so you hold a valid driving permit and that you are sober.
 
But there are regulations that are put on our roads to help us enjoy the comfort of driving so we can avoid accidents. For example, traffic is regulated by providing lanes on the roads or indicating to the drivers to keep left or right or by providing traffic lights on roads. When you have all those, people enjoy driving. So, it is important to regulate. I want to state that regulation helps to prevent others – prevention is just one of those – (Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much. Let us look at a boda-boda rider on the road where there are traffic lights or lanes and they are riding at a good speed and on the right lane. Do you need to regulate or just protect such a rider from someone who comes to knock him? You see the issue is not to regulate but to protect one who is properly observing the laws.

DR OMONA: Thank you, hon. Fungaroo. And that is why I said, I will be coming to the science of earth. Okay, let me give another very simple example. In industries that use power, workers cannot wait until a circuit catches fire for them to alert the Police Fire Brigade. People can regulate that situation by providing thermostats with fire breakers so that whenever there is power excess, it breaks to prevent a fire outbreak. All those are regulations.

I would like to implore my colleagues that as provided for in the Constitution and also in the Police Act – this regulation will protect us from police using excessive powers; it is simply about using those provisions in the Constitution and the Court cases you are quoting - (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, hon. Dr. Omona. Mr Chairman, for your information, the honourable member is our neighbour and so he has to be serious. Otherwise, we can secure an eviction order for him to leave Kyambogo Estates.

Anyway, let me seek clarification from the hon. Dr Omona. You know, when you pass a law – there is a saying that affection or infection can cause amendments on the other laws. Now that we already have laws in place – the Police Act, the Rioters’ Act, Penal Code and the Constitution – do you want us to pass this law to amend or repeal those existing laws?

DR OMONA: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. What I am trying to put across is that as those court cases read – I think what Police was denied was permitting public meetings. Otherwise, I think you and I know that it is very important to regulate any system or crowd. It is because of this lack of regulations that we end up in chaos that we always see on our streets.

Finally, if I still have time, let me respond to hon. Fungaroo. I want to inform you about this case that I always watch on television - the famous demonstration to protect Mabira. This demonstration was allowed, but it was poorly regulated because all of a sudden, I saw somebody who had been leading the demonstration disagreeing with the Police on the planned routes and I am sure you know what happened next. 

Hon. Members, we can prevent this from taking place in our country by having a law that will regulate public meetings in public places. I think this is safe for us and our country. Thank you very much.

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Chairman, we should look at the underlying principle in the context of Article 43 in regard to the rights of others. We should also look at it in the context of a public place – the highways, main roads and so on, where these assemblies and demonstrations are likely to take place.

But more fundamentally, Mr Chairman, the Committee of the Whole House already passed clause 4, which grants the Inspector-General of Police the powers to regulate public meetings, following the Supreme Court ruling. So, as it stands now, the entire Bill deals with regulation. And we have already passed a provision dealing with regulations. So, I do not see why Members have problems with the principle underlying regulation.

MS NTABAZI: Mr Chairman and hon. Members, the clause that is causing misunderstandings has been associated, by many speakers, to the case of Muwanga Kivumbi Vs Attorney-General. Fortunately, the two are in this House. My suggestion is that we stand over this matter so that the committee consults with those two honourable members of this House. This will help us to have proper guidance on how this matter was handled. That will also enable us to continue with the rest of the clauses.

DR LULUME BAYIGGA: Mr Chairman, there is a motion to delete clause 3, which we have all been debating. In the circumstances, is hon.  Ntabazi in order to suggest something at a tangent when we are finalising the debate on the deletion of clause 3?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I always tell you that as the person in charge of the House, I always know its ins and outs. So, when a motion is moved and you see me being reluctant to proceed with it, I know why. Like we are not constituted – the matter was raised earlier and that is why we are just going on with the debate. What we are doing now is to see whether we can harmonise certain aspects. 

What I am saying is that we are not constituted in a way that we can take a decision of that nature. Yes, we can take informal decisions but not substantial ones at this time. That is the reason.

Hon. Members, let me allow the minister to say something then I see how to move forward.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am not a lawyer, but having been here for long, I now can call myself a paralegal. I have been following the arguments between hon. Muwanga Kivumbi and the Attorney-General here and what I have seen in that ruling is that the prohibition was deleted by the ruling. In other words, Police has no right to prohibit peaceful demonstrations. 
But they upheld that Police should regulate – it is in the ruling; I heard it – (Interjections) – please, let me move slowly as an engineer. The section that was upheld is Section 32(1). Now, in this law, we are importing what was upheld. But what I want to know is, what harm does it do to repeat or emphasise, for the avoidance of doubt; moreover, I am not inventing these words, they are there. Let me continue, please listen to me – (Interjections) – hon. Fungaroo, when you were talking, I was seated down, listening to your views religiously. So, please, listen to my views. 

Secondly, because regulation was upheld, they went on to note that it is not well defined on how Police should regulate. So, I think we are here to operationalise that regulation; how the Police should regulate. Therefore, I do not see any problem – (Interruption)

MR KIVUMBI: I would like to inform you that Section 33(1) was not deleted, and I can read it for you. It talks about powers to regulate assemblies and processions. 
    1) Any officer in charge of Police may issue orders for the purposes of 
    a) Regulating the extent to which music, drumming or a public address system may be used on public roads or streets or at the occasion of festivals or ceremonies,
    b) Directing the conduct of assemblies and processions on public roads, or at streets or at places of public resort and the route by which and the time at which any procession may pass.” 
This is already a law. Thank you. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Supposing, for the purposes of emphasis, I repeat it, what is wrong with that? (Interjections) Then finally – (Interruption)

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, I am witnessing an unprecedented submission from an honourable member who is a minister and a senior member of this House, persuading this House to legislate for purposes of emphasis.(Laughter) That situation is unprecedented in this country and probably, in this world. Laws are intended to achieve a given purpose. And if the laws are already in place, then we do not need more. 

Therefore, the mischief is already identified, it is there and already being treated by the Police Act. So, why emphasise that? Is it, therefore, in order for the honourable member, who is a senior member of this House and a minister, to waste this House’s time by asking for emphasis? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member who was making this statement is an engineer – (Laughter) - and the honourable member who raised the point of order is a lawyer. To lawyers, the word emphasis does not make sense; the word that makes sense is clarity. But to an engineer, the word emphasis is the same with clarity. (Laughter) Please, wind up. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I want to go through a few things in order to elucidate on the challenges that we had in coming up with this Bill, in view of what hon. Muwanga Kivumbi is saying. 

First of all, the Police Act, which he is referring to, Section 32(1)(b) which was not declared unconstitutional by the Court, gives the Police the power to issue orders for the purpose of directing the conduct of assemblies and processions on public roads or streets or at places of public resort and the route by which any procession may pass. 

However, that provision does not, for instance, require an organiser of an assembly to notify the Police of the intention to hold the assembly or procession. This presents a challenge in maintaining law and order because without that information about an intended assembly or procession and its location, the Police will not have the opportunity to exercise the power given under what is cited, making it hard to enforce the provision. 

Secondly, while it is the constitutional duty of the Police to maintain law and order, with Section 32(2), the hands of the Police are tied because they no longer have power to regulate the conduct of assemblies or processions in public places especially where, for instance, two meetings are scheduled to take place on the same day, at the same time, and at the same venue, which is likely to cause disorder or pose a breach of peace. The provisions in the Bill are elucidatory to the provisions you were citing. 

For instance, where the venue is considered unsuitable for the purposes of crowd and traffic control or interference with other lawful business or non-participants – all these are matters, which are captured in the Bill to make it broader, clearer and easily understood. 

The section you are citing, for instance, is also silent on the procedure that the Police should follow in the exercise of its power under Section 32(1)(b), the procedure that the organiser of an assembly or procession should follow such as notification by organiser to the Police of the intention to hold the assembly, or procession and the procedure that the participants in assemblies and processions should follow in order to ensure that the processions and assemblies do not take place in a lawless manner. All these are provisions, which are captured in this Bill to make it clearer, understandable and easily enforceable. 

Presently, the provisions in the Police Act are prohibitive and do not relate to the procedure on regulating assemblies, gatherings and processions in accordance with Article 43 and so on and so forth. 

Therefore, this Bill is expounding mechanisms or enforcing the provisions that you are citing, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, at another sitting, where I was not present, this House pronounced itself on the necessity of enacting this legislation at the second reading of the Bill. The House agreed that the Bill was necessary. We cannot again use this debate to go back to that original debate, where we already took a decision. So, the necessity of this Bill was already agreed upon by the House. What we are doing is surgery to it, to make sure that the actual provision conforms to the principles we agreed to, that it was a necessary Bill but it must be a Bill that takes care of the general concerns of the people. That is what we are trying to do. 

We cannot go back to the original debate of the principles of the Bill because that is finalised. So, hon. Members, we have had discussions on clause 3; we may not have taken a decision but we have certainly made progress in terms of clarifying our minds on whether we should at a later stage pass it or not pass it. I think we are now clear about what we want to do, except we are unable to take that decision now. That is the only challenge that we have. So, for that matter and in the way we are constituted, I now propose that we pause on clause 3 and proceed with the entire process tomorrow. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports there to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the motion is that the House resumes and the committee of the whole House reports thereto. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered clause 3 and deferred the matter further. I beg to move. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the VIP Gallery this afternoon, we have Members of Parliament and staff of the Committee on Economic Affairs, Energy and Labour from the Parliament of Zambia. They include hon. Charles Kakoma, hon. Victoria Kalima, hon. Kennedy Hamadulu, hon. Felix Mutati, hon. Lazarus Bwalya and Ms Emily Mwape Zimba, Assistant Committee Clerk to the delegation. Please join me in welcoming the delegation from Zambia. You are very welcome. (Applause) 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE PETITION ON THE LAPSING OF PART II OF THE AMNESTY ACT, 2000

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this matter is important because the entire Amnesty Act is due to lapse on 24th of this month. So, if it lapses by that date and there is no law in its place, there might be difficulty bringing another law to replace it. A petition was presented to this House, referred to this committee and the committee has discussed the prayers of the petition. It has involved members of the public and other professional people and they are now ready to report.

5.34
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Simon Mulongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The petition by the traditional and religious leaders and civil society organisations in the areas affected by the LRA – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am not against your report. Just one minute for friendly fire – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, on what matter do you rise?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, this petition is very important. That is why I rise. We wanted that law by yesterday and I would prefer that at an appropriate time, you organise a seminar for some frontbench ministers like Eng. Byabagambi on how to debate in the House because he went to Russia and he missed while we went to Makerere. Having said that – (Laughter) 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, jumped on to the microphone without authorisation from the Speaker. He hijacked it and the hon. Member has insinuated that they were trying to debate; and the hon. Member knows this is my third term in this House and it is clearly on the Hansard that I have been a very effective legislator in this House. 

Is the hon. Member in order to insinuate that I went to study engineering in Russia and therefore, did not go to Makerere to study debating? Is he in order to insinuate that?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Member, for the point you have raised. It is true that up to the point that the Leader of the Opposition started speaking on the microphone, the Speaker did not know why he was speaking and that is why the Speaker asked: “On what point do you rise, hon. Leader of the Opposition?” So, to that extent, that concern was illegitimate. 

It is also true that the hon. Member who raised a point of order shouted on the Floor, attracting also the same attention of the Speaker without first drawing the attention of the Speaker in the properly prescribed manner in the Rules of Procedure. So, both members are ruled out of order – (Laughter) – but the Leader of the Opposition can proceed to raise the issue he was raising.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the wise ruling. I was rising on this Amnesty thing, which is very important because as members of the Appointments Committee, we even failed to renew the contract of the members of the Amnesty Commission.

The report is very big, it is almost 50 pages and we would need to hear the whole of it. The procedural issue I am raising is, given the time and if you allow the chairman, I would be very happy that the whole of this report is read so that we understand why we want this amnesty.

Secondly, I would request that there is another Bill, which we wanted yesterday and it is more important than Amnesty; the Anti-Homosexuality Bill. When I was raising it, I saw that my brother did not support me yet, we needed it yesterday.

Mr Speaker, you will rule on this but when can we have the other one, which is very urgent?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in my introduction to this particular item, I stated that the subject of this particular petition is time-bound and due to elapse on the 24th of this month. Today is the 8th of May and this recommendation from the committee would provide some guidance on how we should proceed to save this situation. I did not make any indication of any other Bill. All Bills are urgent but that was not the matter that was before the House right now.

What I am going to suggest, since there is a suggestion that the report is big, is that we receive the report from the chairperson; he presents it and we can start the debate tomorrow and take an appropriate decision.

Mr Chairman, try and summarise in 15 minutes and then you can lay an original copy of the report on the Table. Salient issues -

MR MULONGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will try my best to make it as short as possible but I was just trying to touch on the background to the report on the petition by the traditional and religious leaders and civil society organisations in the areas affected by conflict in the country. 

This petition was presented on the Floor by hon. Felix Okot-Ogong and the House asked the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to consider it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could you lift the microphone a bit?

MR MULONGO: Mr Speaker, on 23rd May 2012, invoking powers conferred by Section 16 of the Amnesty Act, the Minister of Internal Affairs, through Statutory Instrument number 34 of 2012, revoked part two of the Act. This part of the Amnesty Act generally provides for the declaration of amnesty for any Ugandan who has, at any time since 26th January 1986, engaged in or is engaging in war or armed rebellion against the government.

It contains the amnesty granting provisions and therefore, it is the heart of the law. The Amnesty Act itself contains a number of provisions which, for purposes of this report, I would like to highlight.

One, the committee tries to appraise the House on the definition, which is about pardon extended by Government for a political offence or forgiveness officially extended by the government to persons who are subject to trial but have not yet been convicted.

The history of amnesty in Uganda predates the current Government. Indeed, in 1978, the then President, Idi Amin, encouraged exiles to return to Uganda through amnesty. In 1987, the National Resistance Movement government also offered amnesty to all opposing forces who surrendered so that they would work together in a government of unity.

The enactment of the Amnesty Act in January 2000 was based on the desire to bring to an end the problems related to the vicious circle of violence in the country. At that time, Uganda was experiencing several insurgencies that included the LRA, the Uganda National Rescue Front I and II, the West Nile Bank Front and others.

The rationale of the Act is well encapsulated in the preamble in which it tackles a number of key issues related to the need for addressing the causes of conflict and the issue of terminating the conflict through reconciliation processes. Mr Speaker, I will invite colleagues to look at the details as provided for on page four about the preamble articles in which the issues of and efforts to terminate conflict using this tool of amnesty are well provided for.

Allow me, Mr Speaker, to go straight to paragraph 3.7 in which we also touched, other than the initial provisions, the amendments thereto in 2002 and 2006 in which there was an attempt to further enrich the law, particularly, to address the issues of abuse by some who had escaped from prosecution and returned to rebellion. In 2006, the law was also amended to introduce two additional provisions. The first one was section 2(a) which, allowed the minister to declare, with the approval of Parliament, unsuitable persons to be ineligible for grant of amnesty and also section 16, which empowers the minister to extend the period of operation of the Act.

The impact of this Act is critical to our understanding as a House. There was a huge response to this law by those who were in rebellion. Indeed, by the end of last year, the commission had recorded 26,288 people from 28 different rebel groups that had been issued with amnesty certificates. This demonstrates the fact that amnesty indeed, registered significant returns.

Since part II was revoked, individuals who have continued to return from rebellion continue to trickle into the country and we were told that since 1st January to date, about 350 have so far reported to the commission.

The rationale and effect of lasting part II of the Amnesty Act

It appears that the decision of the minister was premised on the assumption that amnesty had run its course and that the conflict, particularly that of LRA, was over and consequent elapse of amnesty would have little, if any, consequences.

Finally, that amnesty violates international domestic law obligations to prosecute perpetrators of gross violations of human rights. This is from what we gathered from the institutions of the state, particularly the ministry, the DPP and others who were supporting the elapse.

As a matter of recapitulation to the Members, the implication of the decision by the minister to declare part II elapsed is that no one is now able to benefit from amnesty in Uganda. The petitioners argue that Uganda is still bedeviled with armed rebellion and it is a matter of fact that the LRA and other groups like the ADF remain active even if outside the borders of this country. 

It is also important to note that perpetrators of this rebellion and insurgencies and crimes related to these are Ugandans who are operating in those foreign countries, particularly, in DRC and the Central African Republic.

In their prayers, the petitioners had specific issues that they wanted us to attend to. But first of all, just to mention for record purposes, the petitioners included: Archbishop John Baptist Odama who is the Acholi Peace Initiative Leader; Mr Kenneth Oketa, the Prime Minister of Ker-Kwaro Acholi; Mr Mark Avola of the Gulu NGO Forum; Mr Francis Odongyio, the Executive Director of the Gulu Human Rights Focus; Ms Lucy Akello of the Justice and Peace Reconciliation in Gulu; Retired Bishop Macleod Baker Ochola of Kitgum Diocese; Sheik Musa Kalil, the Chief Khadi of Acholi; Retired Bishop Onono Onweng of the Diocese of Northern Uganda; Mr Source Opak of the Iteso Cultural Union; Mr Boniface Ojok of the Justice and Reconciliation Project; Mr Anthony Kerwegi of the Concerned Parents Association; Mr James Ojera Latigo of the Uganda Historical Memory and Reconciliation Project; Mr Patrick Luwum of the Acholi Religious Leaders Peace Initiative; Mzee Yusuf Adek, the elder and Rwot; and Mr Santo Okema of the Ker-Kwaro Acholi.

The prayers specifically included:
    • To reverse the decision of the honourable minister;
    • The security instrument issued by the minister be revoked;
    • The minister immediately develops and tables before the House, appropriate regulations and clear criteria for the exclusion of certain individuals from benefitting from amnesty as provided for under the law; and
    • To redirect the minister of Internal Affairs and the Amnesty Commission to develop and table before the House clear procedure and plans for the promotion of reconciliation as required by law.

In effect, the above prayers can be categorised into two major areas. One was to secure, through this House, the reinstatement of part two and two, to secure the full implementation of the Act including the provisions of promoting accountability.

The methods common to this House, Mr Speaker, included meetings with the key stakeholders, review of the various documents that were considered important to inform the committee, there were field visits undertaken within Kampala and outside the region, particularly, to the North West and Northern Uganda and also the rigorous analysis of data and related information that supported the committee’s analysis of the petition.

We also consulted resource consultants both local and foreign, members of the academia and civil society organisations.

We believe that the committee hereby tables this report with full strength and understanding that it is holistic and objective.

Section two is about observations and findings that the committee made.
The amnesty in Uganda is premised on a clear rationale but also with counter arguments. There is debate as to whether or not Uganda should maintain the amnesty as a tool of conflict resolution.

The arguments in favour of the amnesty were several. They included the fact that the removal of the amnesty would grossly undermine the task of conflict resolution of not only ending the conflict but terminating it; that the revocation of amnesty without an end to the prevalence of Uganda rebel forces is unrealistic. For example, the LRA and ADF remain operational and largely unpredictable rebel forces operating beyond the borders of this country, parts of South Sudan, the Central African Republic and DR Congo.

The other arguments were: it could not be said that the business of the Amnesty Act had been accomplished because while there is absence of gun fire within the country, Ugandans remain with arms outside the country, all could not be said to be well and safe. Therefore, the absence of the amnesty law indeed, posed a threat to the future stability of this country and the region at large.

Further, the supporters were concerned that the lapsing of part two of the Act did not provide legal protection of returnees from prosecution.

It was found out that if in practice the DPP would not institute proceedings against individuals, theoretically, the possibility either by the DPP or other party would still deter combatants from surrendering.

The prospect of prosecution is, of course, associated with long periods of pre-trial detention and imprisonment often in difficult conditions. This adds to the disincentive of abandoning insurgency, the purpose for which the Act was put in place.

Further arguments by the petitioners and those in support of the amnesty law acknowledge the fact that indeed, crimes may have been committed by the insurgents but notes that the vast majority of rebels were forcibly abducted, many of whom were at a tender age and many of those abducted were coerced into committing the atrocities, which now repel society. This presents a dichotomy. 

So, while on the one hand we have the legal dilemma of perpetrators who themselves are victims, on the other hand they have inflicted grievous harm upon the communities in which they operated or came from.

The supporters also contend that the government, which bears the constitutional responsibility to protect its citizens, was unable to prevent these abductions. Therefore, there is strict moral distinction between victims and perpetrators, which would justify the fact that retributive justice is not applicable to these circumstances.

During the various meetings and particularly, one with civil society organisations in Gulu in February, it emerged that the majority of the civil society, local communities, victims and former LRA combatants in Northern Uganda would like amnesty to be extended to the LRA rebels.

The committee also carried out research whose findings indicated extensive support for the Amnesty Act especially in the LRA affected areas. The local organisations particularly the justice and reconciliation projects in 2011 did a research and obtained an overwhelming 98 percent of respondents who were in favour of the continuity of the law.

The House should hear that those opposed to the amnesty also cite other research findings suggesting opposition to amnesty within the affected areas. In the view of the committee, it is important to approach the issues of peace and reconciliation policy on the basis of a range of political, social and moral considerations, which often are not properly addressed in the service.

The advocates of the amnesty further argue that rather than revoke the amnesty, it would be more appropriate to show the effectiveness of the law and of the commission inter alia through the allocation of more resources and ensure that we achieve the objective of reconciliation through truth telling and community dialogue.

Arguments against the amnesty were also several and the committee would like to share these with the House. Although the minister did not come out openly as to the rationale and circumstances for the revocation of the amnesty, the committee had the benefit of getting information from the public domain and submissions received from the minister, the DPP and the Justice, Law and Order Sector representatives and other interactions with civil society actors.

It was noted that there were two major reasons. One was that the Act had outlived its purpose as the conflict it was intended to address had come to an end. Two, it was stated that the Act violated Uganda’s legal obligations under national and international laws.

The first objection to the amnesty essentially asserts the conditions that are made for a natural lapse of the amnesty. It was said that the law did not intend to be a permanent fixture and conflict in the country had now come to an end or had nearly died out completely. 

The second objection is one of the principle in which the legal grounds for abandoning the amnesty were articulate. In 9.4, the committee notes the context in which the objections were raised. It observed that the Executive faced internal pressure to remove the amnesty largely through the JLOS which includes high profile judges and lawyers within the Ministry of Justice and the DPP with participation from the Uganda Coalition on the International Criminal Court or UCICC, which was founded in 2004 and other factors. 

Tension had risen between the Amnesty Act and the intention of the DPP to bring a case before the International Crimes Division (ICD) of the High Court, which is established to deal with international crimes reflected in Uganda’s laws, and includes cases arising from LRA conflict. 

The first case before the ICD was against a former rebel LRA commander Thomas Koyero who was charged in September, 2010 with offences under the Geneva Conventions Act. Koyero had sought amnesty but this had been denied. 

In 9.6, there is also diverse external pressure from some of Uganda’s development partners as well as agencies of the United Nations and other commentators who have policy objections to the amnesty. 

The committee did run through a number of issues and strands of arguments and it also focused its interest on the legality of amnesty vis-à-vis the international law. 

It will be remembered that during this interface with the committee, the Minister of Internal Affairs and the DPP articulated their argument that amnesty was withdrawn because it was thought to be in contradiction with international laws. It was argued that Uganda as a party to several international instruments dealing with serious international crimes has thereby assumed an obligation to prosecute such crimes. 

The DPP and the minister argued that the grant of amnesty as provided for by part II of the Act was inconsistent with the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, 1998, which was domesticated in the country in 2010 as well as the Geneva Convention of 1949 domesticated in Uganda in 1964, which prohibits various international crimes including genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. 

The belief was that Uganda being a signatory to these instruments assumed an obligation to fight these international crimes. The committee examined legal merits of the objections based on international law in light of three areas. 
    1. The constitutional place of international law within the national system of Uganda. 
    2. The actual contents of international law as it relates to amnesty and obligations to prosecute any specific crime, and 
    3. The scope and nature of Uganda’s amnesty. 

With regard to international law and the Constitution of Uganda, the national legal systems have traditionally been characterised as called monist or dualist legal systems and in purest form monist legal systems make no distinction between national and international sources of law. International law is directly applicable in such a system; whereas in a dualist state, international law is a separate system, which does not apply to the national legal order except by express incorporation, normally through primary legislation. 

In Uganda, several provisions of the Constitution suggest that international law is not directly applicable in Uganda. Under Article 2, the Constitution is supreme and any other inconsistent law or customs yield to it. 

Pursuant to Article 79(2) of the Constitution of Uganda, no person or body other than Parliament shall have power to make provisions having the force of law except under authority conferred by an Act of Parliament. 

Nevertheless, Mr Speaker, Ugandan courts have increasingly drawn upon international human rights instruments in particular to interpret constitutional provisions and particularly, in the circumstances rather than directly applying international law, the courts are in fact, interpreting and giving effect to constitutional provisions. 

However, when the argument is about constitutionality of the Amnesty Act, we are conversed in the Koyero case, the Court of Appeal was unanimous and emphatic that the amnesty properly construed did not contravene the Constitution. It noted that there was no consensus in international law about the status of amnesties. 

The committee was therefore surprised that the same arguments rejected by the Constitutional Court surfaced in the justifications for revoking the amnesty even though that decision still stands. 

Regarding the sources of international law, they are classically contained in Article 38 of the Statute of International Court of Justice, 1945, which is known as the ICJ statute. They include treaties, international custom, general principles of law and judicial decisions and teachings.

Mr Speaker, in general, treaties are considered as the clearest sources of international law for the state statutes. In terms of treaties and amnesties, beginning the analysts of treaties, the committee found that there was no multilateral treaty text that explicitly prohibits amnesties. The two references in such treaties to amnesties are both in favour of amnesties. 

The 1977 Protocol, additional to the Geneva Convention of 1949 and relating to the protection of victims of non-international armed conflicts, which is additional provision no.2 whose Article 6(5) at the end of hostilities, the authorities in power shall endeavour to grant the broadest possible amnesty to persons who have participated in armed conflict or those deprived of their liberty to reasons related to the armed conflict; whether they are interned or detained. 

The rationale behind Article 6(5) was recognition of the imperatives to promote reconciliation. In terms of amnesty, 9.18 and Rome Statute of the ICC, it should be noted that there is in fact, no provision of that treaty which outlaws amnesties; neither does the statute impose any express obligation upon states to prosecute relevant crimes. The question of whether or not a provision accepting possibilities of amnesties should be included in a suit – it failed to garner the relevant consensus at the time of the debate to make this law. 

It was, therefore, left to the prosecutor and judges to determine especially when applying the principle and provisions relating to complementarity. Rather than burying national amnesties, the Rome Statue makes national amnesties irrelevant to the exercise of the jurisdiction of the ICC. Thus, under Article 27 of the statute, official capacity including of Head of State or Government does not prevent the court from exercising jurisdiction over an individual.   However, the fact that a head of state does not enjoy immunity before ICC does not mean that their immunity under national law is or cannot be recognised before national courts. One can, therefore, not super impose an international law rule on the national system. 

It is for this reason that when it came to the domestication of the Rome Statute, Section 19 of the ICC Act, omits any reference to Article 27 of the Rome Statute and accordingly, does not permit national proceeding to be instituted against the President. This is not surprising given that the provisions within our laws like Article 98(4) of the 1995 Constitution properly articulates it; that while holding office, the President shall not be liable to proceedings in any court. 

Another misconception the committee encountered was that the Rome Statute imposes upon state parties as a general obligation to establish International Criminal Court and to introduce criminal legislation in order to prosecute ICC crimes nationally. In fact, the only obligation, under the Rome Statute, to legislate is found in Article 88 of the Statute, which requires states to ensure that there are procedures available under their national laws for all the forms of cooperation which are specified under this part. The forms of cooperation referred to under part 9 of the Statute relate to the proceedings of ICC - primarily arrest and surrender of persons subject to arrest warrants of court as well as other forms of cooperation.  

In terms of amnesty and the Geneva Convention 1949, paragraph 924, the four Geneva conventions principally regulate the conduct of international armed conflict with the exception of Common Article 3, which relates to conflicts, which are not of an international nature. Each of these imposes an obligation to legislate to criminalise grave breaches of the convention and accordingly in 1964, Uganda domesticated the conventions through Chapter 363, which makes it a criminal offence in Uganda to commit grave breach of any of the conventions of Geneva.

The first point to make is that the obligation to legislate is not the same thing as an obligation to prosecute. Secondly, the flaw with the reliance of the Geneva Convention is that Common Article 2 limits the application of the convention to conflicts of an international character and in particular grave breaches relate only to international conflict and do not extend to breaches associated with Common Article 3, which imposes obligations in relation to non-international conflicts. 

So, further support for this position is well articulated from the provisions of the Geneva Conventions Act. If there are any doubts about the characterisation of a conflict as being international like section 414 of the GCA requires the matter to be clarified by the minister and that is the Minister of Justice. 

By contrast, the scope of the Amnesty Act as reflected in section 2 of the Act is broader; it declares an amnesty of which, in respect to Ugandans involved in acts of war or armed rebellion, which is primarily a focus of internal conflicts. 

Other aspects like torture and genocide conventions, which were the other arguments that had been advanced to the effect that there is an obligation to prescribe and punish the crimes of torture as a well crimes of genocide, it was noted that under the definition of “torture” in Article 1 within the UN Convention Against Torture in 1984, only pain or suffering that is occasioned at the instigation or with consent or acquaintance of a public official or any other person acting in official capacity is recognised as torture. Moreover, Uganda acceded to the torture convention – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, you need to highlight only the headings and give us your recommendations. My time keeper says the 15 minutes are now too long. 

MR MULONGO: Mr Speaker, I thought I was coming to the tenth minute but let me just rush with your guidance. Furthermore, the committee did analyse the amnesty and customary international law issues and made key citations which supported its analysis and on page 28, the committee draws conclusions on international-law-based objections to amnesty. That the committee had trailed on legal arguments at some length because of the manner in which those who oppose the Amnesty Act had invoked international law in particular, and the committee also agreed with the court ruling in the case of Kwoyelo that despite certain assertions to the contrary, there was no treaty obligation applicable to Uganda neither is there any established rule of customary international law, which prevented the states from adopting an amnesty in relation to international crimes. 

The committee also reports that in the course of its work, it was concerned by the failure of due diligence on the part of the Executive to appraise claims about the state of the international law. Notable here was failure on the part of officials to distinguish between generally recognised international obligations and aspiration positions promoted by norm entrepreneurs. Unlike national legalisation, development international law is a contested field of claim and counter claim. Therefore, we could not just come up with a one sided argument. And in terms of Africa and the development of international law, the committee also cites and makes arguments about where some African member states have also gone ahead to emphasise some national interests. In some, the Uganda Amnesty Act was an effort to draw upon community values of reconciliation in the service of conflict resolution and this can only be appreciated by those who know the values, customs and practises that can bring about total reconciliation. 

There were other grounds, which the committee touched but I will leave them to the Members to look at. The true scope of the Amnesty Act section 2(a) did actually contain key areas that promote the amnesty and I invite Members to look at paragraph 10 all through and promotion of reconciliation and accountability, paragraph 10.6 and the committee’s views that are very clear about the need to promote reconciliation between reporters and those who might have been harmed in the course of rebellion. 

Paragraph 10.8 also looks at the victims in terms of reparations and there were concerns which had been raised in the course of field visits that attention needs to be given to those who had been affected as well. The point that the committee wishes to emphasise here on page 33 paragraph 10.10 was that the Act properly understood and applied answers to most of the objections that had been advanced in its lapse. To assist on justice and amnesty, the committee also established a number of actions being taken by the Executive to develop through JLOS alternative legal instruments and we wait to hear from them on that.

Mr Speaker, on paragraph 11.0 page 35, the committee articulates and brings into light issues that emanated from the Juba Peace Agreements in relation to the Amnesty Act and we believe that these were very critical and important to borrow from and we make suggestions that the agreements required some elements that had been reached to be borrowed from as we look at furthering reconciliation.  

Allow me proceed to section 3, paragraph 13.0 in which we make conclusions and recommendations on the future of the amnesty. 

Honourable colleagues, thank you for listening to this long report and before I wind up, the committee argues that there is no question that the conflicts, which the Amnesty Act was trying to address still continue in the country and as long as these conflicts continue, we shall need this as a tool to make it less attractive for those who are in rebellion to remain there. 

Part two has started to have negative effects within the affected communities and there are worries of those who have reported who believe that they are vulnerable and leaving it at the option of the DPP can only aggravate their fears. The committee is alarmed by these developments of those who are reporting and have not been granted formal amnesty and as such a move is critical to ensure that they are not discouraged because the whole process would lapse into some of those who have reported to return into rebellion. The committee concludes on examination of the Act that the lapsing of part two was unnecessary since the Act already had sufficient provisions to ensure the exclusion of individuals deemed unsuitable for the amnesty. The Act also had adequate provisions for promoting alternative reconciliation and accountability measures including addressing the needs of victims but it only was hampered by inadequate resources and poor implementation.

About compatibility of the Act with the international legal regime, the committee, upon examination of the arguments for and against, does not share this view that there is contradiction or that it is repugnant for us to promote municipal law. Our municipal law to accommodate amnesties is counter to the international legal system. Although the committee acknowledges the need to develop further transitional justice mechanisms, it does not consider the Act to be inconsistent with transitional justice measures.

Mr Speaker, the committee notes that the statutory instrument of 23rd May, by the minister, extended the operation of the Amnesty Act for a period of 12 months with effect from 24th May 2013 as you will see in the specific recommendations.

In paragraph 14, the committee considered the petitioners’ prayers and has noted, at the beginning of this report, that it is important to approach the prayers purposively aiming at addressing the underlying objections to the lapse of part II. 

However, Parliament can make resolutions, aimed at bringing a situation that requires redress, to the attention of the Executive and indicating the most appropriate steps for addressing this issue.

The committee, if mandated by the House, stands ready to interact with the minister and relevant authorities to take forward the recommendations that the committee made:

    1. To revise the decision of the hon. Minister for Internal Affairs in lapsing the provision of part II of the Amnesty Act and to restore to it, entirely, the expunged provision.
    2. To resolve that Statutory Instrument number 34 of 2012, issued by the Minister of Internal Affairs on 23rd May, be revoked.
    3. To direct the Minister for Internal Affairs to immediately develop and table before the House, appropriate regulations and a clear criteria for the exclusion of certain individuals from benefitting from amnesty as provided for under section 2(a) of the Amnesty Act, as amended.

Mr Speaker, this would include to address certain concerns of reporters who, even when they offer themselves to return, do not divulge or offer useful information to the government. All these can be contained in the guidelines.

    4. To direct the Minister for Internal Affairs and the Amnesty Commission to develop and table before the House, clear procedures and plans for the promotion of reconciliation as required by section 8 of the Amnesty Act.

Other consequential resolutions include the extension of the whole Act. The committee recommends that the House resolves to the effect that the Amnesty Act be extended for a further period of two years upon its expiry on 24th May 2013.

Options in the event that the Executive fails to do this
The committee is alive to the possibility that the minister may not necessarily go by this but also given the importance of amnesty as discussed above, it is necessary for the House to review the position and make its own steps to advance the recommendations in this report.

The committee is ready with a proposed draft amendment Bill that encapsulates the key salient issues that it points out in this report and that will help to quickly and expeditiously have a law in place come 24th May 2013 and this law is available to avoid a vacuum.

On that note, the committee would like to sound its prayer that very soon, it will seek the leave of this House, should the circumstances gravitate towards the points made in the report, to table a Private Members’ Bill.

Mr Speaker, thank you very much for the extension of additional time for the committee’s report and for the lenience by the honourable colleagues to listen attentively. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Those of you who have interest in exploring the difficulties and contradictions that exist between these two regimes of domestic law and international law and including traditional justice mechanisms should read this report in full because I think they provide a great exposition to the issues revolving around these matters.

As we agreed - and I live by my word - debate on this subject will start in earnest tomorrow so that we have sufficient time to deal with it and take appropriate decisions. I am also glad that the importance of the matters raised by the committee has brought the Minister of Internal Affairs himself to be present in the House, which is very good.

We will leave this matter here and defer the debate to tomorrow when we will comprehensively allocate time for effective debate.

6.25
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have an issue of national importance that has been itching and disturbing me. I thank you for according me an opportunity when Members are almost worn out but I pray for their indulgence, like you have done.

Yesterday, the Electoral Commission issued out a work plan stretching as far as 2016 elections including Parliamentary and Presidential elections scheduled for 12th February 2016. The issue at hand is to do with election of LCs I. We did amend the necessary legislations and we expected the minister or the Electoral Commission to come up with a work plan because all villages are in confusion, local leaders are in disarray and there is virtually no leadership in villages. Can we hear form the Leader of Government Business when we are having LC I elections? Thank you so much, Mr Speaker for the opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think, going by the sitting arrangement, the acting Leader of Government Business would be -

6.26
THE MINISTER FOR GENERAL DUTIES (OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER)(Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the issue of elections of LCs I is very important. Let us hear from the Deputy Attorney-General for the latest on the subject.

6.27
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL/MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Leader of Government Business for his introductory remarks to this subject. This morning, we had a harmonisation meeting of our activities and we were looking at the funding gaps. The Second Deputy Prime Minister led the Government side and those present included the Attorney-General, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Minister of State for Finance and myself. All the technical teams from the Judiciary and other relevant affiliated organs of Justice, Law and Order Sector were also there and we were informed, in no uncertain terms, that funding of this particular item; election of LCs is still an unfunded priority.

However, we came out of the meeting with a conclusion that the Ministry of Finance, under the guidance of the Prime Minister’s Office, was going to engage the relevant agencies, particularly, the Electoral Commission and Ministry of Local Government, under whose docket this falls, and see how best to move forward. But certainly, Government recognises the importance of this matter.

The Ministry of Local Government brought a Bill here, which we passed, intended to mitigate the costs. But Government is still constrained financially. What I can say is that we shall be reporting on this matter in our budgetary process in due course. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the Attorney-General. He has indicated to the House that there is no funding for LC I elections. But may I know from the Attorney-General if he is aware of how much the non-existence of local council leaders affects most of the laws we pass and implement in this country? For example, we passed the UCC Act, which requires Ugandans and other people living in Uganda to register their sim cards. But the guidelines and requirements for one to register a sim card dictate that they must carry an LC I letter. Even the Bill on Building Control that we have just handled will require one to have an LC I letter for them to acquire building permits.

So, how are these laws going to be implemented without the existence of these offices of LC I chairpersons, which are very pertinent, when it comes to obtaining important documents? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR MAGYEZI:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the Vice Chairman of the Local Governments Committee, I would like to inform the House that we brought the amendments here on the Local Governments Act. At that time, we were assured that if that Bill went through, it would reduce on the budget. They also gave us the figures they had undertaken to provide.

When the Bill was passed, the costs were actually reduced from Shs 120 billion to Shs 38 billion. I thought we were dealing with a serious Government, committed to its promises. Sincerely, when you look at the time and effort we took, as Parliament, to go through that amendment, you cannot imagine this is happening. Was that in vain? Was it a useless exercise?

As we talk, out of that Shs 38 billion, there is nothing in its breakdown, indicating anything about local council elections. Recently, they brought us a supplementary budget and if this had been a priority of Government, this item should have appeared, but it did not. 

Now, we have come to a crisis and looking disappointed. I now wonder when the Attorney-General says they will be reporting the progress during the budgetary process – is he aware that the budgetary process is coming to an end? Is he aware that as we talk today, we have reported to the Budget Committee, which is finalising its report to the House?

Mr Speaker, this matter should not just be brushed aside by saying they will be reporting back to us later. That sounds casual, yet, we are dealing with governance of a country, which starts from LC I. I thank hon. Muwuma, for bringing this matter to the attention of the House.

I would like to request that Government shows seriousness in this matter. We should have something concrete in terms of the way forward. There is already a proposal that if we cannot find even Shs 2 billion to finance these local council elections, we should go back to the lining system to have these officials in place. Otherwise, for us to provide a vacuum in leadership in this manner is very irresponsible.
 
I pray that a Ugandan does not come up tomorrow to challenge the Attorney-General in regard to the structure and framework of the current LC I system. I hope that does not happen. We need to get some serious commitment from the Attorney-General.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, this morning, the purpose of inviting the Prime Minister – of course, he is out of the country, but he was represented by the Third Deputy Premier – was to indicate the magnitude and importance of this matter, among others. Therefore, since what remains now is a Government position in terms of this funding gap, my role as Attorney-General and Minister of Justice ends here. Let me hand over to the Leader of Government Business to talk on behalf of Government as far as this matter is concerned.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the Attorney-General for his contribution. There is no doubt that the government is more to benefit from a successful LC system. This is because the entire Government is based on the effectiveness of how the policies and programmes arrive at the very grass root. So, we need the best. 

I would like the House to note that it is not dragging feet or a doubting of the importance of the matter. But as the Attorney-General has informed this House, Government is in the process of touching every corner to find funding for all its programmes including the election of LCs. So, leave it to us. We are in charge. (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please, let us close this matter. There is not much we are going to achieve today. However, we need to get time when a proper statement will be made in regard to this issue so that we can have a good debate on it. The Attorney-General has reported what transpired this morning, but we need a good update that will let us debate this matter more comprehensively.

Hon. Members, this House is due to be prorogued on 16 of this month, according to our calendar, in which case, we will go into recess and wind up this session of Parliament as we wait for the opening of the next session on 6 June.

However, there is business that must be completed in this session. Two or three of the items for us to finish are here. I am constrained to say it will be only these important matters that will appear on tomorrow’s Order Paper. We shall start with them at 2 O’clock promptly so that we can do good progress. I thank you for persisting up to this moment. Let us come back tomorrow at exactly 2 O’clock. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.36 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 9 May 2013 at 2 p.m.) 

