Thursday, 9 May 2013

Parliament met at 2.24 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. We have a long order of business today, we are going to have to find ways of deferring discussion on some items and I suspect items six, seven, eight and nine will be handled next week. We will deal with the first issues that are there. 

This is a reminder to honourable members on the Committee on Appointments, the programme for the consideration of the Presidential nominees of the Justices of the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeal and the High Court of Uganda is scheduled to take place from Tuesday 14, Wednesday 15 and Thursday 16 May, 2013. Members of the Committee on Appointments are requested to check in their pigeon holes and pick relevant documents on this matter. Please heed the call. 

Honourable members, last year in September, this House received a petition from the former workers of Kyambogo University. At the time that petition was presented; there was another petition on some other administrative issues of Kyambogo University, but both petitions were referred to the Committee on Education. They handled the petition and actually handed over a report on which we took a decision as a House. 

Now, it turns out that the petition which was from the former workers was not captured in the reporting; it does look like the committee got overwhelmed by the work then and did not pay particular attention to this petition of the former workers of Kyambogo. I am therefore asking the committee to look at this petition again because the issues are still going on so that they can take a decision and advise the House on the best way to move – they need to be paid their money. That is what the petitioners were talking about; but that was not addressed in the petition we handled last time. So, chairperson of the Committee on Education, please take heed and let us pay the necessary attention to the matters. 

Honourable members, on a sad note, death has occurred to the mother of hon. Nakabira Gertrude Lubega. She died yesterday at 9 p.m. in hospital. The honourable member was actually in Tanzania on official duties. Burial will take place on Saturday, 11 May 2013 at 2 O’clock in Rwengo District, Kiseka Sub-County, Manja Village. 

Honourable members, we are expected to give the normal support we give to colleagues who are bereaved so please support her. On that note, can I ask all of you to rise with me and observe a moment of silence? 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, today is Thursday and our Rules of Procedure allow us to use the first few minutes of the proceedings to entertain known private member’s issues. By being known, it means you have addressed it to the Speaker; not just any matter that arises from the House here. So the one that I have known comes from the Member for Ajuri County; would you like to raise it now?

2.30
MR DENNIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In conformity with Rule 25(4) and Rule 39(1), I rise to raise a matter of public importance. Planned activities under development budget earmarked to be implemented by all district local governments in Uganda in the fourth quarter of this financial year cannot take off because the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not yet released funds for these activities and yet we are mid-way the fourth quarter. 

We are also aware that the district local governments are the service delivery points and once funds meant for development are not released, all those planned activities cannot be implemented. It is on this basis that I would like to find out from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who was informed yesterday at half past midday; at least I took the courtesy and called the office of the minister and informed them that you have given me permission to raise this matter and that they should provide an answer before this Parliament. When do they intend to release money to district local governments for the fourth quarter under the development budget? 

Secondly, whether or not, even if this money is released, it will not first of all be released late and as has always been the tradition; once the money is released late, it comes back to the consolidated fund and it is not spent by districts. 

Mr Speaker, this is a very important subject matter because it touches all districts that are represented in this Parliament. Issues of development and service delivery to the people of Uganda are being affected because that component in the budget of the districts has not been released for this fourth quarter of the financial year. That is the reason for which I seek clarification from the ministry and from Government of Uganda. 

2.33
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Obua for raising this very important concern. As we talk, because the Ministry of Finance has not sent funds to local governments, most of the activities are not going on. For example, we are all aware that primary schools are having their athletics in Mukono and so many districts in Uganda have failed to bring pupils for the primary athletics competitions. My district Amuru, on the day the pupils were supposed to travel to Mukono, the CAO went to the account and found no funds completely on the district account. Not only Amuru District but even Gulu Municipality failed to bring the pupils for the competition. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, we really feel there is a tendency by the Ministry of Finance to release funds for the last quarter towards the end of the financial year yet the regulation states clearly that when the financial year ends, the funds in the accounts of the districts not utilised are supposed to be brought back to the central pool. Last year alone, very many districts returned billions of shillings back to the central government. For example, Kitgum District alone returned Shs 2 billion yet some of the funds were already committed but the regulation said the money must be brought back to the central government. 

Mr Speaker, we need the Minister of Finance to tell us clearly when the funds shall be released to the local governments. I beg to move. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Jinja Municipality East.

2.35
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue that is being raised is a very serious matter. Actually, it even touches on our powers as Parliament to appropriate because even in the last quarter, districts received money two months after it was supposed to have been released and this affected activities which had been planned. The point I am trying to make here is: I wonder whether this does not affect our powers as Parliament to appropriate resources. If we appropriate money, we will run a cash budget and if Finance refuses to release money to the entities where we have appropriated it, doesn’t it actually question the mandate of Parliament to appropriate. I am giving an example of Jinja, when they received the money two months later. When I was at the district council, they told me when they had a budget, they had a procurement plan and therefore, they cannot actually proceed to act within time and that will cause Government to lose money. 

So, Mr Speaker, I conclude by saying that the Ministry of Finance must come out clearly and extensively to address the question of releases not only for this one but even in the ministries because they cannot conclude the year without actually giving any release to a ministry and this must be the effect of these supplementaries. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

2.36
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issues raised by the hon. Member for Ajuri are real and it is affecting service delivery. You realise that most of the districts actually leave development activities towards the third and fourth quarters knowing that that is the time when Government probably will have collected enough money to send to them but up to now, the money has not been released and all the services are at a standstill. The districts are at a loss on whether they should go ahead and commit themselves or not and the problem is that the moment money is sent late, it is again requested to be refunded. The assurance we want to get from the Ministry of Finance is, if he said they will release money late, are they going to request for it to be returned to the Consolidated Fund or not? If it is returned, there is even no guarantee that the money will be ring-fenced and sent back immediately at the beginning of the financial year. Year in, year out, the districts continue to lose money and they continue to push whatever they planned in the previous year forward and it is affecting service delivery. We need assurance from the Minister of Finance. 

2.38
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Obua for raising this matter here. Money is a resource for doing something but you cannot do anything even when you have all the monies of the world without time. You need the right time and the right amount of money together. Now, if you give all the monies when the time is lost, what are you going to do with the money? The money is not going to work. 

The issue here is that penalty is given to the local governments if they do not use the money and the money is returned to the Treasury. That is the penalty and the statement I got from Moyo is that if you do not use all the monies that are given to you, in the next financial year, you will not be given as much money as you want because you do not have the capacity. The district is penalised for not using all the money. What about the Ministry of Finance? What penalty do we give them for sending the money late? We must also punish the Ministry of Finance for sending the money late as we punish the districts for not using the money on time – (Interruptions)

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Members are raising pertinent issues regarding the economy. I think we have five ministers who are in charge of finance but I want to find out from the Leader of Government Business what is happening. We do not see anybody from Finance. What is happening? 

2.40
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of money being returned to the Treasury from districts is well known to us. I have just recently met the CAOs. All of them from the whole of Uganda were meeting yesterday at the Silver Springs Hotel and we talked about this. The challenge is not as simple as we want to make it. First, the money flowing into the Treasury is not controlled by the wishes of Government but by the energies operating the economy. Since we operate a cash economy, we deliver when the cash comes in. That notwithstanding, programmes in the districts also –(Mr Sabiiti rose_)– if you give me a minute, I will take your clarification. Thank you. Messages coming from the district reports on the implementation programmes tend to be slow sometimes and therefore, releases are also influenced by lack of quick responses from the districts. I do not think anyone of us here can stand and say that the district they come from does not fault on reporting on implementation of programmes. I have said here – (Interruption)

MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I really appreciate the information being given by Prof. Kabwegyere but my brother had earlier raised a point of procedure and we would have loved to hear from the Leader of Government Business and Mr Speaker, when the professor rose to speak, I expected that he was going to pronounce that he is speaking as the Leader of Government Business. Unfortunately, he seems to be giving a lecture and we are talking of monies that are given to districts and they come back just because the monies are released late. So, is he procedurally right to give a lecture in place of explaining why the ministers are not in this House to answer questions?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable  members, when they ask that all men should stand up, only the men will stand up and it is not up to us to inquire or check whether they are actually men. You said the Leader of Government Business should respond and the hon. Member stood up. Why are we investigating whether he is actually the Leader of Government Business?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Without going too much into it, a message can be delivered even in a lecture. What I was talking about is that this problem affects all of us. Government is interested in the implementation of programmes and programmes cannot be implemented without money. This is the reason why we had two days of meeting CAOs from the whole of Uganda, to overhaul this whole question of monitoring and evaluation, handling implementation and coordination. So it is not out of - (Interruption)

MR SABIITI: Thank you for giving way so that you get this information. You are aware, Mr Speaker, that we have in this House a supplementary, which is over and above 3 percent of what we are supposed to spend.

Secondly, you are aware that we, as Parliament, changed the law in the Finance Bill to allow the government to be given a warrant to spend instead of having three warrants. The government assesses the money, uses it and in one quarter they use more than they should have used. At the end of the year, there is no money for what should have been released to other sectors.

I am authentically giving you that information. If I am wrong, let the Minister of Finance come here and say so. The money that was taken away from local governments is not there and it is not because the money we gave is not there. All the money we appropriated in this Parliament was collected and used over and above. 

Therefore, honourable colleague, is it really correct for you to give wrong information to this august House? If this is diversionary then that is a different matter. This insatiable love for expenditure every quarter, over and above what is required, is dangerous for the country and we should seriously look into this. This is why the Finance Bill comes here. If we just leave it to go as it is then we should not cry. It is we, the Parliament of Uganda that listed that particular position. I thank you very much.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I take the hon. Member’s contribution but I also want to point out what he actually knows. Government is allowed to spend before they can come back here but they spend what is available. The percentage hon. Sabiiti has mentioned is a percentage. There is no problem, I do not have to dispute that but the question is whether the money is easily available. 

To conclude, it is true that every district of Uganda has had its money returned. It is not most of them. I can tell you that the majority of districts in Uganda put the money to use. (Interruption)

MR OCHOLA: Mr Speaker, the information I want to give my colleague, the professor, is that at the end of the financial year, many districts in this country return money to the centre because of what hon. Obua has said. The money for the fourth quarter is released late and Mr Speaker, you know that the procurement process takes long. We are in May and when money is released now, you have to undergo the processes, which will take a lot of time, possibly past June and the money is taken back to the centre. When this money comes to the centre, for the districts to get it back is a tag of war.

The information I want to give is that most districts have to bribe Finance ministry officials for the money to be released and I am giving you this information authoritatively. I have been a chairman of a district and I have seen my technical people do this. The local governments have to part with money to the ministry officials for them to get the releases back to them and professor is here deceiving this august House. 

It is unfortunate but that is the information I want to give you and you must go and cross check with the Finance ministry and this must come to a stop as it is year in, year out. You release the money for the local governments late and yet service delivery is down there in the local governments. That is the reason why local governments are failing; that is why the roads are poor and buildings are collapsing within two years because they go and do shoddy work as they do not have the time and they are trying to beat the deadline. That is the information I wanted to give.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules regulate the kind of language we use. I think words like “Deceiving”, unless they are substantiated, might not be proper. What I heard the Leader of Government Business say is that not all the districts return money, a statement which you yourself have confirmed that most of the districts return money. So both of you are saying the same thing, I do not see where the other word comes in, in this particular instance because he did not say, no district returns money. He said not all of them return money. So let us have the records clear on this.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: If I could conclude, Mr Speaker- (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I need to be guided here. The minister actually alluded to the fact that just two days ago, there was a meeting at the Silver Springs Hotel of all CAOs from all the districts in this country. In that meeting, the ministers who went there pointed out very clearly to all the CAOs that there are going to be no monies disbursed in the last quarter for this financial year. They told all the CAOs not to expect any money for their districts in the last quarter. 

The minister knows very well that monies have been returned to the tune of over Shs 32 billion from districts. The guidance I want to seek is, where has this Shs 32 billion that was returned gone? Can’t these monies go back the way they came? That is the only message that Members of Parliament would like to hear from the minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, I do not think that guidance can be given by the -(Laughter)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, I didn’t want to accuse my colleague of inexactitude because she said that the ministers met the CAOs and said no money was going to be delivered, which wasn’t true. I also don’t think that any Member of this House can believe that there is no money going to be released in the last quarter. But we are all talking about –(Interjections)– no, I don’t need information because –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, the issue is: This is May and the financial year is ending soon, but up to now money for the last quarter has not been released. What is the explanation? Just summarise that for us.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, we now need to be more and more careful – (Laughter) – in the way we handle money given what Members of this House have already presented on how public funds are spent. We are going through a thorough job so that by the time money is released, it is for the right cause. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think this question remains outstanding. We will task Members of the Frontbench present to notify the Minister of Finance so that she can brief Parliament next Tuesday about this situation. Otherwise, there is no way that answer can be accepted even by the Chair. So, let us notify the Minister of Finance that on Tuesday, at 2 O’clock, we expect a response to the issues raised now about the delayed release of the money for the last quarter of this financial year. We need that information because districts, as the Member said, are in a crisis. Let us do it that way. We can now turn to the items on the Order Paper.

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE ON PRESS REPORTS ON SECURITY

2.57
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament. All of us have read or seen headlines in our press making very serious allegations of security nature. It is for that reason that I sought the opportunity to make this statement.

It has been alleged that a criminal plan has been hatched to achieve two ends. One, to frame certain senior officers of Government and the army in order to make it appear that these officers had committed serious and capital offences –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Sorry, hon. Minister of Defence. The guidance I would like to seek relates to the fact that the statement that is being read here relates to one of our colleagues in this House. But you will also recall that there are 10 members of the UPDF who represent the Army in this House. But, none of them is present in the House as of now. Could their absence be related to that matter or can we – because they should be here to listen to the statement. Can I be guided, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The member making the statement is the Minister of Defence, just in case you are not aware of the last appointments that were made by – no, let him make the statement, please.

DR KIYONGA: Mr Speaker, I would like to say that the allegations that appeared in the newspapers can be summarised into two categories. One is that certain senior officers of Government and the Army are being framed that they have committed certain offences and two, that there is a plan to assassinate certain people perceived to be opposed to the so-called Muhoozi Project.

This information no doubt caused concerns not only to colleagues in the House, but also across the population. The reports in the press are attributed to hon. Gen. David Ssejusa, who is a four-star general and a historical member of the UPDF in addition to being an honorable member of this House. He knows the laws of the country and the laws that govern the force in which he continues to serve. It is therefore unfortunate that he made such serious and false allegations in the manner he did.

However, I would like to assure this august House and the country at large that there has not been and there will never be such a criminal act as senior members of Government and Army conspiring to frame their colleagues or indeed anyone in the population. There is no plan, honourable colleagues, that we are aware of, intended to assassinate certain people.

The UPDF and the NRM have clear track records. Such underhand or criminal methods have never been the way these institutions work. The Army is cohesive, united and under effective command and control. The population and we, the leaders, should remain assured that the country is safe and stable.

Within the context of the Constitution and other laws that govern our country, the President, who is also the Commander-in-Chief is taking appropriate measures to respond to the acts of indiscipline that have been portrayed to the population through the press and other means.

Mr Speaker, I wish to request the august House to note this statement and give time to the Commander-in-Chief to take appropriate steps in line with our laws. And in order not to further alarm the population, I request you, Mr Speaker, that this statement is not debated. I thank you, Mr Speaker and the honourable members of this august House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, a statement has indeed been made. The rules of this House allow debate on ministerial statements. This statement is no exception. However, honourable members, the nature of the matters that have been raised are such that it will not be the responsibility of the House to escalate the situation. The House should do everything it can to deescalate any situation that could lead to chaos of any kind.

Therefore, we may not necessarily debate the issues because the issues, as we read them in the press, are the way they are. I don’t know what kind of debate we can conduct. But we can raise some clarifications for brief responses. Otherwise, I don’t think we can debate this statement.

3.03
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE (Mr Hassan Fungaroo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank my senior colleague, hon. Dr Chrispus Kiyonga, for presenting this statement. As a Shadow Minister of Defence and Security, and one concerned about your security and the security of the Republic of Uganda, I have knowledge that relatively, the Republic of Uganda is safe, secure and stable in that there is no actively organised body of people, either Ugandans or foreigners fighting to overthrow the Government of Uganda and to actively destabilise the State. So the State is safe; but what we see in the issues raised here are factors which should be taken seriously because they may destabilise the State. In that regard, I would like to state the following:

First, Gen. hon. Tinyefunza – Sejusa is a Member of Parliament and as a Member of Parliament, he should have the protection of Parliament. So we need him to come here and make a statement on the Floor of the House on the matter he talked about. 

Secondly, we must also ask, in those statements he made - for instance, in the statement of the Minister, they refer to the manner in which he made the statements; but he does not question the substance of the statements – he only questions the manner in which the statements are made. But is the way affected by where he raises the issues from? If he raises the concerns in Parliament, then he ought to do so in a Parliamentary way. If he raises them in his capacity as a soldier, then the way would have to conform to the Army doctrines and norms. 

So we should ask Gen. Sejusa on forum or the way in which he raised his issues; did he do it as a Member of Parliament or as a Member of the High Command; you see in the Army, there is hierarchy. So we should demand for a statement from Gen. Sejusa. 

The content of the argument – according to Gen. Sejusa, the attack on Mbuya or other institutions of Government are stage managed just to frame people and arrest them and assassinate them; that is his argument. Now, I want to ask, are these issues true – can the minister tell us whether there is no risk of another stage managed incident? And in his understanding, is this really stage managed and does he think there is going to be more stage managed events like a stage managed attack on Parliament to make us fear that there is insecurity? I think the minister can answer the question on stage management.  

Lastly, on the so called Muhoozi Project, the minster should tell us whether this project exists or not. You have a report here on the Muhoozi Project, and you are the Minister of Defence. If this project is genuine, are you allowed to have people in the Army who hold projects of presidential nature and participate in politics while still in the Army? Why don’t you eject Muhoozi from the Army? Tell him openly that if he wants to participate in politics, he should get out of the Army. Tell him, “Go and contest in Nyabushozi Sub-County or the District elections so that you become a councillor of a district or you become a Member of Parliament and participate in politics officially. You can then call your political project ‘Muhoozi Project’. But you should not do that in the military.” So what does the minister have to say about the involvement of the military in politics? You have now allowed politics into the Army. Why do you allow that in the Army under your watch? 

Even the Army being in Parliament is a problem. They are now politicians in uniform. In democratic countries, the Army is supposed to defend the country. Those who want to participate in politics resign and context officially. But our situation in Uganda is a bit different; they say it is based on our historical background. They are in Parliament yet they are also in the Army. They are subjected to Parliamentary disciplinary measures and military disciplinary measures. In the military, you cannot speak any how without order. But in Parliament, you are free to speak. So we must go back to the drawing board. But the ministers should tell us, is it allowed for somebody to be in the Army and also prepare for presidential –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think there are two things that we need to have clearly, which can help us. The rules allow a member to make a statement of personal explanation. I have not come across a rule where Parliament demands a statement from a Member – I have not come across that rule. Maybe it should be one of the amendments we should consider making in our next review of the rules. So we do not have the authority to demand a statement from a Member of Parliament. We can do that with the Ministers, but for a Member of Parliament, we may have some legal difficulties. 

But then, secondly, the debate on whether the Army should be in Parliament or not, took place in the CA, in 1995 when the Constitution was enacted; giving a repeal period of ten years. In 2005, the review was indeed done and Parliament confirmed that the Army should remain in Parliament with ten representatives with all the other interest groups. 

The next review is in 2015 and that will be the appropriate time that the debate being raised from Obongi will be well placed to guide the House on that matter. These matters are the way they are. The statements we make should not escalate anything, because many of us do not know whether those things are true or not. So let us treat the issue carefully. 

3.11
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the problem is how the Minister of Defence managed his information. When this incident happened in Mbuya and the events that followed the attack on the barracks – we had expected the minister to come and make a statement here –(Interjections)– he made a statement, but he did not clarify on all the events that followed. So when you fail to manage information and to give people information, people create avenues and make conclusions. 

The only humble advice I would give the minister is, when such things happen, do not give room to speculators. If you had done this early enough, the General would not have become a “rebel General” – because we refer to people who say things which ought not to be said as “Rebel MPs”. So he is a “Rebel General” now. (Laughter)

The minister should learn to act in time to avoid such statements. This is not the first time Gen. Sejusa is blowing up things. Matters went up to the Supreme Court. But if we continue that way – maybe he is the only courageous General who has come up to speak out his mind. But I think the country needs more explanations. Your statement alone here will not stop the debate on this matter. Outside there, debates are going to continue on the presidential project and so forth. The laws are very clear, if any one wants to stand for president, he should come up and declare it. Why should people use other methods? Whoever is interested should come up and campaign and we shall either give or not give them the vote.

So if someone has the ambition, all of them; allow people to talk and speak out that “So and so has these ambitions”. We have heard issues of the queue here. Maybe some are getting incensed because the queue is being jumped. So, please, on issues regarding this project, people have been raising issues when the promotions were taking place. We have just had col. Katirima being promoted to a Brigadier but there is someone, who just after nine years is a Brigadier General. Those are questions which should be answered and people will continue raising them as long as we continue behaving the way we behave. Thank you. 

3.14
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UDPF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the hon. Minister of Defence for his statement and to support his appeal on why this matter should not cause undue excitement. It is not the first time in the history of the UPDF; it is not the first time in the history of this Parliament and it is not the first time in normal daily life that in society sometimes somebody wakes up not feeling well –(Laughter)- sometimes somebody is emotionally affected by a statement made by another and feels out of the norm; it is not unusual. 

Secondly, I want to report to you with a lot of excitement that international and independent local organisations have carried out research in Uganda on the most trusted institution in Uganda and more than three times, they have confirmed, to my pleasure, that the UPDF is the most trusted institution in Uganda.  (Applause) 

Thirdly, on the issues of discipline, a lot of time and effort has been spent on ensuring discipline of the UPDF to bring the present situation in Uganda to where it is. Is there therefore worry that any act of an utterance, of indiscipline, of a statement is such a matter that should cause so much excitement as if more serious things have never been handled before? 

I would like to appeal that the reason the UPDF was found necessary to be in Parliament was that we are able to share things which affect the armed forces and have relevance to the politics of the country.  Mr Speaker -(Interjections)– let me make my point. I kept quiet when you were speaking. You will ask for clarification later. With all due respect, I will give you time; let me finish. 

I was on one of these issues that have taken place and the issue on which I want to call for caution is the freedom of our press, which sometimes goes beyond limits; freedom of our members of the public or even Members of Parliament at that which sometimes goes to excess. How do we handle it and how should we handle it? People normally don’t do what – (Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank comrade Gen. Tumwine for giving way. Thank you for assuring us that these are normal things happening; we should not worry but I want to ask these questions: The statements of Gen. Sejusa are considered by the Army leadership to be improper and dangerous and the Army has a procedure of bringing him to order. In the past, we had senior officers of the UDPF like Kyakabaale, Col. Mande and the late Itongwa, Col. Besigye –(Interjections)– yes, he could be a General if the Army was fair – (Laughter). 

My comrades, we know that cases of indiscipline within the Army - if at all those are cases of indiscipline - may result into insecurity: For example, the case of the late Itongwa was considered a matter of indiscipline but it also expressed itself as a matter of insecurity in the sense that –(Interruption)

GEN. TUMWINE: Mr Speaker, we were talking about hon. Gen. David Sejusa, a Member of this Parliament; a member of the High Command and historical command of the UPDF. Is the hon. Member in order to compare him with Itongwa and Kyakabaale who are – (Laughter) – on treason and I think he was even about to bring in Kony. Is he in order to compare the incomparables? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the honourable member could benefit better from information that Itongwa was not in the High Command; that Gen. Sejusa is actually in the High Command of the UPDF and that there is a distinction. Maybe it is part of the complaint that the Minister of Defence does not inform the public very frequently; that is why members make such mistakes. 

MR FUNGAROO: Most obliged, thank you for the guidance but the – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You had risen on a point of clarification which he allowed but you are going on to debate. Please, he is the one who had allowed you.

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that clarification. I was explaining that the reason the UPDF was seen or the armed forces were seen to be part of Parliament and in the involvement of the politics of Uganda was that a member can ask any question and he will be answered immediately. As I said, do not compare the incomparable.

I want to proceed to inform you that if you trust the UPDF, it does not mean that we have only angels in the UPDF. The UPDF is part of our society; any matter that comes up, trust the UPDF. If it is within the boundaries of the UPDF, it will be handled to your satisfaction. As always, it is proven, it is tested and it is on record that UPDF does not, will not and shall not tolerate indiscipline. That is the basis and foundation on which our doctrine is built; the respect of the Constitution and of the people is our pillar number one.

Therefore, I would like to request that we do not create a mountain out of an ant hill. Let us leave this matter to the able authorities of UPDF to handle effectively, in the interest of security and the stability of this country. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what I was suggesting was that if there were issues of clarification that you want to raise with the minister - but a debate on this subject is not tenable. If you want some issues clarified, maybe I would allow that.

3.25
MR PHILLIP WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We have been told by hon. Gen. Tumwine that people are excited, but I also do not know why the Government or the Army is excited. Gen. Sejusa called for investigations. Without investigations, we do not have a right to speak. So if Gen. Sejusa is calling for investigations, why are we condemning him? Why are we not saying yes, let us investigate? Why is the Minister of Defence saying there is no plan? Nobody has said there is a plan; there have been accusations or allegations. 

Before Gen. Sejusa made his statement, we were reading in the media and social media, of allegations of assassinations and plots within UPDF and of a fight between the Police and the Army. These things should be investigated and after investigations you come and say there is nothing.

We have heard of coups. The President of the Republic of Uganda mentioned that there could be a coup and that was also washed aside; even the Army Commander talked about the coup. These are not easy and simple matters; they are very serious.

We have had a history where there have been disagreements in the first Uganda Army and it ended up in a coup. We had disagreements in UNLA and it ended up in a coup. We are seeing a simmering of these things, so do not dismiss them. We need investigations because you are sending unnecessary anxiety among the public.

Mr Speaker, the minister says the Army is cohesive. Then why are people disserting? Why would 1,000 soldiers desert in a year if the Army is cohesive? Even if there are two deserting, they are deserting so it cannot be cohesive. There is disgruntlement in the Army because of discriminative promotions, discriminative welfare - it is all known and we should not be glossing over these matters. This is our country and it is our Army.

Mr Speaker, I think that the minister should clarify some of these things and we should not just dismiss this as if there is nothing and threaten officers who are talking about issues concerning our country. Thank you very much.

3.28
MR FOX ODOI (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): I thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the Minister of Defence for this information. I have only one question. Where is hon. Gen. David Sejusa? Are his whereabouts known to the Army? Did he go to the places he is alleged to have gone with your permission and consent? Do you know when he will be within this jurisdiction? I thank you.

3.29
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the minister for clearing the air. There has been a lot of speculation so we are grateful that he has done that. The other questions are associated with those of hon. Fox Odoi. Today’s government paper has reported that Gen. Sejusa is out of the country. We want this cleared before people begin speculating. Is he out on official duty? Has he fled or he is somewhere as somebody who is scared of the law? Can we also clear that?

3.29
DR SAMUEL LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just want to get clarification. Towards the end of the statement, the hon. minister states that the President and Commander-in-Chief is taking appropriate measures to respond to the acts of indiscipline.

The clarification I want from the minister is: What is assumed to be an act of indiscipline? Is it what the General is talking about or the act that is indiscipline? We want to know exactly whether you have already concluded that what he is saying is already indiscipline or he is saying what he has seen, being a member of the High Command. So what are those acts of indiscipline? We want to be very sure.

On appropriate measures; at what stage will you inform this House because this House should not condone a situation where appropriate measures take a direction where they end up being vindictive towards people who sometimes come up with information? Gen. Sejusa is a member of the High Command. We trust the Army and we also know that he is a man in his normal senses and I think he is not just talking anything.

In this statement that we have been given, you have tried to avoid a lot of things but we need to know, are you aware of the motive because there could only be two reasons; whether he has a bad motive or he is speaking the truth. In this statement, you have only said that the whole thing is baseless. 

This is a statement that should have appeared as a press statement but in a House of this nature, you should have come up with a detailed explanation for us to be able to rest that matter and know that there is no problem and that we trust the Army is going to handle the issue.

Your statement is very guarded and we cannot decipher the problem; whether the General has some information, which is true or whether he has another motive. So we are left guessing and we do not know who to trust. Could you assure us that at an appropriate time, you will come to this House when this matter is sorted out and give a detailed explanation? We do not expect the General to be pursued because people are saying he is not in the country but we were just outside there and one hon. Member saw the General two hours ago being driven by another officer in a small car.

So this issue of saying that he is out of the country and other people are saying they have seen him with their own eyes - what is the whole thing? Why should the government media report that he is out of the country and another colleague, who I believe is in his normal senses, told me and many others that he saw the General before he came to the House being driven by another lady soldier somewhere? What is the whole thing? What is the truth? Can you state to us, as the Minister of Defense, the true circumstances relating to the whereabouts of this General? Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we first take some responses for us to know the gaps to be cured? Yes, honourable minister.
3.34
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues who have had the opportunity to say something about the statement I made.

In regard to the attack on Mbuya Army Barracks, I came to the Floor of this House and made a statement. Now, I would like to inform the august House that arrests were made and there are people who have been charged before the Court Martial. So, it would be prejudicial for me to be more detailed than that. Otherwise, the due process of the law is being followed.

My statement talked about the so-called Muhoozi Project. It is so-called because this is in the statement attributed to hon. Gen. David Sejusa. But I would like to assure the House and hon. Hassan Fungaroo, who raised this point that there is no such project in the Army.

In the same vein, I would like to thank hon. Gen. Tumwine for the full explanation he has given regarding the reasons why the Army is in the House in addition to what you, Mr Speaker, said. I also thank him for stating clearly that the Army has a procedure of doing things. If there is a breakdown in discipline, there is a regular way that is followed to sort that out.

Hon. Wafula Oguttu said that the hon. Gen. David Sejusa is only asking for investigations. In response to that, I would like to say that perhaps the little detail I didn’t put in the statement is the fact that when you read stories in the press, you get an understanding that hon. Gen. David Sejusa wrote a letter, which was delivered to the Director General of the Internal Security Organization. 

However, the truth is that the Director General of Internal Security Organization has never received such a letter though in the press reports the General has emphatically said that he wrote such a document.

But also ordinarily, hon. Gen. David Sejusa is the coordinator of both the Internal and External security organizations. And so, if there had been such a matter, the Army General would have first addressed it appropriately up to the Commander-in-Chief.  But as I have stated, he claims to have written to his junior, but which junior says, he has never received such a letter. That is why we need to follow up on that matter to get to know where the truth lies. Otherwise for anybody to ask for investigations to take off would not be a problem in itself.

Hon. Wagula Oguttu, I also would like to inform you that cohesion and desertion are two different things. In the laws that govern the Army, desertion is a crime meaning that in any army, there are always people who desert; and when it arises, it is handled case by case. I think again, the press has worried the population by giving the impression that there is massive run out of the Army.

In that regard, allow me inform the House that cases of desertion that we have on record fall under three categories. We have cases of soldiers returning from Mogadishu and finding large sums of money on their accounts and in their judgment, most of them have thought that this was the right time for them to go and invest that money in order to make more. But obviously, that was not in order and once they were noticed and called to order, virtually all of them have returned into the force.

There is the category of auxiliary forces. This category arose from the insurgencies that we had in the Rwenzori Mountains, Teso and Acholi sub-regions. There were auxiliary forces that performed very well with the Army considering to take them on as regular soldiers. But apparently, their call had not been in that place. So, after they served for a few years, some of them felt they had to go back home. That has been another category of soldiers leaving the Army.

Lastly, is the category of those soldiers who were integrated from the former rebel groups?  On the basis of that information, I would like to assure the honourable colleagues that the desertions you hear about are being managed and they should not cause undue worry.

Hon. Fox Odoi and other colleagues have asked to know where hon. Gen. David Sejusa is. I would like to say the hon. Gen. David Ssejusa has been out of the country through regular methods. I cannot say that he has returned as I talk, but I have every reason to believe that he will come back to the country.

There was a question whether we shall come back to the House or not. I would like to say that Parliament has set up a law that governs the Army; so, issues of the Army will be managed in accordance to that law. If we find it necessary to come back to the House, Mr Speaker, we will certainly do so, with your permission. I thank you, colleagues and you, Mr Speaker for that time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us go to the next item.

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER ON THE IMPACT OF MASSIVE CHARCOAL BURNING IN NWOYA DISTRICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you have a maximum of 15 minutes, including the debate.

3.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Ms Christine Munaaba): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, you will recall that on 2 May 2013, hon. Lilly Adong, the Woman Member of Parliament for Nwoya District, during the debate on matters of national importance, reported massive deforestation by commercial charcoal burners who she said have invaded that district causing an escalation of deforestation, human conflict and injury including the castration of a member of the community.

This is a threat to the affected communities as well as to the environment, given the fact that some of the areas being deforested border Ayago River where Government has plans of establishing a hydro power station.

I want to thank hon. Lilly Adong for bringing this serious matter to the attention of this House and my ministry, particularly since this negative activity, which constitutes an assault, if not checked, is leading to the loss of critical benefits and functions that can only be performed by forests.

In addition, livelihoods will be affected in the long term because there will be no resource base for the district and the national economy, not to mention the individual traders who will have nothing to sell. I take note of the fact that this is not the first time this matter is coming to my attention. Hon. Adong wrote to the Ministry of Water and Environment on 26 February, 2013 asking for intervention. I was tasked to handle the matter and I would like to inform the House that I have taken steps to address it as follows?

I wrote to the Executive Director of the National Environment Management Authority requesting him to send a team to the district to make an on-site visit and assessment of the situation on the ground. This was done and NEMA has filed a report with my office, a copy of which is available for your information to show that my ministry is already responding to the concerns raised. I beg to lay the correspondence and the report of NEMA on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What statement; what date is it; who authored it?

MS MUNAABA: The statement was authored by the National Executive Director of NEMA, who has an accompanying letter on the matter. The letter is dated 18 March 2013 and the subject is, “A report on a field visit to Nwoya District to address the issues of deforestation”. I beg to lay. 

The report makes mention of laws and guidelines available that are applicable to this matter and also makes recommendations that may be applied in the short and long term. We need to note that although the land and forests from which the charcoal burners are operating are privately owned, the National Tree Planting Act, 2003 provides guidelines on how much is to be harvested; the type of species and the management measures that should be taken into account in environmental sustainability and eco-system services to be followed while harvesting. These are not being observed by the charcoal burners. 

Furthermore, the National Environment Management Regulation, 2000 on lakes, river banks and wetlands stipulates that a buffer zone of 100 meters should be left between the river and the immediate catchment in order to avert siltation of the river and also protect it against flooding of the immediate catchment. This to my knowledge has not been observed and it causes a future threat to the area and the people. 

We should note that the flooding in Kasese is a result of deforestation in Fort portal. My ministry takes note of the integrated water resource management principles; the Dublin Principle, 1992 which emphasises the need for catchment management as an integral part in conserving and protecting water resources and protecting the catchment areas against disasters. 
 
In that regard, my ministry has already set up four water management zones which are spearheading catchment management planning with all stakeholders in a participatory manner. Since Ayago River is located to one of the water management zones whose headquarters is in Lira, I will instruct the technical persons there to prioritise the area there for the envisaged planning process. 

In addition, the District Support Service Department of the Ministry of Water and Environment working with the District Forest Services will provide technical back-stocking support supervision and the necessary guidelines for the use of the forest resources to curb degradation. This will strengthen the current efforts by the local government in Nwoya to regulate charcoal burning. 

On the need to halt the rapid deforestation taking place now and in an effort to address the inadequate human capacity, my ministry will instruct the National Environment Management Authority, National Forestry Authority and Environment Protection force to beef up the police personnel in the district as a measure to enforce compliance to the national tree planting Act, 2003 and the National Environment Act, CAP 153 of the laws of Uganda. 

This effort will be accompanied by rigorous sensitisation campaigns on good conservation practices as well as community policing by the local government leaders of their natural resources as they are mandated in the Local Government Act. 

Honourable colleagues, as a signatory to the United Nations Framework Convention for combatting climate change and as a beneficiary to carbon credit, we as citizens of Uganda are obliged to conserve our forests. 

In addition, in the view of the roaming desertification and global warming due to climate change, it is even more imperative that we put in place practical measures that will avert negative climate change impacts. In this regard, the leaders in Nwoya should consider imposing a temporary burn on charcoal burning until measures are established to control its impact. I would like to implore honourable members to support my proposals or recommendations as stated above. 

In conclusion, it is unfortunate that such conflicts as those reported in Nwoya like human injuries, such as castration as well as bickering are happening in the district. However, I hope that through sensitisation and awareness campaigns, as well as the involvement of the resource users, an amicable and lasting solution will be reached for the benefit of the community peace, our environment and national economy. Mr Speaker, I rest my case. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think, let us first hear from the Member who raised this issue; the Member for Nwoya. 

3.51
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for responding to the issues I raised. I feel the response the minister has given is insufficient. I have not heard her talk of how we are going to rehabilitate the place because over 10,000 hectares of land have been depleted of trees and when you stand there, you may think it is an open ground that did not have trees before. I would like the minister to say more about that. Can’t we have a programme for tree planting to rehabilitate the place?

Secondly, halting charcoal burning has already been tried by the district authorities. But it seems the people who are burning the charcoal have got some invisible big shots or godfathers behind them. Whenever the district tries to stop them, the big shots come in. We receive calls from the IGP and other big people in the police trying to enforce charcoal burning which the district stopped. That is why I requested for intervention of Parliament and the minister. 

And, lastly, I did not hear the minister talking about compensation of that man. A man of 32 years has been castrated by the charcoal burners; what is Government going to do about it? Thank you.

3.53
MR STEPHEN BAKA MUGABI (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish first of all to thank the Minister and also the Member who raised this issue. This was a wakeup call to the minister. This issue is not isolated to Nwoya alone; I am wondering whether the situation in Nwoya is worse than that in Busoga and Kaliro specifically where the minister comes from. Is the situation worse than Nakasongola or Soroti where I have travelled and seen large areas cleared or Kyankwazi, where we all travelled recently for the exercise? The business of cutting trees for charcoal is serious throughout the country. Therefore, I find the response of the minister inadequate because she restricted herself to Nwoya and yet she knows very well that this problem cuts across the entire country. 

I therefore wish to ask the minister what plans she has to replicate the efforts she has mentioned for Nwoya. But most importantly, I heard of a project some time back of tree planting in the ministry, which was coordinated by an NGO called FIFOC specifically in my area, and I heard that they were planting the species of Musizi and Eucalyptus. I think it is now a year and that project ended. What is the latest from your ministry in terms of addressing what hon. Lilly Adong has just said of rehabilitating the areas in terms of providing seedlings and even addressing the effects of charcoal burning as you have mentioned? 

What is the plan in the ministry on the issue of projects and seedlings provision specifically for those areas that are heavily affected? 

Other than that concern, Mr Speaker, I wish to thank the minister for the response but I wish to put it to her that the problem is across the country; be it in the East, be it in the West, be it in Nyabushozi. All these areas are affected by the problem of charcoal burning. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before I take another contribution, don’t you really think this is a matter much bigger than Nwoya District? It is about the whole country and do you think engaging with the minister now would produce the results we want to hear? I was going to propose that on this matter, we could actually engage the committee of this House to do a complete study of the situation so that we can have a good discussion on this subject because it is a big problem. It really is a big problem. If that is agreeable, then let us refer this matter substantially to the Committee on Natural Resources so that they examine this thing more carefully and in more greater detail and engage with all the stakeholders and they come and report to this House within 60 days. [HON. MEMBER: “Two months.”] The rules say 60 days; I am not amending the rules to say two months. (Laughter) - Next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT MOVED UNDER RULE 47 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE TO ESTABLISH MUNI UNIVERSITY UNDER SECTIONS 22 (1), 24 (1) AND 25 OF THE UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS ACT, 2001

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have members of staff of Muni University. They are here to witness the laying on Table of the processes of creating Muni University. You are very welcome to Parliament. You can see that they are all set to proceed. We should not come in their way and I have already seen, by acclamation, that members coming from that part of the country are fairly excited about this process. 

Hon. Members, the law under section 21(1) states that the minister may, by statutory instrument, on the recommendation of the National Council of Higher Education and by a resolution of Parliament establish a public university. Section 24 is on the location of a public university. 

“The location of a public university established under this Act shall be as may be provided in the statutory instrument establishing it but that university may establish a branch of the university in any other part of Uganda.” Hon. Members, the procedure we have always adopted is for these matters to be referred to committees. Is this a matter that we should refer to a committee or should we dispose of this matter quickly and they go on and start the process? They have come all the way; I think we will listen to the motion and see if it is acceptable. As a House, we should not come in the way of establishing this institution. It is for our own citizens. Hon. Minister.

3.59
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, this is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to establish Muni University under section 22(1) 24(1) and 25 of the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001 and Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, 2012. 

“WHEREAS section 22(1) of the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001 empowers the minister responsible for education on the recommendation of the National Council for Higher Education, by statutory instrument and by a resolution of Parliament to establish a public university; 

AND WHEREAS section 24(1) and 25 require the minister to include in the statutory instrument the objects, functions and location of the university respectively;

AND WHEREAS the National Council for Higher Education has recommended that Muni University be established;

AND WHEREAS the minister responsible for education proposes to make the university and other tertiary institutions establishment of Muni University instrument 2013 to establish the Muni University; 

AND WHEREAS objective 18(2) of the Constitution provides that the State shall take appropriate measures;

AND WHEREAS Article 30 makes provision for the right to education;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that Muni University be established with the object, functions and locations as set out in the University and other Tertiary Institutions Establishment of Muni University Instrument 2013 attached to this resolution as an appendix.” Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Minister Of State For Primary Education; the Minister of State Higher Education; Members from Moyo District; the Member from Koboko County; the Member for Mbarara Municipality; the Member for Ayivu County; the Member for Adjumani District, the Member for Vura County and many other secondments. Hon. Members, I think by the number of secondments that have risen, it speaks volumes about the nature of debate we will conduct. The motion is that Parliament passes a resolution for the establishment of Muni University under the sections quoted by the minister. Is the minister going to justify it?

4.03
THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Thank you very much, Mr Speake, and to justify the motion, I will say a few things since the House unanimously, through their body language – (Laughter) - are of the view that we finish up this matter today. This instrument that I have just laid in Parliament may be cited as the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Muni University Establishment of Muni University Instrument, 2013. The university that we are talking about is going to be called Muni University, whose main campus will be located in Arua District in the area specified in the Schedule.

Mr Speaker, as Government, we are moving to establish Muni University in order to equitably expand higher education to undergraduate and post graduate levels and to increase the number of scientists in Uganda that include basic and applied sciences and science teachers and besides, to develop human resources appropriate for a decentralised system of governance and to produce engineering, technology and medical personnel appropriate for rural industrialisation and development and to undertake basic applied research geared towards rural transformation.

Mr Speaker, the functions of the university will be to provide instructions to all students admitted to the university and to make provision for advancement; transmission and preservation of knowledge and to stimulate intellectual life in Uganda; to organise and conduct courses with particular emphasis on nursing, information, communication and technology, medical and science education and training and to conduct teaching, research, outreach activities, examinations and award degrees, diplomas and certificates and to undertake the development and sustenance of research and publication in line with community needs and national development plans of Uganda.

It is also to disseminate knowledge and give equal opportunity of acquiring higher education to all persons including persons with disability regardless of race, political opinion or gender.

Mr Speaker, the mission of the university is to provide quality education, generate knowledge, promote innovation and community empowerment for transformation. The vision is to be a model academic and professional university for transformation and development. The university is located in Arua District on Muni Hill where land measuring about 130.84 acres has been acquired. 

The university facilities will also be located at Madi-Okolo in Arua District, Bidibidi in Yumbe District and Pakwach in Nebbi District, where additional pieces of land have been acquired. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

4.07
MR STEPHEN BAKA MUGABI (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Mr Speaker, whereas I understand that this is a government motion and by implication we are not infringing on Article 93 of the Constitution and you have already hinted that we might debate this and pass it, I am just inquiring procedurally if we should not refer this matter to the committee for further scrutiny because there are issues of finances that have not been mentioned. The minister talks about the land, which is available but issues of finances, which are actually critical to the running of this university, have not been mentioned.

So, I would think the committee would do a thorough job in terms of inviting the Ministry of Finance to commit themselves so that we do not do what we call “Byoya bya nswa”. We may approve a university when the Ministry of Finance has no funds to run the university. So I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker, if the committee should not be allowed to do thorough work on this before we pass it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, establishing a university is not the same as starting the operations now. Those are two different things. You can establish it and then the commencement will fulfil all those obligations that are required. Let us get clarification from the minister.

MAJ. (Rtd) ALUPO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the hon. Baka Mugabi for those pertinent concerns about finances. It is very good that we have people here who think quickly about money and how it should be found and spent.

The clarification I would like to make is that this Parliament started appropriating money for Muni University in 2009 when Government formed a task force to establish this university. In addition, I would like to assure my colleagues that there are about five steps that are normally followed when Government is establishing a public university. 

Firstly, Government notifies the National Council for Higher Education (NCHE) about the intention to establish a public university. Besides that, it submits programmes, which it needs to run in that public university. This has been done by the task force and it was done using resources which this Parliament, through the Committee on Social Services, which is now the Committee on Education, appropriated.

Mr Speaker, when NCHE is satisfied with the recommendation of Government to establish a university, it visits the sites and accredits the courses or programmes, which NCHE does in consultation with the responsible committee of Parliament. I want to assume that it was done in consultation with the Social Services Committee at that time.

The third step is that NCHE recommends to the minister, who is speaking now, that they are satisfied with government intention to establish a university and I received the recommendation. The next step was that we made a Cabinet memo in order to get the approval of Cabinet. I have already done that and Cabinet approved that Muni University be established.

The next step, which is the fourth, is to get approval of Parliament, which in consultation with the First Parliamentary Council and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, are to bring a motion here, which is supposed to be passed by Parliament. Thereafter, First Parliamentary Council will gazette the Instrument within 30 days and consequently the NCHE will also gazette the Instrument that we are about to pass.

Mr Speaker, all the procedures have been followed by Government since 2009 and my prayer is that colleagues debate this motion in a very objective manner and we pass it today because we need to make Muni University have an independent vote in the next financial year. We are commissioning the first students for Muni University in October this year.

I am sure that hon. Fungaroo over there is about to invite Members of Parliament to Muni University in October this year and His Excellency, President Museveni will preside over that occasion when we are commissioning the university. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.13
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I fully support the minister and the establishment of this university is important and called for. However, I would like to request the hon. minister to inform me and the House when Kabale University shall be declared a public university.

As you are aware, we have already requested Government that this university be made a public university. It has churned out a number of graduates for a number of years. We have land, which is enough to accommodate a big university. We also have enough staff to take charge of students. So, may I know from the hon. Minister, when Kabale University will be made a public university?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules of this House require us to be relevant to the matter on the Floor. Certainly the issue of Kabale University – I hope the minister is now aware. But before she comes in can we hear from the member for Terego County?

4.14
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. From the word go, I want to totally associate myself with the motion on the Floor. This motion has been long awaited. The people of West Nile have been yearning for this university for quite long. If I had the powers, which I unfortunately don’t, I would have just said, there should be no debate on this genuine motion. (Laughter) It should be just passed in totality.

However, Mr Speaker, I want to be on record that ever since the people of West Nile were assured of the creation of this university in 2009, we have received substantial support from development partners and friends and sisters from Korea. Those people have assisted us so much and now, the physical structures are already in place. All we were waiting for was this motion, which I say has come in timely as we get into the new financial year.

In the circumstances, it is my humble prayer to you, Sir, that not much should be said in regard to this university; just put the question – (Laughter) - and we move on.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, we can’t afford to keep you seated waiting. I suggest we suspend the House for 10 minutes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order in the House. I am sure the microphone was still prospecting to the references of a male as opposed to Madam Speaker. (Laughter) Hon. Members, there is a motion for a question to be put and the Speaker has absolutely no reason to query it. I now proceed to the question that a question be put to the motion. I now put the question to the motion.
           
(Question put and agreed to.)
                

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in my communication, I said that items 6, 7, 8 and 9 will be handled next week. So, we will now proceed to item 10.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. Whereas I should have been more comfortable in the Chair allowing a short debate on this motion before we eventually passed it, we have procedural problems. You put the question but you never put the question to the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The question I put was to the motion. Okay, I put the question that a question be put.
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that the motion be approved as presented.

(Question out and agreed to.)

(Motion carried.)

THE PUBLIC ORDER MANAGEMENT BILL, 2011

COMMITTEE STAGE

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members – yes, the Member for West Budama South.

MR OBOTH OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I wasn’t in the House on 2nd May when the seats just in front of you were designated to only four members of the House. May I take it that the other three are now part of the four? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the procedural question has been resolved by action. (Laughter)

Honourable members, when we adjourned yesterday, we were on clause 3. Proposals were made, we had a lengthy debate on clause 3; can I hear from the minister or the chairperson whether there are any changes on clause 3 so that we see how to proceed?

MR JAMES BABA:  Mr chairman, on clause 3, as recommended by the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, following their meeting yesterday morning, as far as I am concerned still stands and I accept it and it is the one I wish the House would consider. 

Yesterday, a number of questions were raised; people were saying, “This particular section of the clause is already in the Police Act, why do we still need it”? Yesterday, we explained at length why it was necessary to have this underlying principle as the one driving the law. 

One, in the Police Act, there is no requirement for notification which is the main body of this Bill now. Secondly, in the Police Act, as was explained yesterday, the procedure that the police should follow in the exercise of its power under section 32(1)b is not in the Police Act. The procedure that an organiser of an assembly or procession should follow is not included; the procedures that participants in assemblies and processions should follow are not in the Police Act. That is why we needed this underlying principle to have the essence of the regulation imported into this law.

So, Mr Chairman and honourable members, I beg the House and the committee to support what the committee has recommended so that we can move forward. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, just for the record, let me state, for those who may not have the text of the proposed amendment, the amendment that is proposed by the committee is to delete the existing clause 3 and substitute it with the following: 
3) “Principle of managing public order; the underlying principle of managing public order is to regulate the exercise of the freedom to assemble and to demonstrate together with others peacefully and unarmed and to petition in accordance with Articles 29(1)d and 43 of the Constitution”. 

The second leg of the proposed amendment is to define the word “regulate”. “Regulate means to adjust conduct or behaviour to conform to the requirements of the Constitution”. That was the amendment that was proposed to replace the existing clause 3. 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and I thank the minister. In my view, as defined, to regulate is about procedures; standards. Take a case where the standards as laid down are followed to the dot. What about the fate of the people who have already followed the procedures and standards and danger comes from outside their circle? Don’t they need protection? 

In my view, the main thing here is protection. Examples are given here, where people who are assembled legally are attacked by hooligans, like the “Kiboko squad” – (Interjections) – that is what they are called, I do not have another name for them. Another example was in Kawempe – these people need to be protected. I would support this Bill if only we replaced the word “regulate” with “protect”. 

If we need procedures, we can go to the Police Act, after working on this Bill and propose amendments to the Police Act so that we cover the gaps in it as stated by the minister. He says there are no provisions on how a meeting can be made; there is no requirement for notification and so forth. But why don’t we go to the Police Act and close the gaps where they exist? This particular Bill should be about protecting people in the exercise of the freedom to assemble, to demonstrate together with others publically, peacefully and unarmed, because the danger is that they can be attacked. We have the example of the Boston case, for those who watched the news on the media. People who were lawfully permitted by the Government of the United States of America to run peacefully were attacked by bombers. Those are the kind of people to be protected, because such a situation can also happen in Uganda.

So this Bill should be talking about those kinds of danger and the need to protect people when enjoying their rights and freedoms. I rest my case.

MR BAKA MUGABI: Mr Chairman, the enjoyment of our freedom to assemble and associate is well protected under the Constitution. We do not need any other law to guarantee and protect those rights and freedoms. The entire Chapter IV of the Constitution is on protection of rights and freedoms. Therefore, what this law seeks to do is to regulate those rights and freedoms; that is what the law is about. Otherwise, the rights are already protected; you do not need to legislate any more on protection. 

So this is only to regulate, such that you enjoy your rights without hampering my rights. You do not have to talk of replacing regulation with protection; it becomes clumsy in my view. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This is not a matter for Bukooli County alone –(Laughter)– I will have West Budama North.

MR FOX ODOI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want first to state that I am a Member of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. Therefore, I do not rise to debate; I have a motion to move. 

Mr Chairman, aware that the committee of the whole House spent the greater part of yesterday afternoon debating clause 3 and the Bill;

Aware that this matter has been covered in detail, a lot of consultations have been done; I beg to move that the question be put. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I thought the Shadow Attorney General had something to say. [HON. MEMBERS: “He is a member of the committee.”]Yes, members of a committee can give information. They don’t debate.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am aware that I am a member of the committee. So, sometimes we would like to listen to what other Members have to say. Maybe they would enrich what we are proposing as a committee. 

Whereas my colleague is really seeking to end the debate, that will be cutting off other views to enrich what we have provided for. The practice has been that we cannot move amendments but I had discussed it this other side to improve on clause 3 especially the definition of “Regulation” and I had asked my colleague, who is not a member of the committee and we had agreed that he moves it; if the chair can allow hon. Wafula Oguttu to suggest something to improve on just the definition of “regulation”. 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The improvement we are seeking to provide was also proposed through your guidance yesterday. We know that we are bent on having the word “regulate.” We would have preferred that instead of “regulate” we say “facilitate the orderly conduct and behaviour of…” because we debated this for a long time yesterday but since we are bent on having the word “regulate”, we wish to define regulate as such; that regulate means to “facilitate the orderly conduct or behaviour to conform to the requirements of the Constitution.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let us have the learned Attorney General.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, we have debated this matter for quite some time and some of us have already advanced our views on this same issue because it came up even in the past debates. To regulate means you are applying regulations and rules. When you breach those regulations, there are sanctions. When you use the expression “facilitation” how do you make that facilitation enforceable in terms of sanctions when there is a breach? 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Chairman, when you are peaceful and unarmed, you simply need to be helped to conduct your business by the Police in terms of traffic and in the case of intruders like terrorists as we were told yesterday. But if you regulate, you can stop yet what we are seeking here is that if I am peaceful and unarmed, you should allow me to do that but if you facilitate me to conduct my activities peacefully, and in this case when am not armed, unless we want to get the Police – (Interruption) 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Chairman, could hon. Wafula Oguttu help me understand whether this facilitation may not be misunderstood; that these demonstrators may want transport from the Police or even money. 
 
MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Chairman, I know that there is vulgarisation of the word “facilitation” in Uganda. It is hard not to think of money but this one is to enable peaceful people to conduct their business but if you say “regulate” then the Police retains the power to stop, to say, you can’t have that meeting and they may not even give reasons. We need to know the law we are making. Is it for people to enjoy their rights or to decide whether you can enjoy or not? It is our choice. Mr Chairman, ideally, we strongly believe that to regulate means to facilitate or to enable but facilitate is better. So, it is “to facilitate orderly conduct and behaviour to conform to the requirements of the Constitution.” 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, I am a scientist but I have spoken English for so long. I want hon. Wafula Oguttu to enlighten this House further. How do you want to be facilitated? Do you want money, do you want a car or do you want a black band? If you keep saying facilitation, you need to say how you want it. Do you want to create a facility? If it is a dancing hall, it is a facility you have created it. So, what facility do you want to be given? Be honest with yourselves.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: The facility I want to be given is the Police to be deployed so that they know there is no traffic problem and to keep law and order at my peaceful meeting. That is the facilitation I am talking about; to ensure that the Al Shabab or any terrorist does not come and interfere with my peaceful meeting. It is not regulation; it is facilitation because if you regulate, you can also stop before the meeting takes place and this is what we are running away from. 

MR ONEK: Further clarification, Mr Chairman. Laws are made normally to stop any bad occurrence or to ensure that there is orderly conduct of peaceful people. If you are really conducting a peaceful demonstration, that must be protected and how do you protect it? We have to ensure that there is no counter demonstration going to come therein and therefore, we have to regulate and ensure that once you have booked the venue, nobody else will be allowed. We have to regulate those other forces that will jeopardise your peaceful demonstration. Otherwise we can easily allow a situation whereby two demonstrations can go on. Spoilers will come in and yet you are peaceful people and the laws are made to ensure that we regulate the demonstration in a manner that we do not allow any disorderliness or violence or other bad-intentioned people to infiltrate and disorganise you. Otherwise if we say we only facilitate and everybody is facilitated to be there, it can be a problem. That is the reason why regulation is the right word for this purpose. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I think we have moved a step forward in the sense that part one has no issue. We are now defining to “regulate”. The first part has been adopted with the word “Regulate” and now we are defining what to “regulate” means. So what should be to “regulate”? What would it mean? I think that is where we are so we should appreciate that we have moved one step forward.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. I have attentively listened to my brother hon. Wafula Oguttu right from when he was invited by our senior, hon. Abdu Katuntu. What I have realised and what I am seeing is that my brother, hon. Abdu Katuntu, realised that what they had done as a committee via harmonising this particular clause was thorough enough to the extent that it never warranted any further improvements.

Mr Chairman, we have had a lot of time to consult over this particular clause. Even the minister has had to concede to the proposal of the amendment by the committee. I want to move -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, hon. Members, let us not go back to the same things again. What is being proposed now is to deal with the words “adjust conduct or behaviour”. That is the phrase that is being looked at. The proposers of this amendment seem to have objections to the words “adjust conduct or behaviour” in the definition of the word “regulate”. So the facilitation they are proposing is to try and improve on that. 

In essence, what we should be thinking of is a situation where we capture the word “regulate” to take care of giving these people the authority to ensure that conduct and behaviour in demonstrations conform to the Constitution. Isn’t that the whole point? So there are no major disagreements. If the word “facilitate” is not proper then get a proper word to take away “facilitate” so that it can be something like, to take steps to ensure that conduct and behaviour in assemblies and demonstrations conform to the requirements of the Constitution, something like that. (Hon. Fungaroo rose_) Honourable Member for Obongi, make sure you are coming to do something like that.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We need to put here a statement, word for word, with the definition of the word “regulate” so that the meaning of the word “regulate” that will be used in the field is the one, which is put in our law books. If we do not define this and we have evidence, which I can take to Obongi and tell the people there that this is what to “regulate” means then we are creating room for abuse of good intentions.

For example if to “regulate” means to permit -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now you are taking us back. Hon. Members, with all the respect I have for the people of Obongi, on this occasion you are taking us back. We are in a very small area now.

MR ONEK: Actually what I meant is that “regulate” means ensuring peaceful and orderly conduct of a demonstration. For example, if hon. Wafula Oguttu who is peaceful has organised a demonstration and the rowdy hon. Fungaroo comes in and has an agenda of disrupting his demonstration and infiltrates, what will Police do? They will have to make sure that they regulate and ensure that those individuals who want to disrupt this peaceful demonstration are not allowed to do it and therefore they regulate the conduct of the demonstrators.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Chairman, there is now confusion here. The hon. Minister is bringing some confusion again.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can you go back to the thinking I tried to - maybe people from the lakeside can help.

MR AYOO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think the word “regulation” would be defined to mean maintaining behaviour so that demonstrations operate peacefully for the good of both the people running the demonstration and other people and Government, who is charged with maintaining law and order. So it should mean control and maintenance of the behaviour so that it operates properly and peacefully. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let the minister propose - it is just about proposal on these words. We are not debating anything for now. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Chairman, English is a foreign language to all of us so sometimes we have to refer to the dictionary in English. There is here the word “regulate” as a verb meaning, “To control or maintain the rate or speed of (machines or process) so that it operates properly.” The next meaning is, “To control or supervise something, especially a company or a business activity, by means of rules and regulations.” Mr Chairman, so that it operates properly by means of rules and regulations. I think these are the crucial elements in the word as it is used in the context of this Bill.

MS ALUM: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have a proposal that we should use the word “facilitate”. The meaning of the word facilitate is to assist the progress of a peaceful demonstration and to make it easier or less difficult in conformity with the Constitution. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think under here, we need to consider several things. When we are defining this, we should put it as checking, adjusting, shaping and bringing into conformity with rules and principles in order to maintain law and order.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, I wanted us to say that “regulate” means to take steps to ensure that conduct or behaviour conforms to the requirements of the Constitution.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPRSON: Can you re-state it?

DR BITEKYEREZO: I propose that “regulate” means to take steps to ensure that conduct or behaviour conforms to the requirements of the Constitution.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Chairman, first I would like to clarify that this Bill was tabled here by the Minister of Internal Affairs, but as I said this  minister seems to have brought some confusion; he is saying that “to regulate” means regulating people who are external to a peaceful demonstration or assembly. But that cannot concern me because you are only talking about people who are going to interfere with my peaceful demonstration. I think the definition should be – (Interruption)

MR ONEK: Let me clarify on that, Mr Chairman. This is not only about the external people because such people can get fused into the demonstrators’ process. So, they must be eliminated from that process. You might have organised a good demonstration but other rival groups can find ways into your group pretending to be supporters but with the aim of creating havoc, which will disorganise your otherwise well intended peaceful demonstration. 

We have to ensure that that does not happen and we can only do that by regulating to ensure such people are not allowed into such peaceful demonstrations. If you find any good word that fits this, we shall be happy.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Yes. The words that actually fit are “ensuring” or “facilitating” – “Ensuring orderly conduct and behaviour in conformity with the Constitution”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, that is what the Member from Mbarara has also proposed. So, we say, “‘Regulate’ means to ensure orderly conduct and behaviour...” Can you please restate it.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: “To ensure orderly conduct or behaviour in conformity with the requirements of the Constitution.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think that captures the sentiments.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, I am thinking of this: “‘Regulate’ means to ensure that the conduct or behaviour is in conformity with the requirements of the Constitution.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, but they are the same. 

MR FUNGAROO: Mr Chairman, I really would like to help this House and Uganda at large. What the Constitution states here is the principle that every person has the right to freedom of speech, expression and so on. How is that achieved? What we are looking for here is how to operationalise this provision. Our problem here is about defining the word “regulate”, but you cannot apply the word “regulate” without first setting the standards. You regulate according to what?

HON. MEMBERS: The Constitution.

MR FUNGAROO: So, that is where we should start from. A good meeting is supposed to be one where the organisers have notified the Police. One of the things will be whether they have notified Police or not and number two –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, you are taking us back. We have gone beyond what you are suggesting now. What we are trying to do now is to deal with the provisions of Article 43 (2) (c), to ensure that the limitations we are imposing on these rights are not beyond what is acceptable and demonstrably justifiable in a free and democratic society or what is provided for in the Constitution. This is because we do not want to over limit beyond what is justifiable.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, if you are going to interpret any law, then we must follow the principles of statutory interpretation. What is the mischief that is being cured? We need to look at that Bill in its original form. The word used by the Bill originally was “direct”. After a long discussion and taking into account the Constitutional Court decision in the Muwanga Kivumbi v the Attorney-General case, the word “direct” would certainly render that provision unconstitutional. So, we settled for the word “regulate”. However, as I can see, if this word is not defined in this law, it will be subject to all sorts of interpretations. 

We have now refined “regulation” again to come to the second part, even though we have provided for it in the first part as “regulation”. We come to the second part and we ask what “regulation” means. This will help us to define it in conformity with what is demonstrably justifiable according to the Muwanga Kivumbi v the Attorney-General case.

I would, therefore, like to agree with the amendment being moved by hon. Wafula Oguttu for the Police to ensure that the conduct and behaviour is in conformity with the Constitution. After that, we do not have to do further debate on this clause.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the final proposal is that the definition of the word “regulate” should be: “‘Regulate’ means to ensure that conduct and behaviour conform to the requirements of the Constitution.” Is that good for us all?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, I now put the question to this particular amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, I rise to seek guidance on rule 23 regarding quorum. As a matter of fact, the issue we are considering is very contentious with some people already contemplating recourse in court. 

In the circumstances, I seek guidance from you as to whether it is procedurally right for us to proceed with this sensitive business when there is no quorum, irrespective –(Interjections)– I am on a point of guidance and you are busy calling me to order. Go back to your constituency.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, we have been in this House – I think this is a latecomer – and we have debated this Bill for long. We were here yesterday, and today very many of us are present. Is the honourable member, whose dress code is not good, in order to disorganise us?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the steps we are taking are to ensure that the House agrees to this position. That is what we have been seeking to achieve because where there is dissent, it becomes difficult. That is why we are moving this way; it is to accommodate all the interests so that if it is necessary, we take a vote on the matter. That is the spirit we have been adopting. 

For those who have been sitting in this House for a while, they know that is how we have been proceeding. Where there is strong dissent, we have stayed the matter but where there is agreement, like on this particular clause, we proceed. By yesterday, the discussions on this clause were more tense than today. By today, the first part has been agreed upon. We have just defined the second leg of the clause, which is the definition of the word “regulate”. That is the spirit in which we are proceeding. If there is any objection –(Interjections)- That is what I am trying to do, honourable member. I wish you could just listen. 

Some of the points of order just require us to listen and we let them pass. (Laughter) We have to deal with matters that will move us forward. So, honourable members, if it is in the spirit of the House that we move forward, unless there is strong dissent, unless there is a matter that is outrightly offensive, we cannot proceed. But if there are matters that we can agree on as a House, I think we should proceed.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I am a bit confused. (Interjections)- No, it is not as usual. (Laughter) You know that I am a very alert Member of Parliament-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, for the comments which are not on the record, you do not have to comment on them because when you comment, you bring them into the record. 

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I want us to be clear about what you are suggesting to this House. If I understood well, what you are saying is that on some matters where there is no contention, it is okay for us to flout our Rules of Procedure. (Interjections) Let me develop my point, honourable colleagues. 

Mr Chairman, we all know that we have Rules of Procedure and there is a purpose for which we have those Rules of Procedure. If we are going to be the people to disrespect our own Rules of Procedure and say that the Rules of Procedure can apply in some cases and not in other cases, then it defeats the purpose for which we wrote and approved the Rules of Procedure. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, in all these political contestations of issues, some matters are resolved by consensus. When there is consensus, you do not vote on a matter. If there is consensus, do you have to vote? That is the procedure. 

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I rise on a point of procedure, quoting rule 23, in line with the sentiments which our colleagues are raising. Rule 23 says, 
“Quorum of Parliament 
(1) The quorum of Parliament shall be one third of all Members of Parliament entitled to vote. 
(2) The quorum prescribed under sub-rule (1) shall only be required at a time when Parliament is voting on any question.” 

So, is it procedurally right for our dear brothers to insist from time to time on issues of quorum and so on? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, can’t we discuss and move forward? If we cannot move forward, we stop but if we can move forward, let us move. The clause that has been called is clause 6 and we have not called a vote. Are there any proposed amendments? If there are, we can discuss them; can’t we? We are not voting. 

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I had thought that our colleague had been quite clear and I am certain that most of our colleagues in this House are well conversant with rule 23. 

Considering that voting takes many forms, I consider that it is important to put it on record that we passed clause 3 and voted on it by voice without quorum in this House. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, that is not correct, honourable member. At the time I called the vote - I have the record here; members have walked out. (Laughter) Yes, I have the records here. I have not allowed a vote on this matter because I have seen that the numbers have reduced. That is why I said, like yesterday, let us discuss the merits and demerits of any proposed amendments but we will not take a vote on them. So, let us just discuss the amendments. Are there any amendments on clause 6? 

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, I have been seated here and I do not know at what point the roll call was made. However, when you remove the frontbench members who are not Members of Parliament, you can hardly raise one hundred Members of Parliament who qualify to vote in this House. I have been seated here quietly, watching the doors closely; I do not think that we passed clause 3 with quorum in this House. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, that is your opinion and you are entitled to your opinion. For me, I counted and the records are here. My officers counted and they brought me the records before we took a decision on clause 3. When we called clause 6, I saw that the numbers had reduced and when they raised the motion to vote, I said, “No, I am in charge and I can see that we cannot take a decision”. 

What is going to happen is, we are just going to debate the amendments on this particular clause but we cannot take a decision. There are amendments which were proposed.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. If I heard you correctly, you guided this House that you are cognisant of the fact that we may not have quorum and therefore we are not going to vote but we shall have general discussions on which we shall generate consensus. 

I want to imagine that tomorrow – when I talk of tomorrow, I mean at our next sitting - when we meet, there will be people who were not privy to the discussions. (Interjections) Wait, please. Hon. Kabakumba, I have known you for a very long time, be honourable and respect yourself as a former member of the frontbench. Please, respect yourself. We are not going to invade radio stations to collect masts. (Laughter)  

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Chairperson, is it in order for the honourable member, who has been here for some time and who knows how Parliament operates, to first of all attack my personality and he even has no proof at all of whatever he is alleging? Secondly, he knows very well that we are paid to be in this House and when debate is carried out and closed, the next time we come is to vote. So, is he in order to attack my personality and to behave as if he has not been in this House for all these years?
       
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the rules of the House are very clear about what we can say, how we can say it and even when we can say it. Some of the statements that came from the honourable Member for Terego County were not in the spirit of facilitating the debate in this House as against the Member that has raised the point of order. I ask the Member to restrain and strictly follow the rules. Please, proceed. 

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, first of all, I want to say I had no intention of hurting anybody’s feelings but when you give authority to somebody to talk, we should respect ourselves; put up your hand or stand up, catch the eye of the Speaker, be given the authority and then you can rebut. When you rebut in chorus, that is what will normally happen. Otherwise, I had no intention. 

Having said that, this is a law that we are in the process of making and it is going to touch each one of us in whatever form. In so doing, it is only fair that we all move in tandem. I would not like a situation where tomorrow when we meet, even the saying that “we had already agreed on this” will not hold water. People will still want their opinions put therein. 

The guidance I am asking from you, Mr Chairman, is the relevance of this consensus we are trying to build moving together. Will it still hold water tomorrow when those other Members who are not here will want to be on record? That is the guidance I seek from you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, if you recall what happened yesterday, we discussed clause 3 almost for two hours and you can see that by the time we came today, there was consensus because most of the issues were exhausted. Today, when we came, we were not discussing the first part of the proposed amendment of the committee; we are now dealing with the definition of “regulate”. That means the hours we spent yesterday were not in vain because people went and reflected on the discussions from the colleagues and when they came back, they have made some adjustments in what they originally thought. That is how we have been able to go through clause 3. 

These discussions can inform, because if you speak now you are on record, people have heard, those views have been shared and people can go and reflect on them. So, instead of gathering everything and starting to speak tomorrow, you can say it now. If you say it now, people will record it, they will go and reflect on it and when we come next time, they can inform the course of the debate. Isn’t that the proper way to use our time? 

MR KATOTO: I seek clarification -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You want clarification from the Speaker? (Laughter)

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. First of all, the country is watching us. We come from our constituencies to deliberate for the people of Uganda but now a Member of Parliament stands on his two legs and talks of Members who are not around. Where are they? They come and register in the books and disappear. So, do you want us to be dragged to wait for them? That is the clarification I seek. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, thank you for the opportunity. You are right; yesterday, we debated this clause. However, before I say anything, I would like to say that these names that they give us are very dangerous; they either mean good or bad. I advise those who are still producing children to be careful when naming their children, and I am serious. Names like Wambuzi, Katoto –(Laughter)– are very dangerous names. 

Mr Chairman, it is true that yesterday we debated but I recall that at the time we left, there was a motion –(Interruption)

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I rise on a point of order. First of all, someone asked where Members are at this time yet they come and register in the registration book and disappear and they drag the country into anarchy. Now someone stands here and says that because someone is called Katoto, he is therefore still young and that is why he is not responding. Is he in order? Is the Leader of the Opposition in order? I was asking where the people are and majority of the members are missing from this House. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, the current Chairman of the Committee of the Whole House knows two languages only. He knows Luo and English and in both languages, the word Katoto does not exist. So, I am not able to understand what the name means but what the honourable Leader of the Opposition said was that we should be careful when we give names. I do not know the full implication of some names. So, I am unable to rule on a name like Nandala - (Laughter) - because if I am to go into that investigation alone, I may have to find tonnes of interpreters in all the different languages to tell me what each name means and that might take a whole session of Parliament. So, we do not want to go into that. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, you are right on names like Nandala, Mbabazi, Rugunda. It is unfortunate that my brother said that Katoto means childish. So, he knows that his name is childish. 

Mr Chairman, it is true we debated yesterday and we took quite a long time but I recall when we left, hon. Alaso moved a motion and other Members and I seconded it. However, I have not seen a ruling on that motion.  Many of the Members who were around then understood where we left off, but there are some people like hon. Kabakumba who came and do not know where we ended. (Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Chairperson, I think we are turning this House into a laughing stock for all those who are watching us. Previously, I used to respect the Leader of the Opposition but from the way he is moving, anyone will agree with the change in my opinion. Yesterday I was here, and for your information even the issues that we are discussing were referred to our committee; I am a member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. 

Yesterday, we considered the issues that were referred to our committee the other day and even when we adjourned yesterday, I was in this House. You can check the record of this House. Is the honourable member therefore in order to impute improper motives? If he has something personal, he could, if he so wishes, disclose it. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, now you are aware that the honourable Member for Bujenje was in the House at the time we were closing the meeting.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I am a Christian. I had hoped that hon. Kabakumba-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, move to the subject.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The honourable Member for Bundibugyo, I remember you were around and you even said something but she was not here. 

Mr Chairman, what I want to say is that we left a motion on the Floor; have we ruled on it? That is my major interest because it would have been better for us to dispose of that motion and then move to the next one. That is what I am asking. I am not challenging the Chairman, hon. Moses Ali-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: A motion was moved yesterday but we were not in a position to take a decision on that motion. When the House resumed after several consultations, if the Member was still interested in that motion being carried, when the article was called it would have been decided like that. What happened was that immediately, both sides started making suggestions. So, in the opinion of the Chair, consultations had been done, which would now move the matter forward. That was the understanding from the Chair. 

If the matter had been restated that we need to delete clause 3, it would have been restated but the proposal that came was to improve clause 3. That is why we moved the way we did.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I do not want to dispute your ruling. I want to inquire from my colleague, hon. Alaso, if she went for consultations without me so that I may understand. Maybe they consulted. Because I am one of those who seconded the motion, I would imagine that it would have been-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we have taken a decision on clause 3 in the form we have. It was not deleted; instead, an amendment was proposed, which has been seconded and voted upon. If this matter is still outstanding, there are procedures for recommittal and at that stage, we will be able to recommit this and move forward. 

Please, let us have discussions on clause 6, if possible. If there are no discussions, we can adjourn and move. The record has already been cleared by the Chair.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The committee considered proposals – (Ms Alaso rose_)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We are on clause 6, honourable Member for Serere.

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposed clause 6 sub-clause (1) which defines a public meeting- 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Ok, let us hear from hon. Alaso.

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, I can understand my colleague - (Interruption)

MR BAKA: Mr Chairman, I think the senior members of this House are creating a very bad precedent. I know for sure that the presiding officers favour senior Members in this House. They catch the eye of the presiding officers first while some of us stand and struggle to catch the eye of the presiding officer. Now, if you are going to abuse that privilege by behaving in this manner, I think that is not acceptable to us. 

For you to insist that you must speak even when the Chair says it is not allowed is not right. Senior colleagues in this House, take note because if we start behaving in that manner - We come here when we want to talk and we are never given a chance; should we also insist that we must talk? Is it, therefore, in order for a senior Member of this House to behave in the manner she has just behaved and insist that she must talk even when you have ruled otherwise?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, sometimes it is sheer courtesy, which many people lack, and that is why people bend over backwards to allow even things of this nature to happen. The House runs on principles of courtesy and mutual respect for each other. If you cannot respect the presiding officer as such, at least you should respect the presiding officer as a Member of the House. So, some of this conduct certainly is exceptional but in the spirit of courtesy, which I am very well trained in, sometimes you bend over and allow even irregularities of this nature to flourish. But certainly, we should exercise restraint and courtesy in these matters. 

If we have moved forward, and even if the Chair is very wrong, very illegitimate or disrespectful, at least the fact that the person is the Chair should make you take some considerations in terms of understanding. The Chair has been treated with disrespect and the Chair takes exception. Can we move forward.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The committee considered clause 6 and in sub clause (1) we considered the definition of a public meeting. 

a) The committee proposes to replace sub clause (1) as follows: 
“(1) For purposes of this Act, ‘pubic meeting’ means a gathering, assembly, concourse, procession or demonstration of persons in or on any public place or premises held for purposes of discussing, acting upon, petitioning or expressing views on a matter of public interest.”

Mr Chairman, the justification for this is that the essential elements in a public meeting are the place, which should be public, and the purpose for which the meeting is being held. Whereas it is not possible to envisage and therefore provide for the purpose for which a public meeting may be convened, it is necessary that the meeting is held for some known and lawful purpose, which has a connection to the public. It is for this reason that private meetings like wedding meetings and social gatherings are exempted from being public meetings for the purpose of this law since they do not have direct relation to public affairs.

b) The committee proposes to insert, after sub clause (2), the following new sub clause (3): 
“For the avoidance of doubt, a meeting convened by a group, body or leader in a group or body at- 
(a) the ordinary place of business of that body, group or leader; or
(b) any other place, which is not a public place in the course of lawful business of the group, body or leader is not a public meeting under this section unless that meeting spills over into a public place.”

Mr Chairman, the justification is: to exclude meetings held by a group, body or leader of a group or body except where those meetings prejudice the rights and freedoms of others or the public interest as provided for under Article 43 of the Constitution.

c) Lastly, we propose to insert after sub clause (3) a new sub clause (4), which should read as follows: 
“(4) For the purpose of subsection (2), a public body includes Government or any department of Government, a local government, a body established by the Constitution or an Act of Parliament, a registered political party or political organisation or a registered trade union.”

Mr Chairman, the justification is: to define “public body” for purposes of clause 6 (2) (a). Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you will recall that in the previous discussions that led to clause 6 being differed, there were issues of definitions that were not clear and that were disagreeable to very many Members. We could have some discussions on the new proposals by the committee and see how they will be placed within our understanding.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Chairman, I propose an amendment to delete the entire clause. I already officially communicated my amendments. A copy can be provided to all Members.

As you may see, I propose that the entire clause 6 be deleted. The justification is:
a) 	The meaning of a public meeting is not provided for under the Traffic and Road Safety Act as stated in the clause;

b) 	The definition of “public meeting” should be incorporated within the interpretation clause to mean a gathering, assembly, concourse, procession or a demonstration in a public place or premise; 

c) 	Even if it were, the purpose and intent of the Traffic and Road Safety Act is different. Its scope of application is also different. “Public place” should be given the meaning given to it under Section 2 (aa) of the Penal Code Act, Cap 120. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there are now two proposals. There is the original text of clause 6 and the committee proposes that that should be altered to conform to what they have proposed in their amendments, which have just been read by the committee chairperson. The honourable member for Butambala has also just suggested now that the entire clause 6 be deleted. If it is deleted, it means even the amendment proposed by the committee would have no place because the whole basis for the amendment would have gone. Are there any discussions on this subject?
 
MR JAMES BABA: Mr Chairman, I would like to support the amendments brought by the chairman of the committee. I appeared before that committee and concurred with them and that is the position I would like to support. Accordingly, I oppose the proposal made by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi to clause 6.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, first, clause 6, the initial one, even if we bring all these words, is taken care of under the Penal Code, Section 65. All these things we are talking about are under the Penal Code. 

Mr Chairman, I do not think there is a need for this clause 6. It should be deleted because if it remains in its form, it means that the people will have no freedom to hold a meeting. This is because public meetings include even a rally of a political organisation or discussions of an item maybe in the village, which has affected the village. So, there is no need for us to have this clause 6. It is talking about people who have gathered and if they made an error, then under clause 3 which we have passed, the Police will regulate them and under the Penal Code if there is any problem, it will be taken care of. 

Therefore, I want to support hon. Kivumbi that this clause in its entirety should be deleted. Supposing a meeting has been convened of few people to discuss the stealing of masts in Uganda, for example –(Interjections)- Yes, it is a meeting - then because it is not allowed under the law and if we just take this as it is, it will be very dangerous. So, in short, you are regulating anything small to deal with public meetings. Mr Chairman, I want second the deletion. 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, thank you very much. I want to make a brief observation. From the original text, if you would allow me to read clause 6, they try to define “public meeting”. I will read out the main points here. They bring in the concept of a gathering, demonstration, procession and so on, and they define the number of people that should be considered to have constituted a gathering or assembly or procession to be three or more. 

In clause 6(1)(a) they try to say that the reason for the gathering of three or more persons should be to discuss Government failures. Now, when we go to the amendment by the committee, to me it actually makes it worse. It says under (1), that the proposed definition should be: “For purposes of this Act, ‘public meeting’ means a gathering, assembly, concourse, procession or demonstration of persons...”  but they are simply running away from defining the number and that even makes it worse, because it can even be two people. In the original text, they tried to talk about three and it was very contentious here. Now here, they are hiding and saying, “or persons” and then they go ahead and say, “in or on any public place or premises held for purposes of discussing, acting upon, petitioning or expressing views on a matter of public interest”.

Mr Chairman, when we were on the contentious matter of the oil Bill, the issue of public interest brought a lot of division here. We struggled to define what amounts to public interest. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Amama Mbabazi, later on beat around the bush and said, “No, it is the common sense meaning that should be attached to ‘public interest’”. Now here again, it is coming back. In case we meet at a malwa joint and we are three, or we come to a gathering and we are discussing corruption on PRDP, especially the situation of the funds that have been taken away that should have helped us from the North, and eventually the police officers land on us, either for political reasons or whatever, and they tell us, “You are discussing a matter of public interest; you should have sought permission because you are more than two or three people”. To me, “persons” would mean two or more people; the minimum is two.

To conclude, I think if we do not give more time to understand clause 6, let use delete it and go with the definition of hon. Kivumbi for avoidance of doubt. Thank you very much, Mr Chair.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, first of all, I am happy that hon. Kivumbi, although he says he is proposing deletion in my opinion it amounts to an amendment because he is not entirely deleting. He is actually saying that the definition should be captured in the interpretation clause with modification. 

When you look at his proposed definition, the only point of divergence is one. You look at his definition. His concern in (a) has been taken care of because the committee has deleted the application of the Traffic and Road Safety Act; it is not in the definition of the committee. So, that concern is already taken care of.

His concern in (b) is to amend the definition of “public meeting” and put it in the interpretation clause to mean, “a gathering, assembly, concourse, procession or demonstration”, which are all captured in the committee’s proposal. The only divergence is the use of the expression, “of persons”. However, when you are talking about these matters, it is inevitable that you must use “persons”. You do not capture it in yours but the committee captures it. 

The committee also says, “in a public place or premise”. This was on purpose because the original Bill had a purpose captured in 6(1)(a) and (b). The committee had also rejected it initially because it more or less had eyes; it was looking at activities like those who were discussing policies, those who were doing this and that concerning government and so on. So, in the committee’s wisdom, it came out with the expression “of public interest”. 

The moment you lose sight of the purpose, then you are likely to have an arbitrary kind of enforcement of a provision of this nature. The question should be, “What were they doing?” They were having a meeting but what were they discussing? So, the purpose is key. This is why in supporting the use of the expression, they use the expression, “in or on any public place or premises held for purposes of discussing, acting upon, petitioning or expressing views on a matter of public interest”.

When you look in your dictionaries, legal or otherwise, you will see the definition of “public interest”. This principally refers to the common wellbeing or general welfare. When you look at the definition of “public”, it is that which concerns the people as a whole. (Interruption) 

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I thank the learned Attorney-General. I would like to borrow from the explanation you are trying to give and the example that hon. Joshua Anywarach has given. He said that we may be three people drinking our malwa and in the course of drinking, we begin complaining that the cost of living has gone very high and even a gorogoro is going at Shs 3,000 yet the other day it was Shs 1000. Now, will that also be seen as a matter of public concern because we have talked about the high cost of living?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Would you like to explain what a gorogoro is? 

MR WADRI: A gorogoro is a unit of measurement of malwa –(Laughter)– and malwa is a local brew made out of millet. 

MR RUHINDI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think we were proceeding well before that interruption. I was coming to that part -(Interruption)- If you could be a little bit patient. I was explaining the import of the use of the expressions “public interest” and “public” and the divergence between hon. Kivumbi’s proposal and what the committee has proposed. Given that scenario, you find that if you import that purpose into this expression, it will make it more meaningful and make it more effectively applied. 

The honourable Member for Terego, my friend, and hon. Joshua Anywarach, the committee is proposing an insertion of clause 3 after clause 2. It reads, “For the avoidance of doubt, a meeting convened by a group, body or leader in a group or body at-
(a) 	the ordinary place of business of that body, group or leader; or 
(b) 	any other place, which is not a public place in the course of lawful business of the group, body or leader is not a public meeting under this section unless that meeting spills over into a public place”. 

I go to Bugolobi Church of the Resurrection; certainly, within the meaning of “public place” that is a public place. However, because it is its ordinary place of doing its business of worship, it is excluded from this business of giving notice and so on –(Interjection)– Let me first finish, honourable member; be patient. If that church wants to worship outside its ordinary place of business, for example, it can do so in another place, which is not a public place and still it would not have to comply with these requirements. 

There are some Members of Parliament or counsellors, for example, who have their ordinary places of business in public places like markets. You may have an office or a hall in a market place and you may hold your meeting there. What this provision is saying is that it is certainly okay to hold your meeting in your ordinary place of business; it is okay, you do not have to comply with this. However, if it spills over to the entire market, you may have to answer to the requirements of the law. 

This is also taken care of under another proposal which is coming, which was discussed by the committee, on spontaneous meetings. The idea is that if people get out of their place of ordinary business and they meet outside, it becomes a spontaneous meeting because it would not have been planned that they would be there. Now, an authorised officer can say “no, although it is a spontaneous meeting and you are not supposed to comply with the requirements of the law in this way and that way, - giving notice and otherwise - you are interfering with the crowd, you have blocked traffic, another group has booked the place where you are meeting, etc and then they can disperse you. That provision will be discussed later in clause 9.

Finally, let me turn to the concerns raised by hon. Nandala-Mafabi –(Interjection)- Certainly, people who sit in malwa groups cannot be said to be in public places -(Interjections)- Please, let me first finish and then you can come in. Let me first respond to hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s queries as far as Section 65 of the Penal Code is concerned. 

Sections 65 to 74 of the Penal Code prohibit and criminalise unlawful assemblies and riots. While participation in a riot is a misdemeanour punishable by two years’ imprisonment, holding an unlawful assembly attracts only one year’s imprisonment. In addition, the provisions of the Penal Code Act are punitive and purposely prohibit unlawful assemblies as opposed to regulating assemblies and processions in public places. The adversarial and punitive nature of the provisions of the Penal Code Act does not ease the exercise of the right given under Article 29(1)(d) of the Constitution and, of course, regulated by Article 43 of the Constitution. Therefore, when we talk about the Penal Code provisions, we are talking about provisions which are penal. Here, we are talking about provisions which are intended to regulate. Mr Chairman, thank you very much.

MS SANTA ALUM: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. My argument is not very far from the argument hon. Joshua Anywarach brought forward. When you look at the proposal of the committee and the original Bill, what brought contention was the number of the persons involved. We are now running away from the original position and we are now talking about “persons”. “Persons” can be two or more people. 

My proposal therefore is that we pick the word “persons” and take it to the definition clause and define it there; what do we mean by “persons”? Since the other time the words, “three or more” brought contention in the original Bill and now, according to the debate, we still see Members not comfortable with the word “persons”, I suggest that we go and define what we mean by “persons”. Thank you.

MS ATIM ONGOM: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. This is a very contentious issue and it needs a lot of understanding. Here, the committee is saying that for purposes of this Act, a public meeting means a gathering. I am not worried about an assembly, a concourse, a procession or a demonstration because we agree to those. He is saying, “a gathering of persons in or on any public place or premises held for purposes of discussing…” These are areas that I want to bring to the attention of the Members - a gathering for purposes of discussing or expressing their views on a matter of public interest. 

Mr Chairman, on many occasions, as Members of Parliament sometimes we meet two or three or even five of our electorate at the roadside and you never know where they come from. They gather around you and they will discuss with you matters of public interest. They will ask, “Honourable Member, what were you discussing in Parliament?” This issue of the Marriage and Divorce Bill, for example, is already a matter of public interest. How do we handle such a case? 

Here they are saying that the essential element of a public meeting is the place. They have met me at the roadside. Then they are saying that the purpose for which the meeting is being held is the issue. So, we may be there for a minute or two or an hour. How are you going to handle this? The Members are saying that this is spontaneous. How? Can you clarify this because we have to understand some of these things before we make this law? Thank you.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I think the class of citizens who are going to be most affected by this piece of legislation is the class that sits in this assembly and in the other assemblies across the country. 

I would like to quote my good friend, hon. Ruzindana, who categorically states that you cannot be neat in politics. This proposal made both in the Bill and in the amendment by the committee is trying to make politics neat and clear cut - a separation between a gathering being spontaneous and one that is organised. How does somebody who comes after the gathering has been formed determine whether it was spontaneous or it was organised? Many times, we get into meetings that are unplanned. My colleagues have articulated on this matter and if we pass these proposals in their form, this could be used as an instrument to harass political opponents. 

When I talk about political opponents, Mr Chairman, I am not referring to the Opposition alone. I am even speaking to you, my friends on the other side of the isle. So, as we embark on passing this piece of legislation, we need to have that at the back of our minds. 

I do know whether we may redefine “public place” in our interpretation clause because the proposals completely eliminate the issue of highways, roads and traffic. However, in talking about a public place, I would like to imagine that it is any place that is accessible to the public. It could be by the roadside or in a bar. I have experienced heated political arguments arising in bars and you would be construed to have broken the law if you are engaged in such an argument in a bar without asking the Inspector General of Police for permission. What are we doing to the citizens of this country if it is not bonding or tying them up and not allowing them the liberties that are guaranteed in the Constitution? I think we need to exercise a bit of restraint. 

Mr Chairman, I would like to agree with my colleagues that this matter is a heavily contentious one, which is going to infringe on our political and other forms of freedoms. So, I think it is not good for the laws of this country.

I would like the chairman of the committee to help me and define a public place in the context of these amendments that you have brought across, because it is going to totally change from what we had here. As we discuss these particular proposals that the committee has brought, of course we have elaborated on what gatherings, assemblies, concourse, processions and the others mean but for this proposal to be fully understood, I think we need to know under what context a public place is being used in this proposal. Otherwise, it will be difficult for us to chew this proposal, internalise it and be able to pronounce ourselves on it. 

As I sit down, Mr Chairman, I want to sound some bit of caution to the House. This will be used as a whip for all of us. When you disagree with your political party, that is the ruling party, they will follow you to your constituency or village and harass you. I do not think that is what we want. It could be worse for the Opposition because you are like a wolf being pursued and I think all of us have to be prepared for potential harassment.

Lastly, as we legislate, we should look at the other people on the opposite side. Today, you might intend this for the Opposition of the day but we are not permanent on this side. One day, we will be on that side. Put yourselves in our shoes. These people want to harass and incarcerate using the law; supposing it was you? You will not have the opportunity to amend, my dear friends, because at that time we will be there and we will say to you, “You laid your bed, lie in it.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, recently, we visited the Zambian Parliament and found that the current Leader of the Opposition was actually in the previous government. He started pleading with us that they were shy to make some proposals to the government now because the same proposals that had been enacted by them were being used against them. So, they are now shy to even ask for proposals and they asked us to intervene with the government to see how to deal with that. Honourable members, the spirit should be that you do not make the law for anybody; you make the law for everybody and everybody includes yourself. I think that is a principle that is being argued here and which we all agree to. 

Now, if you delete the definition of a public meeting, which is in clause 6, “public meeting” appears in clause 7 about five times. It also appears in clause 8 seven times, in clause 9 three times, in clause 10 four times and goes on through the rest of the Bill. If you do not define it here, where else will you define it? If it is not necessary to define “public meeting” will it ever be defined anywhere? That is something you should think about.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I seek some clarification from the committee chairperson on that issue of the definition of “public meeting”. What I understand from the amendment being proposed by the committee is that actually, we can have public meetings or gatherings in public places as long as one is not going to discuss matters of public interest. You can have a gathering or a meeting in a public place and you will not need to go through the requirements.

This leads me to the point I want to make. I might decide to invite people to Kaliro District headquarters’ grounds to discuss issues of development of football in Bulamogi. I will not consider this to be of public interest because it is for our locality and it is exclusive and not for every Ugandan. After we have called the meeting and discussed issues of sports in Kaliro, we then discuss, for instance, how NRM is performing in its manifesto. That was not the cause of the meeting - the meeting was to discuss sports - but this was a subsequent issue, which arose. Can it be raised that since we are discussing matters of public interest, we should have sought permission when actually, the meeting was called to discuss sports but this came up subsequently? I need that clarification. What if an issue of public interest is not the primary intention but it comes out subsequently, what is the effect of that, Mr Chairman? Thank you.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have listened to you carefully, that when we are making a law, we should not make it for ourselves or for anybody but for the common good of citizens. 

I would like to urge Members that when we practice politics, we need to have discipline so that we do not injure others. As much as Members are saying that we are politicians who can go to the market and people gather, what about people who are not interested in my business? What is the situational analysis today? The situational analysis and the spirit of this law is that all of us need to be very orderly and disciplined. 

We might say that as politicians we do not want to be selfish or to appear exclusive, what about those who are not interested? Take an example of what has been happening. People have been demonstrating in public places using provocative words but there may be somebody who has woken up in the morning to try to do business from Kampala Road to Jinja Road; what happens? We are injuring that person. 

I would like to concur with the amendment of the committee that what is needed is orderliness of public meetings. Even though I am a politician, I also have to be disciplined. If people find me in a place, which I feel is public, and they gather, I can discipline myself and say, “Please, we are blocking others who have other things to do”, and this is the spirit of the law. When you look at it that way, you realise that it is for that reason that private gatherings like weddings and other social gatherings have been exempted from the definition of “public meeting”. It is because they do not have a direct relationship to public affairs. 

It is on the basis of this that I would now like to declare my support for the Bill. I also urge my colleagues to bear in mind that as politicians, when transacting business we need to be disciplined so that other people can imitate us.

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have listened to concerns of some of my colleagues. I think many where trying to ask that as a politician or as a Member of Parliament, supposing you are in your constituency and you would like to hold a meeting with your constituents, will you then be required to notify the Police? That is the question I have lingering in my mind.

Sub clause (3) that is being proposed by the committee states thus: “For the avoidance of doubt, a meeting convened by a group, body or leader in a group or body at an ordinary place of business of that body, group or leader...in the course of lawful business of that group or leader…” It means that as a Member of Parliament when you go to meet people in your constituency, you will be doing the lawful business for which you were elected and so you do not have to notify the Police. That is my understanding of the import of the new clause 3. However, if there are people disagreeing with the interpretation, maybe the Attorney-General can give some clarification on that. Thank you.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. As a Member of Parliament, my constituency is my place of work, ordinarily. In Busoga – and hon. Baka will bear me witness – when we go for burials, they will always ask the MP to say something and they will expect you to tell them what is going on in Kampala. That is at a burial. Is that a public place? Do I need permission from the Police?

When I go to my constituency, at the first trading centre that I go through, Busowa, which is part of constituency, people will stop me and begin to ask questions about Kampala and Parliament in particular. As you are aware, I might take a few minutes to answer those questions. Is that a public meeting? Do I need to get permission for that?

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, let us be practical. In the area where I come from, the Alur Land, our sentiments are linear. In most cases, people are actually on the road reserves. Unknown to them, their compounds are actually on the road reserves. So, you may organise a meeting that will not fall in the definition of a public place, but you find yourself in someone’s compound and legally you are on the road reserve, which is a public place. So, let us look ate some of these practical things.

Two, also look at the idea of a concourse. I would like to think – I hope the learned Attorney-General will clarify on this – that public meetings should be limited to things like processions and demonstrations but not concourses. My understanding is that a concourse is now a common practice in the Western world, and it is now coming to Uganda, where people go to a large place of gathering like an airport to welcome someone, for example. You may be welcoming someone like Kiprotich and people who are fans of athletics will come from Nebbi, Kaberamaido, Mbarara and all over the country. That is what we call a concourse. You remember one time many people went to welcome the Speaker and applaud her for her stand on homosexuality. That is a concourse. Mr Chairman, we need to think about this again. Thank you very much.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, your ordinary place of business is that place where you carry out your business on a daily basis. However, let me give an example of the DP President, Mr Norbert Mao, who may wish to visit his supporters in Mbale. Mbale is not his ordinary place of business but he is coming to visit his supporters there. How do you treat such a case? 

Have you defined what an ordinary place of business is? Does it apply to politicians whose ordinary place of work may include all parts of the country? That is very important for us to understand because many of us do different types of business. For an organisation like a union, the co-operative society might have its offices in one place but members of the union may have to go and visit its members. How about other people whose businesses spill over to other areas?

Two, in reference to the committee report that was presented to the House in March 2012, on page 20 you recommended that we delete (a) and (b) because they are discriminatory in nature and are also in violation of Article 21 of the Constitution. But as you define “public place”, you are inserting some of the ingredients of these sub-clauses in the definition. Yes, the definition is good; we like the definition of a public meeting.   

You have not talked about clause 6 (2) and yet in your report you recommended for its deletion because it was a fertile ground for discrimination and it is outlawed by Article 21 of the Constitution. Now, when you went on to amend the report, things changed; you did not delete it because you are recommending that after sub clause (2), we insert sub clause (3).

Mr Chairman, I am sure clause 6 is only about definition. If we could only restrict ourselves to defining a public meeting, these other sub clauses are really not necessary; sub clauses (3) and (2) are not necessary. So, I implore the Attorney-General and you, Mr Chairman, to only concentrate on the definition.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, we shall have to debate most of these issues until the cows come back home because it seems we are repeating ourselves. 

Let me start with the concerns raised by the Member for Kiboga East about the import of the proposed sub clause (3) of clause 6. It says, “For the avoidance of doubt, a meeting convened by a group, body or leader in a group or body at-
(a) 	the ordinary place of business of that body, group or leader; or 

(b) 	any other place, which is not a public place in the course of lawful business of the group, body or leader  is not a public meeting under this section unless that meeting spills over into a public place”.

Essentially, what this says is that if you are in your ordinary place of business – Let me say that we have used the expression “ordinary place of business” even in our parliamentary election laws, presidential election laws, local government election laws and nowhere has it ever been defined. However, should the Leader of the Opposition want to define it, he is free to propose. 

Your ordinary place of residence and your ordinary place of business are clear. Even in law, when we say, “file with the Registrar of Companies your ordinary place of business”, you go and file it. So, it is your ordinary place of doing business. If it is a church, it is the ordinary place of worship. The burden is upon you; when there is a dispute or a case, what follows is evidential. You would have to bring evidence to show that what you indicated is your ordinary place of residence or business. 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Would the Attorney-General make it clear to me what my ordinary place of work is in Bukooli Central Constituency as their MP.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What is hon. Oguttu’s ordinary business?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, he is better placed to answer that. (Interjections) You want me to tell you your ordinary place of business?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Chairman- 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The Attorney-General was answering and the Attorney-General is the Member of Parliament for Nakawa Division. The question being asked is: “What is the ordinary place of work for a Member of Parliament?” We know that the honourable Prof. Kabwegyere has no constituency. So, is he in order to stand up to answer a question, which relates to a Member of Parliament? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, the honourable member is a minister and I suppose he is in charge of the whole country. But the minister violated another rule of this House in accessing the microphone when the Attorney-General was holding the Floor. There are clear rules on how you interrupt debate. You do not just show up and negotiate between yourselves and proceed. (Laughter) That, certainly, is out of order.

MR RUHINDI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. He is asking me to tell him what his ordinary place of business is or what his ordinary business is. I am saying I am not well placed to tell him; it is up to him. Should the case arise -(Interruption)

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, if the Attorney-General could address the issues I raised, it would answer the question being raised by the Member of Parliament for Bukooli. When I stood up to speak, I referred to a Member of Parliament in his constituency. Please, clarify on the questions I raised and it will also clarify on his question - When he is in Bukooli Central as a Member of Parliament, is he in his ordinary place of business as an MP?

MR RUHINDI: I will give an example. Most Members of Parliament have got offices in their constituencies. They have got even halls in their constituencies where they normally meet their people. (Interruption) 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: I seek clarification from the Attorney-General, with due respect. My literal interpretation of what you are saying is that as a Member of Parliament, my ordinary place of business is this Parliament and in my constituency. When I am in my constituency, my ordinary place of business, which is not a public place, is my office. So, if I am to step out of my office, I would need to go to Police – 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Chairman, this law is not made –(Interruption)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Chairman, you just guided the honourable Professor that he should follow the rules of this House. You also ruled earlier that for points of clarification, you get permission from the Member holding the Floor. Is the honourable minister is order to begin jumping around –(Laughter)– without permission or following the order in the House?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, I clearly saw the honourable Leader of the Opposition giving way to allow the Member to interject; that is what happened. If he had stood there and not allowed him, there is no way he would have accessed this microphone. So, the authority was granted by the Leader of the Opposition. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Chairman, we should start by going to school ourselves where freedom is taught and enjoyed. If we cannot allow each other to enjoy freedom of speech here, then we cannot be defenders of freedom in society. 

I want us to be clear that we are not making a law that protects Members of Parliament alone or even for Members of Parliament or political parties. The value of law is that it cuts across and only captures deviants. So, if you are not deviant, you cannot be captured by the law. 

Secondly, if you are in your constituency and you are doing normal business, what you do all they time –(Interjections)- The sociology of law is that it catches the one who deviates. The law is made to catch the few who deviate from the norm. If you are within the norm, you are protected by the law, but the moment you go outside the norm, you are sanctioned. 

It is not even the formal law we are talking of here; we are talking even of traditional norms, customs and so on. They define how far you can go and how far you cannot go -(Interjection)- Before you come in - that is why I had asked you to remain behind - I wanted us to be clear that if you are looking for a completeness of behaviour and you are making a law that will protect everybody, then that is not a law. The law must differentiate between those who do wrong and those who do right and it will protect those who do right. 

Here, what we are all looking out for is what is wrong. I think all of us have been asking, “What is wrong with meeting on the roadside?” “What is wrong with calling people in my constituency?” Of course, there is nothing wrong if you are calling people in your constituency under normal circumstances. However, if your behaviour deviates from even what your own followers can define as deviant, then the law must apply. [Mr Nandala-Mafabi: “What have you said?”]

I must come back to help hon. Nandala-Mafabi. It is not my fault sometimes to go too far ahead of him but let me tell you also that not having a constituency now does not mean that you will have yours forever. (Laughter)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Chairman, I will excuse my good professor. There are difficulties here. In my humble understanding, these are simple issues. If he was a professor of mathematics, I would have said a few things. In mathematics, we either differentiate or integrate to solve a problem. What we mean by that is that you either bring the pieces that are scattered into one - that is integration - and get a solution, or you split one into pieces by differentiating to get a solution. That is what I am trying to do. I am trying to do both - integrate and differentiate at the same time. 

The point of contention is one. Even if it is a councillor, a chairperson, a bishop or even a king - we are making this law so let me extend it to the Kabaka of Buganda; what is his ordinary place of work and what is his ordinary business? Today, you have bishops who do not wear a collar but can afford to be human rights activists; so, what is their ordinary business? This law will catch up with them and say, “Your ordinary course of business is not that”.  

The King will be found out of order because they will say his ordinary course of business is cultural functions, his ordinary place of work is Mengo. That is exactly what you are saying. If one is an elected leader, whether a councillor, an LC chairperson or even you, Mr Chairperson, what is your ordinary place of business? It is this Parliament and your constituency. Now, if you are to come to Butambala on any other day, that is not your ordinary place of business and my humble view –(interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you very much, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, for giving way. Mr Chairman, the information I would like to give is that recently, we had a land wrangle in Nebbi and it attracted the interest of very many parties. The land happened to be for the Kingdom and the dispute was between the Kingdom and the Government indirectly. The people who were occupying the land under the power or under the directive of the King were actually crying for their rights when they were being evicted. 

It so happened that the King sent a representative in the name of his prime minister. When the Prime Minister of the Kingdom arrived, there was a very big gathering of people that came from as far as Nebbi Town Council and from Zombo because the land is actually between Nebbi and Zombo. We sat down to listen to what the King was to say about the land matter, of course, through his prime minister. 

If we go to the Traditional Leaders Act and so on, these traditional leaders have been limited, that this is not their area of involvement. However, for the general good and welfare of the subjects of the kingdom, the King will come or he will send his prime minister. How would you define such a gathering? Are you going to incriminate the prime minister? Thank you very much. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: I would like to wind up by saying that when I moved an amendment to delete, I did acknowledge that we needed to define a public meeting and that it should be incorporated within the interpretation clause. Going by that definition, you will avoid all these other contentious debates you are going into. You should restrict yourself to the gist of the matter. That is the way we, the scientists, work. We are precise and clear. 

We are making a law for the ordinary person to give it an ordinary interpretation. I want my father or my grandmother in the village to understand her ordinary place of business or her ordinary place of work. How will a lay man understand this law? Even a police officer who has completed senior 4 and has been training for one year and is the OC of my police station will have difficulty in interpreting that. 

To that extent, I would like the chairperson of the committee and the minister to concede. Let us restrict ourselves to the definition of a public meeting, delete the whole clause with all its other controversies and we move forward. That solves every other problem because the intended meaning is exactly that. I do not find difficulty in that. 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to correct the impression created by hon. Kivumbi that by passing this law, we are restricting a Member of Parliament to the Chamber here and his office in the constituency. 

If you read the proposal - You are only reading the first part but there is also (b). It says, “For the avoidance of doubt, a meeting convened by a group, body or leader in a group or body at- 
(a)	 the ordinary place of business of that body, group or leader; or 
(b) 	any other place which is not a public place…” 

So, what is a public place? As we have said over and over again, a public place is a place accessible by everybody. We are talking about a road, a market; even if you are a leader, if you want to meet people as a politician you cannot have a procession on the road. - (Interjections) - No, a church is different. If you are going to do that, then you need protection. The people you are going to meet –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think there is an agreement that these two words, “public meeting” need to be defined. Basically, all of us have agreed that they should be defined. The proposal from the honourable member from Butambala is that, yes you define it but you define it in the definition clause. What I am saying is that there is agreement that a public meeting should be defined. So, when we leave this House, we should know that we have agreed that we should define “public meeting” in this Act. 

There is a proposal that the definition should be in the interpretation clause. In ordinary drafting, when making a definition in a clause and making it relate to the whole law or Act, this is a very new style of drafting in my opinion because restricted definitions apply to specific clauses. You will usually say, “For the purposes of this section, this is what this word means”. But if the definition is running across the entire Act, why don’t you put the definition in the definition section so that it applies without having to say, “For the purposes of this Act” and all these other phrases. In drafting, that would be redundant. You can then explain the details when the specific provisions are being handled. 

I think there is no disagreement that this word should be defined and there is no disagreement that it should be defined in this Act. If someone was saying it should be defined in another law, that would be an issue but all of us are saying the definition of a public meeting should be in this Act. So, the question is placement and details of what goes into that definition. Can we really find a way of agreeing on this? Please, when we-

MR RUHINDI: Personally, as Deputy Attorney-General I do not think I have any problem in having the definition in the interpretation clause. In fact, even in principle, the definition of “regulate” should also go to the definition clause because as the Chairperson says, this is a definition which is applicable across the Act. If you are defining something for purposes of a particular section, then you can have it only in the context of the Bill. This is a drafting matter and the draftsperson can see how best to place this.

I want to wind up because I was given information when I was clarifying on a few things. I gave you a good example of a church in the definition. We have not come to the definition clause yet and this is a good example. A church, principally, is a public place because it is accessible by whoever wants to go in. For as long as it is your ordinary place of worship, you do not have to keep giving notice to the Police every time you are going to church. However, if you go to worship outside your ordinary place of worship - I know there are people who are interested in finding it and they will be free to do so. If you go out of your ordinary place of worship to worship somewhere else, like in our place in Ankole where some people move out of their churches and go under trees for fellowship, we are saying you are free to do so as long as where you go to worship is not in a public place.

Now, the catchword is “public place” and “public place” is defined. The idea is, if you are in a place, which is accessible by people, you are likely either to be exposed, to be in danger and you may even need protection because you would want your function to run smoothly at that particular place. This is why these notifications and so on - (Mr Amuriat rose_) Let me first finish, hon. Amuriat, please. 

If you have your ordinary place of functioning principally in a public place, for instance you can have your place of business in a market, - I understand hon. Ssimbwa, I do not know whether he is here, has his office in a market in Makindye - you are free to function there without necessarily notifying the Police. However, if anything you conduct in your ordinary place of business in that market spills over to the entire public place of that market, then with all due respect, Article 43 of the Constitution has got to apply because your activities are likely to interfere with the activities of others. As such, you may require the regulation and guidance of the Police. (Members rose_)

Let me finish and others can take the Floor and debate. Mr Chairperson, the other matter was raised by hon. Anywarach about a concourse. Before I was interrupted, I had given the definition of a concourse as a crowd or assembly of people. It is a question of terminologies. It may also be a large open area inside or in front of a public building as in an airport or train station where you find domestic arrivals and that kind of thing. That is a concourse. Whether or not currently in Uganda we have such processions, we legislate for the future because if you do not have them now, you can have them tomorrow. Therefore, that emphasises the need to have this expression captured in the definition.

Mr Chairman, the idea of putting the purpose of a public meeting in the definition clause is very important. Actually, I do not know why people are debating against this because it is very good for everybody. Finding four, five or six people talking say about a wedding meeting or standing together without looking at what the purpose was is not good. So, I do not know why we are debating against it. To me, the purpose is important and in fact, when you leave out “purpose” and “spontaneous meeting”, you are more in danger concerning the application of this law.

Although we have not reached there, I thought I would read to the Members the proposed amendment on spontaneous meetings so that we bear it in mind as move on. It will be 9 and it says, “Spontaneous public meeting 
The notification required under section 7 shall not apply to a spontaneous public meeting. 

2. An authorised officer may direct any person participating in a spontaneous public meeting to disperse where- 
(a) 	notice of another public meeting at the same venue, date and time has already been received by the authorised officer; or 
(b) 	the venue is considered unsuitable for purposes of traffic and crowd control or will interfere with other lawful business; 
 3. For the purposes of this section, a spontaneous public meeting means an unplanned, unscheduled or unintended public meeting.”
 
You may reach your constituency and people gather around you. Whether they are 100, for as long as it is unintended or unplanned, you do not have to comply with the requirements in the law. However, if an authorised officer realises that where you are may interfere with lawful business, crowd control, traffic or you are in a place which has already been booked for another meeting, he is free under this Bill to disperse the crowd and tell you, “please, this is the reason.” I think that caters for most of our concerns.

MR OKEYOH: Thank you very much. Mr Chairman, I would like to thank you for guiding this House to always come to a compromise and I am very grateful that where we are, we are also going to reach a consensus.

Having said that, I would like to add that it is important that when we are making laws, we look at what will happen in future. That is why I think Members on the other side are trying to express their hesitations regarding this law. I want to say that it is important that we really look at the people who are going to be in this gathering. If it is a church going to have a crusade, say in an open place, we must get to know that we are now living in an era of terrorism and it is important that people organising such a meeting have to inform the Police for security and regulation purposes.

Secondly, Mr Chairman, I represent people in the islands where we have many landing sites. I may be moving from one island to the other and I happen to land at one beach; if I hold a meeting, the Attorney-General has clearly indicated that spontaneous meetings will cater for such meetings. 

Also, if we happen to go to a place like the airport to welcome someone like Kiprotich, it is important that such a gathering be regulated. That gathering at the airport must not interfere with the business of other people using the airport. That is why it is important that such gatherings be regulated. It is in the interest of this country and all the Members here present that we pass the law to regulate such public gatherings so that we can have peace at all such meetings.

MR SABILA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I want to point out that usually in public gatherings we have various actors. Some of those could be the conveners and participants but there are other people who may not belong to any of these two. All these are entitled to their rights. When we talk about rights, many people think that they only apply to the conveners but there are also the other people who do not participate nor convene those meetings. Because rights are universal, it is therefore proper that everybody or every category of persons is catered for. 
What I am trying to say is that if rights are universal and they are regulated in the way that has been agreed, then I believe there is no harm. The fear comes when tomorrow the law will catch up with –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, is it procedurally right for a Member to take us back to what we have already discussed? Is he just standing for us to note that he is present?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member from the islands, please conclude.

MR OKEYOH: Thank you, honourable colleague, for that information. It is important that – (Mr Amuriat rose_) – Please, let me sum up because –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member from Kumi, why don’t you hold on.

MR OKEYOH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The honourable Member from Kumi is my friend and I hope he has understood the point.

I would like to say that this Bill has been dissected with most of clauses being agreed upon by both sides of the House.  Let me state that the amendments brought in by the committee are good and pray that we support them. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR BIRAARO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have an idea, but first I would like to seek some clarification from either the Attorney-General or the chairperson of the committee. Many Members have a fear, which I also have, about the definition of “ordinary place of work”. I have the idea to the effect that elected and appointed leaders in their areas of jurisdiction should be an exception to this law. This will calm down the concerns of people who are worried about how they will be meeting their voters under, for example, a mango tree. Those people will be properly covered when we capture it that way. That is what I am seeking clarification about – if it violates any law or if it is good or bad. 

MR LUBEGA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. My understanding of this law is that we should find a mechanism to give room for that particular time of campaigning – (Laughter) – Yes, because I have seen cases where some leaders have been blocked. The President, for example, has been stopped on the road and he must talk to the people because they have problems. 

Secondly, you may have a purpose to sensitise the public about some issue but because your opponent is not happy with that, they may come to interfere with your purpose by politicising everything. That can make you be liable for any misunderstanding that may occur during that interference.

Under normal circumstances, the law is good but when time comes for you to now talk to every group you meet, this law might inconvenience you. That time should be considered. That is my contribution. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, it is now 7.00 p.m. We have had a long discussion and agreed that we have to define the word “public meeting” including its placement and detail. We will use the time from now until the next meeting to ponder over this with colleagues and see how to get to a middle ground. I also urge the Attorney-General to consult with the ministers to see how we can resolve the issue of placement. That will help us move forward.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I think there is also a need for us to define the phrase “ordinary place of business” and “public place”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: “Public place” has been defined.

MR AMURIAT: No. When you look at the Bill, it takes into account what was initially part of clause 6, talking about highways or roads within the meaning of the Traffic and Road Safety Act, which is no longer in the body of the proposal. So, I think we need to go back and look at this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The definition of “public place” has not been concluded. We will go back to clause 2, which has all the definitions, to handle them systematically. The issue you are raising is about an ordinary place of business. You can make a proposal so that we get it on table when we come back.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chair, I have rable have an idea, but first,one point. Much as we are defining a public place as being a place where you need to seek permission when going to hold a public meeting, I would think also that in the spirit of democracy and freedom, we should also provide for a place where you can hold a public meeting and be protected. In London, for example, they have the Trafalgar Square. Even in Uganda, we can provide something. 

Hon. Kiyonga will bear me witness that these are some of the tricks that Government can use to find out the dissenting views among its people. Provide a place where you can go without the need to seek for permission. Even if it is a public place and you are holding a public meeting, automatically the Police will take it squarely upon themselves to provide the security there without the organisers asking for permission. 

Secondly, that would also help the democratic movements that we have, which keep Government in check. Why should we close their mouths? They should be given a place where they can go and be protected by the law. That is my suggestion. Thank you very much.

MR BAKA MUGABI: Mr Chairman, as we close the day, I have been listening to colleagues and I want to state that when we started with this Bill, people did not know that places of burial, weddings and all other such meetings had been exempted from regulation by the Police. It has been a long way to reach where we are now. So, I want to assure my colleagues on the other side that issues of spontaneous meetings as opposed to organised meetings, the ordinary place of business as opposed to a public place, and a private home as opposed to a public place – all these have been engineered to create greater freedom. They are not to restrict but to create greater freedom for our citizens to express their rights – (interjections) – Please wait; let me give my comment. 

Imagine a situation where there was no provision for spontaneous meetings and hon. Wafula here, who is very popular, reaches Busowa and a crowd of 1000 people gather around him. Now that is provided for in the Bill; he does not have to notify the Police. That meeting can go on as long as it does not interfere with the normal flow of traffic, for example. If I go to Bugiri and 1000 people gather around me, I can proceed. I will not be accused of organising a meeting because it was spontaneous. That is freedom. 

If weddings and burials were not excluded, it would cause a crisis. We go for burials and we are asked to make statements on issues in Kampala or those in Parliament. This also has been excluded. Originally, we feared that we would be accused if we went for burials and addressed people but it is now clarified. You can go for a burial and make political statements without any problem because that is excluded under the law. You can go for a wedding and talk and you will not be accused because it has been exempted under the law. 

If you are at home and you invite 1000 campaigners at home, there is no problem because that is a private place. However, if you call them to a market, then that might need regulation. I see spontaneous and organised meetings as creating greater freedom for us. “Ordinary place of work” is also a good thing because at my meeting place, no one is going to ask me why I have not informed the Police. 

Mr Chairman, I am sorry if I have provoked further debate, but these remarks were intended purely to allay the fears of my colleague on the other side and to curb the nerves. Where we came from to where we are has been a long way. 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and honourable colleagues. Just as my colleague, hon. Baka, has said, I think we have moved a very long way. I think from the flow of the debate, it seems we are getting to a common ground, which is very good for us. 

Hon. Joshua Anywarach mentioned something like Trafalgar Square being created around here. I was fortunate to witness the burial of the late Margaret Thatcher, the former Prime Minister, and there was information all over that people going to that place should notify the Police. Actually, there was very heavy Police presence at Trafalgar Square at that time. 

The point I am making is that it is good for us to consult, but for the progress of the work we are remaining with, I think it is important that for members who have ideas of amendment, it is not good enough to just say, “Go and think about this and come back with an amendment”. If you have an amendment, come with it and we debate it. If it passes through, so be it. As a committee, we have done what we think is best on the basis of the information and documents we have. So, for us to progress, let people come with the amendments and we debate and get through with the Bill. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think we all agree that these last few hours that we have sat here have been very informative and the discussions have been good. Certainly, this adds on the spirit of finding a way of – 

MR ONEK: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to appreciate the spirit of consensus which is emerging. I also want to inform my colleagues that we are living in a different time now. Terrorism is real; there was an explosion in Tanzania and Uganda is a target. I would not wish that our good intentions - In leadership particularly, when you go somewhere you may get those spontaneous gatherings, which could be exploited to mess up our politics, particularly when they are organised by Members from the other side. Someone can do something silly to mess up our politics so that others may think that maybe it is Government. 

We have to be very cautious in the way we operate. There is no intention whatsoever to block any democratic process but to make sure that there is peace and that you are protected. You can even get Police to escort you if you wish to make sure that nothing wrong happens. If you do not want the Police, it is fine, but we are taking precaution because of the present situation. I am in charge of internal affairs and I know what is going on; I know the terrorism threat is real. That is what I want to add. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank very much. Honourable members, in terms of the situations that we face, you and I are the first line of defence and we should do everything to empower ourselves to be in a position where we can make appropriate responses to threats that could easily come. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “the Public Order Management Bill, 2011” and passed clause 3 of the Bill with amendments, and considered and discussed extensively clause 6 and the clause relating to spontaneous meetings but no decision was taken on it. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. The Leader of Government Business would like to make a comment. 

7.15
THE LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank every Member who up to now is in this House for their contribution on this Bill. Indeed, everybody, including me, has seen that there is a lot of difficulty. The going is very slow but I think with the guidance of the Speaker, we are moving on. 

We should probably leave it to you, Mr Speaker, on how you could do this because as you can see, when we started the House was almost full but as time went on, we are now very few and we could not vote on anything because we have no quorum. I think there must be a way, as you have perhaps discussed, that we could debate everything and then come for a particular session to specifically vote. 

Also, I think there should be room for other people to talk. If one person talks 20 times, then I do not think we shall have enough time to complete this Bill, and if somebody has spoken again and again they are clearly repeating themselves. Surely, I am not trying to tell the Speaker what to do but I think for the sake of time, we need to cover everybody to speak and not one person to speak very many times. Therefore, I believe that we shall soon overcome this problem and pass this Bill. 

The last time I said there is no intention to withdraw this Bill and now it is true that this Bill will not be withdrawn and therefore, it shall be passed, Inshallah, with the help of everybody. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we all agree that with this kind of work we have done something on this. If you all recall, the most contentious clauses are these two which we are trying to ponder over. Once we resolve this one and then we resolve clause 8, it does not matter how long it will take us to deal with clause 8 but as long as we are able to generate consensus on the basic formulation, the rest of the clauses are easier to deal with and will always go through.

Gen. Ali, you may have to ask a carpenter why they just do not hammer a nail once. Sometimes when building, you do not hammer a nail once. You hammer it for as many times as is necessary to drive the nail to its right place and that is how we are proceeding at this stage, so that we do not leave nails hanging up in the air when the responsibility of fastening to make them firm has not been accomplished. So, we will respect Members when they come up to make statements on this. What we want is that we agree that the framework we are formulating is one that is acceptable to people. So, as the Speaker, I will not rush; that, I can promise you. I will make sure that when the law is finally passed, it is a legitimate pronouncement of the Parliament of Uganda. 

With these remarks, this House stands adjourned until Tuesday 2.00 O’clock.    

(The House rose at 7.19 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 14 May 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 

