Wednesday, 15 May 2013

Parliament met at 2.25 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As you have seen copies of the Order Paper, today is one of those days when you have five pages of matters to be discussed by the House. That means we are going to do things quickly so as to enable us finish what we have to do.

Item 3 and 4 will not be handled today because there are some consultations going on to facilitate the process of their expeditious handling when they finally come back to the House. However, you should not celebrate because there are two other items which will replace those ones: We shall have requests for loans. The first one is for the Millennium Villages Project in Uganda – scaling up that project – and the Committee on National Economy is ready with it. So at the appropriate stage on the Order Paper this matter should come up and we should take a decision on it now since they are due to expire on the 22nd.
 
The second one will be a request to borrow a loan from the Arab Bank and another loan from the OPEC for financing the upgrading of the Masaka-Bukakata Road. 

So, I will alter the Order Paper to allow these to be handled today. With those two items out and these ones in, we are ready to proceed with today’s business. Thank you. 

Before that, I want to remind the Budget Committee that I extended the date that should have expired today to Friday 17th. So, they are still within time and should finalise quickly so that by the 17th, the dictates of the law are complied with. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE PETITION ON THE LAPSING OF PART II OF THE AMNESTY ACT, 2000

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I even do not see the committee chairperson, and the minister who was in charge of this particular matter is not in the House. I do not even see the Members who had requested that they should be present when this matter comes up for debate. We will therefore briefly defer this matter so as to allow us have more Members to debate this.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS REGULATIONS, 2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the chairperson of the legal committee? They made a passionate plea that this matter should come up now because it is brief - you remember this motion was brought by the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme to this House and it was referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. The report is ready but the presenters are not here. Where is the committee chair? Because this relates to the pension of the Members and there are regulations that are required under the Pensions Act to be brought to the House and that should be approved to facilitate some processes. There are Members who should be paid their pensions but the current arrangement presents some difficulties and therefore a need for these regulations. So I do not know what - Are you from the legal committee? You look like you are from the legal committee – (Interjection) - No, it is not only lawyers who belong to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. (Laughter) I remember the time I chaired that committee, my vice was a professor of agriculture; and we did well because you can learn these matters.

Now, how do we proceed? The chairperson is not here; so we shall defer that too. 

Honourable members, this House is suspended for 15 minutes and so let the bell be rung. 

(The House was suspended at 2.32 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.46 p.m. the Deputy Speaker presiding_) 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS REGULATIONS, 2012

2.46
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is the report of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee on the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme with the Parliamentary Pensions Regulations of 2012.

Introduction 

In 2007, Parliament passed the Parliamentary Pensions Act, 2007 for the purpose of making provision for a hybrid cash balance pension scheme for Members of Parliament and staff of the Parliamentary Commission; establish a Parliamentary Pensions Fund for the payment or granting of pensions or retirement benefits to Members of Parliament and members of staff of the Parliamentary Commission and provide for related matters.

Parliament in the Parliamentary Pensions Act delegated its powers to the Parliamentary Pension Scheme Board of Trustees. Section 24(1) stipulates that the Parliamentary Pension Scheme Board of Trustees may in consultation with the Parliamentary Commission by statutory instrument, make regulations for the effective implementation of the Act.

It is further stipulated in Section 24(3) that the statutory instrument shall be laid before Parliament and Parliament shall pronounce itself on the statutory instrument by way of a resolution within 21 days from the date it was laid.

On 4 September 2012, a copy of the Parliamentary Pensions Regulations, 2012 was laid on Table before the House by the Chairperson, Parliamentary Pensions Board of Trustees, hon. Rose Akol. It was referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for scrutiny.

Methodology

The Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs scrutinised the regulations by analysing each regulation in reference to the Parliamentary Pensions Act, 2007. The committee also interfaced with the Parliamentary Commission, Members of the Parliamentary Pensions Board and some retired Members of Parliament and staff who are already benefiting from the scheme.

Observations

The committee observed that the regulations contain a new aspect of trivial pension for the effective implementation of the Act. The committee while interfacing with the retired members of Parliament who are already benefiting from the scheme learnt that most of the Members were dissatisfied with the scheme.

The Members informed the committee that their monthly pension is too meager compared to the cost of living. This is contrary to what had been expected when the Act was passed. Majority of the former Members urged the committee that since the monthly pension is too little, most of them earning between Shs 300,000 and Shs 600,000, to embrace the introduction of trivial pension which allows a pensioner to withdraw his or her money in lump sum if it is not sufficient to ensure a sustainable pension. 

In order to fully appreciate the issue of trivial pension, the committee carried out more research by looking at jurisdictions that have applied trivial pension, for instance, in the United Kingdom and South Africa. 

The Parliamentary Pensions Act, 2007 which establishes the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme under Section 6 (1) requires that a member’s pensionable emoluments shall be deducted monthly at a rate of 15 percent to make contributions to the pension scheme. Under the Parliamentary Pensions Act, a former member is entitled to a pension under Section 12 of the Act. Section 12 (1) establishes a general rule which is to the effect that pension shall be paid to a Member who retires or ceases to be a member on or after attaining 45 years of age, subject to service as a member for a continuous period of five years or more.

On the other hand, Section 12 (5) of the Act allows a member entitled to a pension to receive a commuted lump sum of not more than twenty five percent of his or her scheme credit.  

The Parliamentary Pensions Act does not provide for trivial pension. The Board of Trustees in consultation with Parliamentary Commission however introduced trivial pension in the pension regulations to enable Members whose monthly benefits are trivial to get their pension in lump sum.

Trivial Pension

Trivial pension is an option available to beneficiaries who have small pension funds at retirement, which allows them to take the balance of their funds as a lump sum. Such a pension can be cashed in without affecting the pension scheme’s office approval. Trivial pension arises where one’s total contribution in the pension pot is comparatively small and one is over or at the retirement age and is no longer in service with the employer that he or she originally built up the pension with; one may have the option of taking a lump sum payment of the total pension he or she is entitled to.

The threshold at which the trivial pension is decided is usually determined by law. In the United Kingdom, for instance, if you are over the age of 50 and if, after payment of your tax free lump sum from the pension plan, the amount of money remaining in your pension fund is less than €20,000, then you may have the option of taking this as a once off payment from the pension plan. This payment is subject to full PAYE tax.

Trivial pension provisions are intended to allow members to get a lump sum payment upon retirement, which would be more useful to them rather than if members receive it monthly.  In order to allow trivial pension recovery, the applicable pension regime must define:

(a) 	the retirement age;
(b) 	the threshold below which the member’s entitlement under the pension pot will constitute a trivial pension;
 (c) 	the time at which the member will invoke the trivial pension; and 
(d) 	the formula to calculate the resultant pension in cash form.

To ensure that the introduction of trivial pension is clearly understood, there is need to define what trivial pension is and the formula of arriving at it. This calls for amendment of some provisions of the Parliamentary Pension Regulations. The committee recommends that in order to clear the ambiguity, it is urgent indeed to amend the Parliamentary Pensions Act to provide for trivial pension and two, the committee recommends that Parliament approves the Parliamentary Pension Regulations by way of a resolution, subject to incorporation of the approved amendments. 

Mr Speaker, we had a meeting with the Chairperson, hon. Akol, on this matter and they have looked at the amendments that we are presenting in this document. Mr Speaker, it was your guidance that the House cannot go into debate on the particulars of regulations; that they may either be adopted in whole or be rejected. But as I have reported, we have discussed with the pension scheme manager and the board of trustees and they are agreeable to the proposals that we have come up with. It is my prayer that this House passes a resolution to pass the Parliamentary Pension Regulations, 2012 as presented by hon. Akol to this House. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I was about to ask whether the last phrase, “…subject to incorporation of the proposed amendments,” was still valid since this House cannot amend regulations. This House cannot go to committee stage to start amending regulations. We have already given those powers away. So, we either adopt regulations as a whole or reject them as a whole. For regulations, that is what should happen. 

The report from the committee says, “The committee recommends that Parliament approves the Parliamentary Pension Regulations by way of resolution.” That is the matter that is before the House. The committee has looked at it and they are agreeable that we should pass it. Any debate? I put the question?

Honourable members, I put the question that the Parliamentary Pension Regulations be adopted by this House and approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Resolution adopted)

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE PETITION ON THE LAPSING OF PART II OF THE AMNESTY ACT, 2000

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report on this petition was presented to the House and we deferred debate to allow us proper time to discuss, after Members have studied the details of the report presented by the committee. The matter is for the adoption of this report. Any debate on this matter?

2.58
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the recommendations they have made to save the lapsing of part II of the Amnesty Act. 

Mr Speaker, you will bear me witness that the lapsing of part II of this law is making it very difficult for people in Northern Uganda to co-exist or even to handle the children who are coming back from the LRA captivity. Much as we know that the gun has fallen silent in Northern Uganda, the same people who caused atrocity are still causing mayhem in other parts of the world, particularly in Central Africa, South Sudan and the DRC with our children in captivity. And these children did not choose to go; they were mostly abducted! 

I want to give you a scenario of a family of six where four children were abducted by the LRA and later on forced to kill their father. After killing their father, the four of them were taken to the bush and forced to kill one of their brothers. Later on, two of them managed to escape and came back. One was re-abducted but he managed to come back. Two of them came back. One of them has remained in the bush up to today but the two who came back have been given amnesty and they are peacefully settling in the community. People look at these people not as criminals but with a lot of sympathy and that sympathy has caused us unity and reconciliation in the community.

But the lapsing of this Act is causing a lot of fear and if the armed forces are in the House, they will bear me witness that these children are not there according to their wish but they can only escape if there is exchange of fire. But this is a situation where there is no amnesty law to protect them. If the child is there against his or her will and then later on they have an exchange and during the crossfire with the UPDF they escape and then they are back home, again they are going to be taken to court as criminals. How is it going to be? This is creating a lot of fear. Most of them who are coming are hiding. They are not staying freely in the community. 

So, I want to support the committee because what is in the report of the committee is that in 2012, the Ministry of Internal Affairs decided that part II of the amnesty law has lapsed and therefore there is no more amnesty for all the returnees of LRA or any other armed rebellion, which is in the country. You find that it is not auguring well with the people of Northern Uganda. People in Northern Uganda, particularly in the Acholi sub-region on whom the atrocities have been carried out, do not want to hear anything that will make the children not to settle down and again run back to the bush. We have cases where there are some children who escape and come on their own and when they reach, because there is no amnesty being provided for them, they live in fear; they do not want to even come outside.

I want to thank the committee, and this one goes well with all other bodies in the Acholi sub-region we consulted, including the Acholi Religious Leaders Peace Initiative that petitioned. They are saying it is making work very difficult. First of all, getting witnesses - because if these children are supposed to be prosecuted, what will happen is that they have to testify against their mothers or their brothers. People are generally not accepting it.

I beg that we support the report of the defence committee. I remember in 2003 when I was trying to share the plight of people of Northern Uganda with one of the professors from abroad - I thought that problems of Uganda can be solved by people from abroad but he told me, “With time I think the people will find solutions to their problems.” 

So, if Uganda finds a solution to the problem by enacting the amnesty law, how are we to depend on only those international laws that are not grounded by our Constitution and yet our Constitution is supreme? The report of the defence committee has clearly spelt out that amnesty is not contravening any of the international laws, and has not stopped the country from going its own way and resolving its own problems within its boundaries.

It is already tested, it has already served the purpose and it should continue serving the purpose because LRA is still alive and kicking. Although outside the borders of the country their impact is still being felt; our children are still there. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me just give some guidance on how we should structure this debate. There are two issues: The first issue is that, on the 23 May 2012, the minister issued a statutory instrument that in essence lapsed part II of the Act, which relates to its application to people who can come. Essentially, nobody can now come under the Amnesty Act. The second issue is that the whole Amnesty Act is now due to lapse on the 24th of this month, if it is not extended. 

So, there are two issues being proposed in a series of seven recommendations by the committee. That one, that statutory instrument, which makes part II of the Act to lapse, should be revoked so that part II of the Act goes back to the Act. The second one is that the Act be extended for a further two years to allow the minister handle some details of what they have proposed as recommendations. That is what is proposed.

So, if we are going to carry out any debate, it should be in those areas and we see how to move forward.

3.06
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As we all know, we were brought into this world by God and God has never closed the doors of forgiving people. So I strongly assert that the extension should start now and not wait because there are people who wrong unknowingly and then later their hearts say, “Let me go back.” So if we close the doors, it will not be good at all because even God who created us will never close the door until you die before repenting.

So I strongly assert that the committee should continue and I thank it very much. I request the House to allow this extension to continue and we make sure that our brothers who are there are given a soft landing and encouraged to come back. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

3.07
MR ROBERT SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to those of the committee that we should allow, first to reinstate the second schedule and two, to extend the amnesty. It is not true that it is only the North and LRA relationship that is affecting abductees. Even here in the central and in other places, ADF has taken it upon itself to lure people into Congo deceiving them of how they are going to receive so many goodies while fighting this government. They have ended up suffering, getting diseased and some of them have decided to come back into this country.

It is very disappointing for these aliens to come back home and the government is not able to welcome them and at the same time, the rebels of ADF are looking for them. So I pray that we ask Government to reinstate the first schedule that would help us integrate these people who have been misled to believe that they can change this government with a gun. That era is gone and we do not wish it to come back again. We would wish Government to help integrate the disoriented back into society. That is my prayer and I wish Parliament to follow suit. I thank you.

3.09
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The petitioners are traditional and religious as well as civil society organisations. In African tradition, religious and traditional leaders were people who were highly respected in society because they spoke on behalf of their people. They prayed on their behalf and God answered them. These are the people petitioning.

Mr Speaker, this government also acknowledges the role of traditional leaders so when they come forward with such a request to Government, I feel that Government should do something and listen to them. Some of them even participated in the Juba Peace Talks so when they come up to present such a petition, it is really with a genuine heart.

On page 7 of the report, we are told that the rationale and effects of lapsing part II of the Amnesty Act was premised on the assumption that the amnesty had run its course and that LRA conflicts and other conflicts like the ADF conflicts had run their course.

From media reports, however, we are told that LRA is still very active. Recently, they told us that LRA had moved from Central African Republic and relocated to South Sudan. So to say that rebellion is completely over is not true. 

We also need to note the fact that some of these peoples who are in rebellion went there against their will; they were forcefully conscripted, including children. Now if they get a chance to escape, I think we need to do something to help them by welcoming and reuniting them with their communities.

It is also good that in the same law there is a provision to bar those who come falsely to request for amnesty and go back. The law is clear that such people will never benefit from amnesty again.

Mr Speaker, I support the committee report that we uphold the 2002 amnesty. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Kyadondo, are you okay now? You have finished? Please now we are going to have two minutes each.

3.13
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I will start by thanking the committee because they have done a wonderful job. Indeed, this report should have come last year but now that it is here, definitely I want to request that this House passes it wholesomely.

The reason we want to support this is that it is actually not an issue for the people of Northern Uganda alone. It is going to benefit the whole country. This is because conflicts of this nature did not happen only in Northern Uganda.

Secondly, on the extension of the Act, I would request – I do not know how it augurs with the committee and the whole House - that the extension of the Act be amended to at least three or four years, instead of two years. This will allow time for those who still want to think about coming back home. And above all, elections are around the corner; if we extended it by only two years, those who would like to join the next presidential and parliamentary elections would not benefit. Some of the grievances that made those people to join rebellion could have been political. Let us give them the benefit of the doubt, especially those who wish to come and take part in general elections. You never know maybe “Gen.” Kony may want to come and stand for the presidency. 

3.15
MR JOSHUA CARTER ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the job well done, especially on their final recommendation of extending the Act for two years. But like the hon. Akello has suggested, it should be longer. I have my view on why the amnesty should be extended: When you listen to the song Peace return by one of the artistes from Northern Uganda, he actually says – I do not understand Acholi very well – somewhere that “When you look at the government side, what are the casualties and deaths? And on the rebels’ side, equally the same thing: children of Acholi die.” That makes me to weep more because as the hon. Akello said, some of these people did not join the rebels because they wanted rebellion; it was circumstances beyond their reach. That is on the LRA side.

Coming to the ADF side, probably where there is any kind of rebellion there will be abductions, threats and intimidation and so on; there are people who will not willingly join the rebellion. So I would think that all over Uganda we have had cases of rebellion and people have been abducted. Therefore, ending part II of this Act, moreover by the Minister of Internal Affairs from Northern Uganda with experience of a war zone –incidentally both ministers in charge of internal affairs are from Northern Uganda. So, I would think that Uganda, which is now a fountain of peace, after fighting internal and external aggressions – we went to Liberia, Somalia and other places and we are actually respected as a fountain of peace –(Member timed out_)
3.17
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to ask the minister in charge of this sector why when the low key rebels return, they get amnesty but for the top leaders, especially in the LRA, this amnesty question is glossed over. This is probably the reason why the people who are still in captivity and are still continuing in rebellion fear to forsake it. And so the double standards should stop and let whoever abandons rebellion – be it the top leadership – be granted amnesty. 

Mr Speaker, I also want to look at the extension in reference to the politics on the continent. It is a fact that while we were supporting the South Sudanese to create their own country, we had an engagement with the then rebel force considered rebels by the Khartoum administration. And it is also true that the Khartoum establishment supports the LRA. Now in the context of extending this amnesty for two years, I humbly plead with the government to check on our relationship with other countries in the continent, especially where we have strategic interests. Otherwise, it is not a matter of extending the amnesty without looking at the politics on the African Continent.

Lastly, much as I support the extension, I would also want us to set timelines for these engagements; you cannot afford to have extensions forever. It is a testimony probably that if after two years you do not want to come out, you are enjoying rebellion -(Member timed out_)

3.20
MR KRISPUS AYENA-ODONG (UPC, Oyam County North, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not sure if somebody doubts what I am going to say – (Laughter) – but I will begin by saying that there is an adage that “If you think education is expensive, try ignorance.” By the same token, if you think extending the amnesty law is expensive, try insecurity. 

Mr Speaker, those of us who laid down our lives to make sure that security is restored in this country, I am not sure who I am now talking to convince. As far as I am concerned, there is nobody either on this side of the House or the other who doubts the benefit of security. Those of us who took courage and went to the “lion’s den” to negotiate with Joseph Kony and experienced why some people refuse to come out – because they were not sure about their security – can only say that it would be in the interest of especially the government that does not wish to witness any rebellion in any part of this country to support the committee’s position.

I remember a day when I was in the bushes of Garamba and I was walking along the path to hear, “Iribo, Lapwony Kris” meaning “Good afternoon, Uncle Kris”, only to turn and find that it was my own nephew who had been captured and consequently conscripted into Kony’s army. I wonder what the fate of this boy will be in years to come – if at all he is still alive -(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, you have the plea of the Members and so I will add you one more minute. (Laughter)

MR AYENA-ODONG: Mr Speaker, my personal experience in the bushes of Garamba is that there are very many people who could not come back because of the fear of what would happen to them. A typical example was “Gen.” Caesar Acellam; by the time I left, this man had actually already broken ranks with Kony but did not know what would happen to him. 

My wish, therefore, is that this House is magnanimous enough to extend this amnesty to include those who perform aggressive action when they come back like Gen. Sejusa, so that he can come and apologise if he wants. That is my understanding of security and accommodation so that this country may forever be in peace. Thank you.

3.23
MR PHILLIP WAFULA AGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We must extend amnesty because it is necessary. We are still at war; our soldiers are in Central African Republic chasing some of our brothers to bring them back home by force or to kill them and we are now seeing some people running away - so amnesty is okay! But we should also be discussing why people need amnesty; why are people constantly running away? They run away due to political differences; they run away due to economic problems and they go and join rebellions. 

I think Government should be discussing issues like these and seeking ways to stop it, because amnesty does not stop rebellion. The conditions for rebellion are always created by those in power. 

I have read in the papers that there are young people who have been recruited from my constituency and they are in Congo. I have tried to establish where they come from and who they are. I am told these are jobless people; people go to their areas and persuade them to go with them and get a job. They take them to Masindi for jobs, and from Masindi, they end up in Congo. 

So, it is okay to give them amnesty to come back, but what about the new ones who will go there tomorrow? So the condition we should be addressing as Government is why people run away – (Member timed out_)

3.26
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First and foremost, in our Christian prayer, we say, “Forgive us our sins as we forgive those who sin against us.” Again, somewhere in the Bible, the disciples of Jesus came and asked Him about how many times they should forgive their brothers when they sin against them. The reply was, forgive them seven times – (Interjections) – seventy - 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you would like to quote from the Bible, be exact; it is the Book of God. (Laughter) 

MR BIRAARO: Mr Speaker most obliged. But what I want to say is that forgiving should be an endless exercise. So I support the committee in saying that we extend amnesty. For the sake of peace in Uganda, we should extend amnesty to allow our brothers who are there by their own intention or coercion to come back, well aware that they will be welcome at home and then we can build our country in total peace. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.28
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand in support of the report and I would like to state clearly that amnesty should be extended. The reasons I have concern children. In the bush, many children have been born and they are there suffering. The mothers want to come out, but they fear because amnesty is almost elapsing. If we do extend it, then the mothers will be encouraged to come out. The fathers might prefer to stay there, but the mothers will feel that their children will be safer when they come back to Uganda. 

So for the sake of the children and women, let the amnesty be extended so that we can protect the right of the children and the women. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.29
MR CYRUS AMODOI (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): Mr Speaker, first of all, I want to thank the committee for the report. I have one observation. My senior colleague, hon. Ayena, is one ambassador whom I request to help this House champion this cause. Since I was a young boy, I have read in the papers that he has always been a focal person; a personality recognised by the LRA commander. I bring this up because up to now, I have brothers and sisters from Teso, where I represent, who are still in captivity and they have never returned home. 

We all know that Government engages these people; most of them are in Garamba, Central African Republic and South Sudan. Sometimes we see them being captured and we do not know what happens to them afterwards. So, I appeal to the House to extend the amnesty. 

There was a proposal brought by hon. Franka that we make it four years so that we can also use the opportunity as the leaders to engage the people who are in captivity. Some people have relatives that are in the jungles. 

The last issue I want to raise is, Government spent a lot of money in the peace talks. But up to now, I do not know the results of the peace talks in Juba. How far have we moved? Are there hindrances within, which are part of the problems of amnesty? If they are there, I request the committee of internal affairs to avail us with a copy of that report so that we can see how to help our brothers and sisters. Thank you. 

3.31
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support this report and the motion from the committee, which has ably presented it. The Act we are talking about now is the Act, which returned peace to Uganda and the only way we can sustain this peace is by extension of this Amnesty Act. 

In the report, it was stated that 26,380 persons were given amnesty. As we extend this, I think sometimes when people benefit they forget the reasons for which they benefited. I say this because I hear some people saying that they were not given any benefits and they were not properly settled in the previous amnesty period. 

My request is that of these 26,380 persons, let the ministry give us a detailed list per district of who benefited and who did not benefit. We would like to use that to mobilise people in our respective districts and inform them on some of the questions they ask us. 

My second issue is on the Juba Peace process. I participated –(Interruption)


MR SSEKANDI: I think I forgot the geography of this assembly. Mr Speaker, the clarification I am seeking is that, is the law still in operation or did it expire and they want it to be revived? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your Excellency, part II of the Act was made to lapse by an instrument issued by the minister. Part II was the critical aspect of the Act that was drawing people to take amnesty. The Act itself is due to lapse on the 24th of this month.

MR SSEKANDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MS KWIYUCWINY: If I can wind up my last point. I was saying that I was part of the discussion on reconciliation and accountability processes of the Juba Peace process, and my question now is about the involvement of traditional and religious leaders in the rehabilitation of the returnees. While they have signed a petition, which the committee has ably looked at, I would like to request, if possible, that the new Act going to be put in place will also spell out clearly the role of these traditional leaders and the religious leaders.  This is because when we were discussing the peace processes, especially for the returnees, a lot was talked about the role the traditional leaders can play, the Mato Oput and all those other roles which the traditional leaders can play -(Member timed out_)

3.35
MS EVELYN ANITE (NRM, Youth): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, allow me to thank the committee on defence for the job well done. I have heard various views on the extension of amnesty. The committee is proposing an extension of two years while some Members are proposing an extension of four years. My own view is that, an extension of amnesty should be to totality. In other words, it should be left open. Why do I say this? The Bible tells me - please do not ask me which part of the Bible because I am a good Christian who goes to church every Sunday, and who listens to what the priest says but not read the Bible. (Laughter) The Bible tells me that forgive 70 times seven times. That means that you should not get tired of forgiving anyone who sins. In other words, for us to sit here as legislators to decide the fate of our fellow Ugandans, who err by going to join rebel groups to fight us, and then say that when they come to ask for pardon we should never forgive them, is very wrong in my opinion. As a young person and as someone who comes from Northern Uganda - not only do I come from Northern Uganda but I lead young people in 28 districts of Northern Uganda - (Interruption)-

MR AYENA: Thank you very much, for giving way, my colleague. I would want to inform you humbly that there is also some part of the Bible, which says that a good shepherd will take all the trouble to look for one of his lost sheep and abandon 99. I am a general student of the Bible but – (Laughter) - so I may not be able to -(Interruption)

MS ANITE: Mr Speaker, I believe the Bible and the Koran say the same thing. Thank you for that information. To conclude my point, I would rather we advocate for sensitisation in the community, that when these people want to return to the community, the community accepts them and settles them down because many times former rebels find it very hard to settle in  the community because of a lot of discrimination -(Member timed out_)

3.38
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to support the report. However, nobody is talking about the rehabilitation plan for these people when they come back. In Mayuge we have boys who were recruited into ADF and taken to the DR Congo. They were convinced by Government to come back but those boys who came back are suffering; they have not been rehabilitated very well and Government has been selecting some boys and leaving out others. When you leave out these boys they again cause more havoc because they recruit more and they are also willing to go back. So, I am interested in knowing how are we going to rehabilitate these people so that they are really convinced to come back? I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I see many more contributions coming up but we need to take a decision on these issues. They are in summary seven recommendations from the committee. I would like to hear the opinion of the minister of the sector, if he has objections, if not we go paragraph by paragraph and we see how we can conclude this debate. 

3.40
THE MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Hilary Onek): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We received that petition from the committee and we also, as of now, heard collective contributions being made on the subject.
Definitely, the existing amnesty law touches on witnesses. There are areas which are not compatible with the current laws and as such we presented these to the Justice, Law and Order Committee headed by the Chief Justice. We are proposing to come up with a new comprehensive Act that will address the flaws, which were in the previous law and ensure that we bring it to Parliament and have comprehensive laws which do not have loopholes which were previously in the old Act. 

Definitely, an Amnesty Act is required and we shall have it but we should have a strong Amnesty Act that will look at all angles and not allow some loopholes for some wrongdoers to exploit. Otherwise, we greatly appreciate the concerns of the honourable members of Parliament and their contributions. They are very useful. We are going to have those integrated as we are going to examine the new law. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. The minister has said they are preparing a comprehensive law, which will deal with all the weaknesses that used to be cited to bring down the Amnesty Act. The decision we are going to take therefore now is, in the meantime, while we wait for that law, what should be the status quo of the law as it is? Part of it has lapsed and Parliament is saying, “No put it back in whole so that while we wait for the comprehensive law, you have a full Act of Parliament taking care of the provisions as it is now.” 

I now go paragraph by paragraph on the recommendations of the committee. I think we are all agreeing. The minister has agreed.

The first recommendation is to revise the decision of the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs in the lapsing of the provisions of part II of the Amnesty Act and restore, in its entirety, the expunged provision. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Two, that the minister shall revoke – yes, learned Attorney-General, you are now behind so I could not easily -

MR RUHINDI: I can make the point here. Mr Speaker, the legal challenge that we may have is the application of the Interpretation Act, I think sections 12 and 13. Legally and logically, when you repeal provisions of the law, they cease to exist.

The Minister of Internal Affairs, under that statutory instrument being mentioned, repealed part II, which gave blanket amnesty. By doing that, it ceased to exist. Even if the minister revokes that statutory instrument, it will not revive that part. That part can only be revived through re-enactment by Parliament. So my advice is that, we may have to go the route he is proposing of looking at that opportunity of bringing here a law for debate encompassing all the concerns that have been made.

Of course, I see the challenge that you are posing of what happens in the meantime but technically, you cannot revive part II simply by revoking the statutory instrument because that part ceased to exist and the power to have it re-enacted is the power of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So what do we do to take care of the existing situation now, learned Attorney-General?

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it in order for the whole Attorney-General to give advice to this august House from the back bench when he is not a back bencher? Also, is it in order for the whole Cabinet Minister, hon. Jessica Alupo to sit behind at the back like a back bencher when there are seats in front?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the standard rule is that all Members should be seated in the House comfortably and conveniently. So the sitting of a minister in a particular place is immaterial as long as we recognise that person as a minister. Learned Attorney-General, what is the way forward?

MR RUHINDI: Thank you so much, Rt Hon. Speaker, for that wise ruling because in this House, not only do I speak as minister, I also speak as Member of Parliament for Nakawa Constituency.

I think the only way forward is to expedite the process and we keep you updated.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House can still say that that statutory instrument should be revoked anyway so that it stops being there and so that both of them are not there, if that is the implication.

The minister should revoke Statutory Instrument No. 34 of 2012, the effect of the revocation - I think I will stop at that based on the issue raised by the learned Attorney-General. That the minister should revoke Statutory Instrument No. 34 of 2012. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That the Minister of Internal Affairs immediately develops and table before this House appropriate regulations and clear criteria for the exclusion of certain individuals from benefitting from amnesties as provided for under Section 2A of the Amnesty Act, as amended. I put the question to that.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am looking at the prayer as you have read it, and I am looking at the recommendation of the committee that the minister should be at liberty to seek to exclude an individual on an ad hoc basis as long as he or she discloses the criteria to Parliament.

I would find the recommendation of the petitioners more organised and orderly than what the committee is proposing here because the committee is telling us, let the minister use his own discretion to refuse somebody amnesty and then declare that to Parliament. I think this House should require that the minister tables to us objective criteria on which one can be excluded from amnesty, we pass that and that can then be used as the yardstick later instead of taking a person simply on the -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that recommendation is merely restating the provision of Section 2A of the Act. What is stated under 2A is just what the Act says now. So in bringing regulations to deal with the powers given under Section 2A of the Amnesty Act, that is what it says. So it would not be creating any new situation; it is required that the minister should do that. The discretion was already given to the minister by this Parliament in the past. I put the question to the third issue.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Based on the advice we got from the Attorney- General, I need guidance on that particular recommendation. Do we still seek to get regulations from the minister or what we need to get is a Bill since the whole Act is coming to an end?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the whole Act has not come to an end. There is another recommendation that it should be extended for two years because it is due to lapse on the 24th. The 24th is still ahead, it is not behind. So please let us proceed.

That the Minister of Internal Affairs immediately develops and tables before this House appropriate regulations and clear criteria for the exclusion of certain individuals from benefitting from amnesties as provided for under Section 2A of the Amnesty Act, as amended. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Three. To direct the Minister for Internal Affairs and the Amnesty Commission to develop and table before the House, clear procedures and plans for the promotion of reconciliation as required by Section 8 of the Amnesty Act, as amended. I put the question to that recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Four. That upon reinstatement of part II - this one now would be dependent on the general interpretation given by the Attorney-General.

So, the next recommendation is, the committee recommends that the House should resolve that the Amnesty Act should be extended for a further period of two years upon expiry on 24 May 2013.

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Following the debate and support from Members, I would like to amend that the extension of the Act be for four years, pending the comprehensive one.

MR ONEK: Mr Speaker, legally, all instruments are normally extended for a year but of course Parliament has the prerogative. I believe two years would be reasonable. Within the next year, we should have been able to come with the new law that will replace all this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that okay? I put the question to that recommendation that it be extended for a further period of two years before - it cannot be upon its expiration. Before it expires because if it expires then there will be nothing to extend. So the minister should make the extension for two more years. I put the question to that recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The committee recommends that the House should resolve that if within 10 days of the making of the above resolution the minister does not revoke statutory instrument – I think that one is also taken care of by the other interpretation by the Attorney-General. Is that clear? Can we amend that “The committee recommends that if within 10 days of the making of the above resolution the minister does not revoke Statutory 34 of the 2012, the chairperson of the committee shall seek leave of the House to introduce a private members Bill to amend the Amnesty Act and, inter alia, give effect to the above resolutions of the House.”

MR ONEK: Mr Speaker, we shall effect that before the expiry date; the expiry date is 24th and we should be able to accomplish that before then.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, if it is not extended, the whole Act will come to an end. And it is in nobody’s interest that it does that.

MR ONEK: We shall extend it, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now that he has agreed with it, should I put the question to this resolution? (Interjection) I think it is because that other recommendation relates to reinstatement of part II. And given the interpretation from the Attorney-General, it could introduce some complications in this particular recommendation. I think it is taken care of.

MR AYENA-ODONG: Mr Speaker, I have discovered something very curious in what the learned Attorney-General said. I am not very sure if a minister can repeal any provision of the Act. I want to be guided because maybe I have misunderstood the law to the effect that the minister may not have the power to repeal.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this Parliament gave the minister that power in an amendment in 2006; it was an amendment to the Amnesty Act that gave the minister the authority to cause the lapsing of part II of the Act. It was the authority of Parliament that the minister used and therefore he can repeal. That is the complication we have here because it was given by Parliament. Learned Attorney-General, is there anything you want to add on this? If not, I will have the Member for Bujenje. 

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. For avoidance of doubt, I would like to add a recommendation that “This House recommends that Government brings a comprehensive amnesty law within two year.” I know the minister has mentioned it but it would add value if we made a recommendation. I am sure all these other issues would be resolved if we fast tracked this comprehensive amnesty law. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The one of bringing the amnesty law – that will make it again -

MR ONEK: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is an undertaking we are determined to carry out. But the Ministry of Internal Affairs works together with other departments of Government like the Attorney-General, the First Parliamentary Counsel – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This would be your responsibility, hon. Minister, not of any other person.

MR ONEK: That is right; our aim is to bring it even within a year. But if you gave us two years’ extension, it would give us flexibility in case some other aspects of the process are held up. Nevertheless, it is our determination to have the new law in place.

Secondly, with your recommendations here, we shall definitely strengthen the Amnesty Commission by reinforcing it with the relevant manpower to ensure that those who leave rebellion are evaluated and given amnesty. But of course the amnesty is basically for those who found themselves victims and not for those who deliberately perpetuate the rebellion. So, we are going to handle that effectively. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Minister, you will cause the revocation of the statutory instrument as agreed by Parliament, the effect of which will be for future interpretation.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking a clarification on the minister’s statement to the effect that those who come out should be “evaluated”. What is involved in the evaluation? When we talk of rebels fearing to come out, that could be part of the factors. Thank you.

MR ONEK: I am not a lawyer but what I meant is that, the process of granting amnesty exists and those who come out have to go through it. And the aim is to give amnesty to victims of rebellion. So that is the process I meant; if I used a wrong term, please forgive me. The lawyers can then streamline it. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the criticism which is in the report about the Amnesty Act as it is, is that it promotes impunity; people come and say, “Yes, I have abandoned rebellion, please grant me amnesty” without disclosing anything. So there is a recommendation for some form of disclosure before you are granted amnesty. That is precisely what is being said here. So I think we are done with this - committee chairperson?

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is another recommendation that skipped the typing, whereby we were proposing that Government/Ministry of Finance provides the requisite resources for the resettlement and integration of the returnees. And the justification is that since the year 2000, when the Amnesty Act came into place, 26,000 people have benefited from the amnesty but only 5,000 of those have been resettled because of resource constraints. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that recommended – Yes, Member for Busongora? 

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, I have heard from my colleague about that recommendation. But I have two questions: First, of the returnees – in my experience of Kasese during the time of the ADF – they would have inflicted havoc and destruction to the lives and property of their victims. Secondly, when they were still in active combat, they were not acting within the law. Now I am wondering whether it is necessary to resettle the people who actually wrecked the lives and property of their fellow citizens! Wouldn’t we rather resettle those who were their victims? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, committee chairperson.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is one thing we should always look at and that is: Why grant amnesty. The reason the Amnesty Act was out in place was to encourage rebels to come back home voluntarily. Now that somebody has voluntarily returned, are you going to say to them, “Welcome back from the bush; now we have accepted you, go back home.” How is that person going to start a new life? That is why they put a provision in the Act for a small package to kick-start someone’s life – (Interjections) – there is a similar body in Rwanda called Unity and Reconciliation Commission. After the genocide, they copied that from our law. They are also offering some packages to the returnees to resettle them and encourage them to stay peacefully in their areas. 

In the new law, from the stakeholders we have interacted with, there should be a provision to provide something to the victims –(Interruption) 

MR BAKA MUGABI: I do appreciate the issues you are talking about, but I need clarification. What are you going to do for those who were hurt by the acts of insurgency; acts done by those you intend to settle when they come back home? 

Secondly, don’t you think you are creating a window for people to go to the bush with the hope of being resettled?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chairman, I think we are extending the debate for no good reason. It is a provision in the Amnesty Act for demobilisation and resettlement. That provision of the law has not been implemented. So, the recommendation is simply saying, implement that provision of the law.

MR BABA: Honourable members, the Speaker has interpreted it right; this is a provision in the law which the chairman wants implemented. Secondly, the petitioners who petitioned Parliament did so in the spirit of Bible forgiveness. Let us forgive those who wronged us; let them come back home. 

But fundamentally, my senior colleague hon. Onek told you that we are working on a new enactment which will take care of both the victims and those who caused the havoc. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the recommendation, which was brought by the chairperson of the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have the town council speakers from Agago District represented by hon. Akello Judith Franca and hon. Okot John Amos. They are led by the district speaker hon. Bosifayo Owekka; they are here on a benchmarking visit and they have come to witness the proceedings of the House. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PUBLIC ORDER MANAGEMENT BILL, 2011

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you recall that we had a fairly lengthy discussion on Clause 6 and by the time we left, there were three propositions. 

MR BABA: Mr Chairman, you are absolutely right. The committee of the whole House did debate very extensively on Clause 6 as per the report of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and with the amendment they propose. In addition, they also brought qualifiers to Clause 6(2) which was also extensively debated and discussed and we added another interpretation, relating to spontaneous public meetings, which dealt with meetings which are unplanned or scheduled. All this was extensively discussed. I think what remains for us now is to take a decision. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There was a proposal on the location of this definition; the matter was raised by the hon. Member for Butambala. 

MR BABA: I proposed that for spontaneous public meetings, it could appropriately come after Clause 8 because it relates to notification, which comes after Clause 7. I wish to submit. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Chairman, I recall that I moved an amendment to that entire clause to be deleted and I gave a justification. But during the debate that ensured, we were almost reaching some agreement that the definition of a “public meeting” should go to the interpretation clause. What remained was for us to agree on what that definition should be like. But we had fundamentally agreed – we disagreed because this one had the word “persons” while the other one lacked the term “persons”. I think that was the general position on which we left. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Indeed, you had proposed that Clause 6 be deleted, but not just be deleted, but be re-enacted in the interpretation clause. So it was not an absolute deletion that it is completely removed from the Bill; it would be deleted from Clause 6 and placed in Clause 2, which is the definition clause. It was a relocation; that is what I said when I was summarising. So there was the issue of “persons”, which was refined. 

MR BABA: Mr Chairman, first of all, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi is right that we move the new definition to the definition clause and it would remain as it was recommended by the committee, to read: “For purposes of this Act, ‘public meeting’ means a gathering, assembly, concourse, procession or demonstration of persons in or on any public place or premises held for purposes of discussing, acting upon, petitioning or expressing views on a matter of public interest - ”, and we agreed that this should be moved to the definition clause. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you. That means we cannot take a decision now on Clause 6. 

MR BABA: Clause 6 has section (2) and a new addition (3), which the committee also dealt with and we support that. So we remain with Clause 6(2) and a new (3), which the committee recommended in the report and which we support. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So the first paragraph which is 6(1), which is the definition of a “public meeting” will be relocated to the interpretation clause in which case we cannot pronounce ourselves on it until we come there. 

Now, the outstanding issues on Clause 6 are the remaining sub clause (2) and the new sub clause proposed by the committee as (3). Can I put the question to this? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, on page 20 of the report, the committee proposed to delete sub-clause (2) and the justification was that this clause gives fertile ground for discrimination as outlawed by Article 21 of the Constitution. I do not know why the chairman is now saying it should remain when in the first instance he said that it was fertile ground for discrimination. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is because there is an addendum to the report of the sectoral committee, based on the meeting that was ordered by the Speaker who was chairing then. As a result of that meeting, an addendum to the report was made which has now come with these recommendations on sub-clause (2), which is now on page 4 of that report. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, when the House told them to go for that meeting, they did not tell them to look at Clause 6(2). They told them to look at what is a public meeting or meeting place. That was all. So, they cannot come and change what they had agreed on earlier and at this time.

MR BABA: Mr Chairman, the chairperson is here and we were all here. The Speaker told them to look at clause 3 and clause 6 and that is what the committee went and deliberated upon. Therefore, the report they submitted related to both clause 3 and clause 6 in their entirety. I thank you.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, in the addendum of the committee report on page 4, (b) you can see it starts by saying, “Insert after sub-clause (2) the following new sub-clause (3),” meaning that the committee owns sub-clause (2) in the rejoinder in the addendum.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: And hon. Leader of the Opposition, it was not the definition of the word that was referred to the committee. I have a copy of the Hansard of that day: “Can we then direct” - this was the Speaker who was presiding then - “Can we then direct the committee, if there is anything left with the minister to complete it, use this time to finalise.”

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I would like to agree that as a committee, we shall be briefed. On Tuesday we should be prepared to come and present the amendments.” 
And these are the amendments they are presenting.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I am not objecting to that. Clause 6 talks about the meaning of “public meeting”. That is the heading. What the committee was directed to look at was, “What is a public meeting?” Clause 6(2) was not talked about at that time because the committee had already recommended that it should be deleted, and we had said that was fine but the issue was the “public meeting”. Now, here he is turning out to reinstate- if you have the first report - so at what stage because we never told them to go and change that?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We are at committee stage; that clause has not been adopted. We have not voted on it.

MR BABA: And, Mr Chairman, as the sponsors of the Bill, we do not accept the recommendation of the committee to delete Clause 6(2) of the recommendation of the committee. We want it retained. When we later went as directed by the chairperson then, we revived it and that is why they brought in qualifiers in sub-clauses (3) and (4) of this report now before us.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: And you will recall I was not in the House but the discussions arose because the minister had come with a huge document that had not been seen by Members before. That was part of the confusion and they said, “You go and harmonise whatever has not been harmonised and come back.” So, no part of Clause 6 was adopted. The whole of clause 3 and clause 6 was referred to that discussion. So there was no decision taken. The committee could have recommended something but there was no decision taken by the House. 

MR OGUTTU: Mr Chairman, I was in the House and I remember asking about, if I went for burial and if people came around me in the towns as an MP - we asked what the place of work of an MP in the constituency was; we saw “public place” defined and we said “public meeting” should be defined. That is what I remember us asking the minister to do because there was controversy over a “public meeting”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is correct; that is why we are not handling that definition now in Clause 6. It is going to go in the definition clause. We have not taken a decision on that. So, the agreement is that this first part of Clause 6 should not stay here and if it is not going to stay here, we cannot discuss it here. We will discuss it when we come to Clause 2 which has been stood over; that is when we will refine the definition of what a “public meeting” will be. Not so? 

So, what is now left of Clause 6 substantially is sub-clause (2) and now what is being proposed by the committee as sub-clause (3). That is what is remaining. Let us deal with the amendments proposed then we come back to what is in the Bill.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: What would be the heading? Let us first get the heading of Clause 6 because here the heading is, “Meaning of public meeting.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is a vital point.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Let us get the heading before we can go ahead. Mr Prime Minister, you are most welcome back from exile. Mr Chairman -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I have not yet heard the Prime Minister on record so I do not know why you are making that -(Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I heard him making noise that is why I am saying that; he wanted to tell me he was available. 

Mr Chairman, what is the heading of Clause 6? If we get the heading then we shall discuss Clause 6. The reason why I am raising this -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the point he raises is a legitimate point. If we are taking away the definition of “public meeting” from Clause 6 and retaining sub-clause (2) which is in the Bill and the proposed sub-clauses (3) and (4) by the committee, what is going to be the new headnote of Clause 6? That is a legitimate question. What is Clause 6 going to address now in the absence of defining “public meeting”?

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. From the debate we had and what seems to be taking place, there seems to be no disagreement on the definition of “public meeting”. And if there is, then we should resolve it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, there is no disagreement on the fact that the word should be defined. We are all agreeing on that one and that it will be defined in the definition clause. But the text of the definition has not been agreed as of now. 

Hon. Chairperson, we are retaining Clause 6. What would be the new heading? What is the subject in Clause 6 now? That is the matter being raised.   

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, all we need to drop from this clause now is the expression “meaning of” because the definition will go to the interpretation clause. Essentially this section will be covering public meetings and that can still be the head note.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The head note would be “public meetings”.

MR RUHINDI: Yes.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think you can see there is a problem. If you say it will be “public meetings” yet we have defined it the other side then we should carry the whole section from definition. Clause 6(2) says, “Notwithstanding....” Now what are we withstanding from? That is why we should put the heading for Clause 6 and change clause 2 because it also says “Notwithstanding....” You can see how it begins. What are we withstanding now? I support those who proposed that it should be deleted because as you see it, it is making us get more conflicts.

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, I would also like to indicate that in the text to the new amendment, the subject matter being dealt with is convening a meeting. So it does not address, in essence, public meetings. It addresses how a body or group or leader convenes a meeting. So the title being brought by the Attorney-General will still not work in the context.

Secondly, it starts with sub clause (3). The assumption is, there exists 1 (a), (b) and (2). So in the context here, there is need for repackaging of these particular words to start with the title, come with sub clause (1) and deal with the subject of convening a meeting by a group or a leader or a body.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: That is why if you go by my amendment for deletion and you look at the justification I gave, it was very clear. I said we delete Clause 6 in its entirety. When you reach (b), public definition should be incorporated within the interpretation clause and we agreed with that because that settles this whole issue once and for all. We will define it when the time comes. 

Therefore, Mr Chairman, we can stand over it in the meantime and proceed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Even if we are to stand over it, this is saying, “a public meeting does not include “- It is making exclusions to what would fall within the definition of a “public meeting”. So you still need those exclusions where funerals and all these other things are excluded from that definition.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, I have stood to offer technical help to my very dear brother and friend, the Leader of the Opposition. In legislation or in interpretation of statues, marginal notes are a short summary of the content of that particular section. It is not part of the law and it is not taken into account in interpreting the meaning of the content of that section. So, it is such a crucial thing. The critical thing is to agree what should be in this particular clause. Once we have agreed on it, we can have the marginal notes, whether it is public meetings or whatever. It has absolutely no consequence in terms of legislation.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, thank you very much. I think it is even made worse if we begin giving out what is excluded within the definition of “public meeting” without knowing because what takes precedence is what is supposed to be included. Some of these things, which are excluded, could actually form very prime elements of the definition of “public meeting”.

That is why I am also of the view, after reading the amendments provided by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, that actually we may not need Clause 6 as long as we transfer the definition to the definition clause. Whatever is provided for in Clause 6 that we think is really essential could be disseminated into other clauses like maybe procedures or seeking for permission and so forth because I am seeing here that it is bringing more confusion. Thank you very much.

MR BABA: Mr Chairman, it is these very Members here who raised issues of, “what about our wedding meetings, our kwanjulas” and so forth. That is why this particular section, which does not include public meetings, is brought here. If we delete it, how do we explain it out there that churches, mosques and other gatherings are not addressed in this particular Bill? So it is very necessary that this part is clearly elaborated.

I would like to go further to support what the deputy Attorney-General proposed as a heading “public meetings” in which case, the current section 2 would now read, “A public meeting does not include” a, b, c, d and so forth. I thank you.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, to describe that this is not a human being, you must have the definition of a human being and this is what we are talking about. For you to reach a point of telling us that this is the exclusion of public meeting, you must tell us what a public meeting is. This is why we are saying, we cannot proceed in such a situation where we do not understand what we are tackling and then we are giving an exception where there is no exception.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the best thing is to delete this clause so that we can move on. This is because in the interpretation clause, we are going to define a “public meeting” and the public meeting must pass the test of the definition we shall put there. This is discriminatory, as you said in your first report. In fact, Mr Chairman, you should agree that we delete it because initially you had said it is discriminatory - Not you, Mr Chairman, but the chairman of the committee. So Members, for purposes of us moving, we should delete this clause.

MR KUTESA: Mr Chairman, I do not see anything that stops us now from defining what a “public meeting” is and agreeing on it and then it goes to the interpretation clause when already agreed upon, and then we say here in Clause 6 that this is not what it includes. This is because the hon. Leader of the Opposition is saying we should delete. No, you want to be able to say what is not a public meeting, so if you delete, where will you say it? 

I am saying there is nothing to bar us even now in defining what a “public meeting” is, keep it aside at a location - whether it is in the definition or interpretation section is a different matter but we can agree on the content and then we keep Clause 6 and define what a public meeting is not. But when you say delete, then how will you exclude it? I thought that I would help the Leader of the Opposition.

MR BAKA: Mr Chairman, this is a quick rejoinder to hon. Kutesa’s idea, which I support. The first idea is of taking the meaning of “public meeting” to the interpretation clause. The second idea, which I want to suggest to the House, is that we maintain the definition as it is in Clause 6; it will give a clearer meaning to the definition of “public meeting”. Moreover it goes ahead to exclude what does not constitute a public meeting. So the other idea is to agree with hon. Kivumbi’s proposal. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Committee chairperson?

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to slightly disagree with my vice-chairperson because we have already moved a step from that position. We have already proposed a new definition, which is contained in the report. And from what hon. Kivumbi was saying and as all of us recall, I think we have all substantially agreed on what a “public meeting” is. I do not see why we cannot agree on it now and then proceed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, it seems that it may be necessary for us to agree on what a “public meeting” is so that we can agree on what it is not in another part, if necessary. But for now, we can agree on what a “public meeting” is. The Member for Butambala has proposed a definition for a public meeting in his amendment while the committee has also done the same in its report. I will now read both and we see how to harmonise. 

For hon. Kivumbi, “A ‘public meeting’ means a gathering, assembly, concourse, procession or demonstration in a public place or premises.” The committee proposes this: “A ‘public meeting’ means a gathering, assembly, concourse, procession or demonstration of persons in or on any public place or premises held for the purposes of discussing, acting upon, petitioning or expressing views on a matter of public interest.”

So, in other words, the two definitions are the same for the first leg but the committee gives an extension in its definition. The intention of the committee is that the purpose of that meeting should reinforce what the definition of a “public meeting” is rather than leaving it open. I think it is agreeable. 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, the other time a definition of that kind was suggested on the amendment that was brought here by the committee, my concern was to define at least a minimum number of persons that would amount to persons gathered for the purpose of demonstrating. Initially, it was three but we suggested that the number should be raised. If we put it at only “persons” that means even two people perceived to be in a public place and are discussing matters of public interest can be said to be holding a public meeting and, therefore, should have sought for permission. 

Secondly, my other issue was that the word “concourse” should be excluded because in most cases concourse is more of a spontaneous gathering. For example, here – even the learned Attorney-General agreed – is a situation where, for example, in a train station or airport a renowned person arrives and people go to welcome him or her. Let us say Kiprotich is returning  or Sejusa is returning – (Laughter) - so where we have a gentleman coming from Agago, another comes from Nebbi and yet another comes from Mbabara and they all converge there. This would have constituted a gathering; who then should have sought for permission to be there? Who has organised such a gathering if it is just a “general happiness”? That is why I am suggesting that “concourse” should not be included in the definition.

MR BABA: Mr Chairman, I thought last time we agreed that whoever had an amendment should bring it to the House and we decide on it. We have discussed these things and now we are going through them all over again. So it is the time to come up with concrete proposals and amendments and we decide on it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have recalled what you said that for a carpenter – (Laughter)– this is now like a carpenter; this law touches on everybody, including children. So it needs a carpenter who is hammering with care. You might be in “injury time” and you want to go away – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, I think let us see how to move forward; please just hold your fire. In both definitions, “concourse” is used. Can we then first finish with that first leg of the definition; should we maintain or delete “concourse”?

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Chairman, I propose that we delete that word in both definitions before we take a vote. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But what is the actual definition of the word “concourse”?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I think there is an absolute misunderstanding of “concourse”; concourse simply means a big area in front of a public building or in airports like it is in France – inside but a huge empty area where people can gather. So when you are talking about a gathering in that open space – outside a public building. Isn’t it? That is it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Does it mean that a concourse is not a group of people but space? In other words, a concourse would qualify to be a public place. 

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, I have just done a Google search and from the Free Dictionary, it reads: “A concourse means: 
    1) A large open space for the gathering or passage of crowd as in an airport.
    2) A broad thoroughfare 
    3) A great crowd – a throng 
    4) The act of coming, moving or flowing together.” 

Those are four different meanings of concourse. So it means if we are moving together, that is a concourse. So it is not only one definition as alluded to by the Prime Minister. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So it is important that it should be included?

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, I think the issue being raised here is that, for example, if I go to my constituency and from nowhere, people start following me, this definition still calls that a concourse. In that context, I would prefer that we define it clearly – remove the term “Concourse” and say, “in front or inside” as the Prime Minister wants. But if you put the word, “Concourse”, then the issue raised by the honourable member about spontaneous action of people following their leader when going somewhere, some will be interpreted in the same manner and would become criminal under this Act. 

MR ANYWARACH: The information that I want to add is, if people from different parts of this country are running to the airport to welcome a hero, the implication of including that in a “public meeting” would mean implicating the hero innocently for having organised people to receive him and did not seek for permission. So, in line with what the honourable member stated, we have to clearly define “concourse”. The ordinary practice right now – “concourse” is in relation to airport and railway stations where people are received. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the definition of the Prime Minister said, it is an open space and if it is an open space, can that be a public meeting?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I would like to supplement those who have spoken before me on this matter of “concourse”. Yes, it is an open space as has been described but we are looking at its real life activities. According to the online dictionary a course is often used to refer to a situation where people come together; even if they do not come together in real physical life – (Interjections) - in other words, if for instance, people meet at an airport in that open space or at a railway station that is a concourse. And I liked the example which hon. Anywarach gave. This is why the committee inserted the expression, “Where people meet for purposes of public interest” - the purpose is critical. 

People who, for instance, intend to transact matters of public interest in a concourse must certainly first comply with the requirements in the Bill. And even if they transact matters of public interest in a concourse, spontaneously, that will also be exempted from the application of the Bill under the provision which was proposed by the minister on spontaneous meetings. I do not see any contradiction at all. 

MR KATOTO: Mr Chairman, I think the word “concourse” is confusing. Another definition I have here is, “A wide hallway in a building where people can walk”. So if we use that term, it might bring in a thousand interpretations and we might never come to a clear conclusion. I propose we look for another word. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, if we listened to the Attorney-General, he said if the purpose is not stated, a concourse would even capture the kind of people who come just to welcome a leader. But if you come to the concourse for a purpose that is defined, then that becomes a public meeting. I think it clarifies your concern if the purpose is inserted; it is limited. 

MR ANYWARACH: I think that is why hon. Ruhindi is a learned Attorney-General. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, I agree with you; that clarifies it. The moment you say, “Concourse” and add a purpose, which is known then that limits it to that particular meeting. Is it now clearer, Members?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, you have seen hon. Katoto bringing in another meaning. So for purposes of moving forward, we have clarified what a gathering is, what an assembly is, what a procession is and a demonstration only “concourse” is unknown. We better delete it – (Interjections) – Mr Chairman, can you protect me from hon. Kutesa, who has not been around; he just wants to vote and has not been following these things. Please protect me from hon. Sam Kutesa. 

I want to propose that we remove the term, “Concourse” because all the other terms are known; but the term concourse has many meanings. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, the definition is no longer stopping at “concourse” it is now extending to the purpose for which you are in the concourse. That is what the committee is saying. Instead of just saying, “Concourse”, qualify it by saying the purpose; it is the purpose which should capture the definition and the exclusion of certain proceedings. 

So if it is just there and people just show up, and their purpose is not for discussing, acting upon, petitioning and expressing views on a matter of public interest then it does not qualify to be a public meetings. 

MR SSEMUJJU: The Attorney-General made it clear but who determines the purpose? We may be walking and we begin clapping. Someone may subjectively say that they came here knowing that the Deputy Speaker will be returning and that is why they are involved in an act of clapping to welcome him. It remains subjective and I do not think we want to define a word “public meeting” by creating ambiguity in a definition. The definition must be very clear. 

MR OGUTTU: One time I was travelling and I met so many people at the airport. I was wondering why and I was told these were people who had gone to welcome their friends and relatives who had come back from Mecca. Are we going to make a law against meetings like that? They went as individuals. That is a concourse. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But that is now what is being excluded by the purpose. If that concourse was for the purpose of discussing, acting upon, petitioning or expressing views of public interest, then it would qualify to be a public meeting.

MR OGUTTU: Yes, but, Mr Chairman, this word is unnecessarily controversial; it is ambiguous. We are better off deleting it and we move forward. Why do you have to put a word which is causing controversy? If even you learned people are not so clear about it, how about the peasants? 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I would like to caution that all of us shall be in trouble if we maintain the word “concourse”. What usually happens is that when there is somebody dearly loved in an area, spontaneously people will gather. If we left the word “concourse” in that meaning of public meeting, once any law enforcement officer who may not be in tandem with your school of thought sees a crowd around a Member of Parliament, he will be the one to judge and say, “You have breached the Public Order Management” law. I just want to caution that if we maintain the word “concourse” we shall all be caught up with it. I pray that we delete the word “concourse” to remove ambiguity.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I actually support the line of thinking that proposes that we delete the word “concourse”. In Uganda, you have a policeman after every 20 metres of any environment, I am not sure who is going to take the time to judge objectively whether the purpose for that meeting deserves to be defined in a way that if I am to breach the law or not to breach the law. This is because today what happens is- it happened to me in my constituency very recently. I went to address a community because of the health situation in the area and before I knew it, a truck full of policemen with teargas and armed with anti-riot gear came. And I was asking myself, what was the purpose? So we are not going to avoid such scenarios with a government where there is no objectivity. We are going to make it very subjective and even those of us who are saying “aye” you might be the first victims. 

I want to propose that we get rid of this word and let us proceed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, hon. Chairman, learned Attorney-General, can we be advised why the word “concourse” is so important here so as to take all this time? What is the justification? When you have demonstrations, processions, assembly and all those words, and then we are spending a week on the word “concourse”. So, I want the chairperson and the minister to help us with this because you have all those other words. A procession is there; a gathering is there; everything is there; then concourse, concourse, concourse. (Laughter)

MR BABA: Mr Chairman, even for gatherings, even for assemblies, like concourse somebody still has to decide.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You are now taking us away from the subject.

MR BABA: So, Sir, at the moment I am reluctant to let go of the word “concourse” -(Interjections)- Okay for purposes of making progress, let us delete the word “concourse”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The word “concourse” has been removed from the committee’s proposal and also from that of the Member from Butambala. So, let us go to the remaining part of the definition. The only difference between the first part of the definition is about persons and numbers. Do we need to include numbers in this? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No!

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, that was my proposal and I –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes. You had already made the proposal and I am now asking the honourable members. You proposed that there should be numbers. You have already made the proposal. It is your proposal I am processing now. Do we need numbers in this? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No!

MR SSASAGA: It is a little uncomfortable us using the word “procession” because in my culture, during the imbalu we are always in processions. We move from place to place -(Interruption)

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am standing on a point of procedure. We just recently deleted the word “concourse” which had a definition from Wikipedia which hon. Amama read. The fourth definition had the idea of procession and we said we delete that word. And now a honourable member, who is a good friend of mine from Budadiri, is seeking that this honourable gathering of Members of Parliament reconsiders the word “procession”. That one clearly implies that we are going back to accommodate one - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, please. What we were dealing with was different. So, please resume your seat.

MS KABAALE: Is it procedurally right to take us back? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please resume your seat. The issue we were dealing with was numbers. Please let us be relevant to what is on the Floor. We were dealing with numbers: do we need numbers or do we not need numbers? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the moment it is more than one it becomes “persons”. Already you have put numbers -(Interjections)- yes, if you know English, “person” is one and “persons” are more than one. So, the moment you say “persons” you are meaning the number starts from two.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But you see, the minute you say “public” it cannot be one.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Mr Chairman. So, I mean the number starts from two.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But you see, the minute you say “public” it cannot be one.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Mr Chairman. So I think here we need to put numbers. My proposal on the number is 1,000.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, please. I can hold you in contempt of the proceedings of this House. On the proposal of a thousand? Would we be acting reasonably? Please, would “persons” suffice because the preposition was “two” or “more”, “three” or “more”? That is why I am asking whether numbers are necessary. Are you satisfied?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: No. I contend strongly that we do not require “persons” because “person” is one then you get to persons. The late lawyer, Counsel Kayondo, had a demonstration to name Ben Kiwanuka Street. He was only one and had a legitimate demonstration as one person. Today we call Ben Kiwanuka Street as such because Counsel Kayondo went on the street and demonstrated. He was only one person and we are saying it is a gathering of persons. I can have a demonstration when I am alone.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, please let us be relevant. This definition is about a public meeting. Can you hold a public meeting alone?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Chairman, I would like to contend that in the definition, when I order for a meeting I may not know how many people will turn up. I may say I intend to have a rally - (Interruption)

MR SEKANDI: Mr Chairman, yesterday I was struck with what I saw in the Nation newspaper. Somebody or some people were opposed to what Members of Parliament in Kenya were demanding about an increase in their salaries. What I saw in this demonstration is that, somebody took pigs to the demonstration. So the question of tying ourselves to numbers, I do not think is necessary. Let us vote on it because are you going to say two, ten or what? Two people can hold a demonstration and an effective one as this person did with the pigs.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, we adopt the first part of the definition from the Member for Butambala. In other words, we will say, “To mean a gathering, assembly, procession or demonstration in a public place or premises.” That is what he proposed. And then the extension from the committee is that, “That is done for purposes of discussing, acting upon, petitioning or expressing views on a matter of public interest.” That is the addition on that definition. So can we resolve this?

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am a bit perturbed. When you talk of a matter of public interest, we need to determine the scope of a matter of public interest.

Mr Chairman, ordinarily, a wedding is a personal event but the history of this country has seen a wedding of public interest and it was actually repeated due to public demand. Now what was that? Was it a personal event? Can we say it was a wedding of public interest? Was it a public gathering? That is why as we determine which definition to take, a matter of public interest – [Hon. Kabwegyere: “Can I inform you?”] – I am a bit informed but you can try to add on.

MR KABWEGYERE: Mr Chairman, the issue of public interest has been in philosophy for a long time. The honourable member could inform himself by reading John Stewart Mill’s book on liberty wherein is the debate on what is general and what is individual, the general will or the will of all.

A public interest is beyond the interest of an individual. It is determined in the whole concept of the law and order because if you do something that interferes with other people negatively, and those other people do not like what you are saying and are even angered to act in breach of the law, then you are interfering with the public interest.

So when you are talking about public interest, it is not defined by Government. Rather, it is defined by society within the context of the will of all.

MR KASIBANTE: I was trying to conclude. I still insist, Mr Chairman, on how a matter becomes of public interest. I was giving an example of a wedding and you would ordinarily think that a wedding is a personal celebration. A whole President of the Republic of Uganda did it in public interest. The professor may not have been a minister then but it happened in Uganda. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR KABWEGYERE: Mr Chairman, a wedding is a public institution and it is known that a marriage is taking place. Not anything can be called a wedding so is he in order to say “when at a wedding” when a wedding is already clearly defined within the public law?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The honourable member has now heard from the professor what a wedding is. 
Honourable members, I think we should resolve this. So the definition is – Please, let us resolve this. We have debated this.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Chairman, I think the definition should end where we have ended.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is what I am going to process now. That is why I am saying, I need to process that. Honourable members, I am going to take the amendment of the honourable member as amending the position of the committee. Would that be good? So what is before the House is that, “For the purposes of this Act, ‘public meeting’ means a gathering, assembly, procession or demonstration in a public place or premises held for the purposes of discussing, acting upon, petitioning or expressing views on a matter of public interest”. That is what is before the House now.

The amendment proposed by the honourable member for Butambala is that the phrase “held for purposes of discussing, acting upon, petitioning or expressing views on a matter of public interest” be deleted? What should be retained should stop at “in a public place or premises.” That is what is before the House now. 

So, we need to take a decision on whether to delete that last leg of the definition. In other words, we remove the question of using the purpose to be part of the definition. That is the question I am going to put now. I put the question to the deletion of this last leg of the definition.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the definition of “public meeting” as proposed by the committee with the exclusion of “concourse” and all the other things.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, for purposes of moving on, I would like to ask the chairman what he understands by “public interest”. (Interjections) Mr Chairman, I have seen that hon. Kutesa wants to provide the answer; will you allow him to answer my question?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, you should proceed by the authority of the Speaker. Can we then move on since we have adopted the definition, which will go to the definition clause, clause 3, when we come to that? 

What now is left is the remaining part of clause 6. There is a proposal to retain that and the consequential amendment that will be adjusted to do that. The proposal was that the head note remains as “public meeting” and then there will now be sub clause (2), which is as it is in the Bill, and a new sub clause (3) as proposed by the committee. This relates to stating cases of what does not constitute public meetings. Sub clause (3): 

“For the avoidance of doubt, a public meeting convened by a group, body or leader in a group or body at- 
(a) the ordinary place of business of that body, group or leader; or 
(b) any other place, which is not a public place,
in the course of lawful business of the group, body or leader is not a public meeting under this section, unless that meeting spills over into a public place.” That is the additional qualification to exclude certain activities from being defined as public meetings. 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, before we adjourned last time, I had suggested that under clause 6 we lay down what does not amount to a public meeting. I also did suggest that we should put within that clause a place, which is a public place but does not really amount to a public place within the definition of this Bill. 

What I meant was that in the spirit of freedom, there must be some places that are gazetted, although they are public places, for the benefit of people who are in democratic movements and those who are in activism at least to speak out their mind about failures of Government. In fact, I did say that it is even in the interest of Government so that they are aware of the dissenting views, especially on matters of public interest. That is in the spirit of Trafalgar Square in London, which I quoted, and the City Square here in Kampala. In such a place, it will be known that as long as a group of people is holding a public meeting, automatically they do not need to ask for police permission but the Police, under their duty of keeping law and order, will maintain law and order in such a place. Thank you.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Committee chairperson, what do you say about gazetting a place for those matters?

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, I remember the honourable member raised the same issue of Trafalgar Square the last time. I informed him that when I was recently in London at the time of the death of the former British Prime Minister, even those who were demonstrating at the Trafalgar Square notified the Police and there was police presence there. If you –(Interjections) Yes, they informed the Police.

The point he has been making all along, of people demonstrating and airing out their views against or for the government at whatever place you want, is good but we are also looking at the responsibilities; these people should be protected. You never know what may happen as you are airing out your views and as you gather people there. What responsibility would you take if you get people into a place and something bad happens? We are looking at the security of the people, not only of those who are expressing their views but also of those who are not interested in them. They must be protected as well. 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, the committee chairperson brought up a very serious point, that during the funeral of Margaret Thatcher demonstrators asked for permission from the Police, but here I am talking about notifying the Police. That is why we insist in law by saying “give a notice in writing”. A notice can even be by your presence in a gazetted place, which automatically notifies others that people are now coming to express their views. 

Currently, the City Square in Kampala is always occupied by the Police even without demonstrators going there. Now, if they provided such a level of security at a time when people are expressing their views, in the spirit of democracy and freedom I think it would be a very good move by this country, that we are giving rights and freedoms to people to express themselves. That is the spirit I am pursuing. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIPERSON: I think there was a time when – unless I am mistaken – Kololo Airstrip was designated as a place where people could go and express their opinions. Was it a permanent situation or was it a matter for a particular period? Maybe that is what we need to clarify; must it be a permanent place or must it be a place that can be set aside for a specific period where issues are being discussed? Let us hear from the Attorney-General.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, you recall as well as I do that there was a statutory instrument, which was brought here, debated but not passed. It was deferred for further consultations. So, that arrangement is purely administrative and the legal framework enabling that arrangement is in place, and that is Section 35 of the Police Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIPERSON: That is what I thought. The provision is there in the law, that is what I remembered, but the issue is that it was not a permanent situation but it could be ordered periodically that different places at different times are allowed for those functions. 

Honourable members, there is the actual existing subclause (2) as modified and subclause (3), which by re-numbering will be (1) and (2) as proposed by the committee. Can we deal with those first?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, it is true, I have those two, but first of all the committee had said that sub clause (2) was fertile ground for discrimination. I want them to explain to us when it became non-discriminatory. Initially, it was agreed that it discriminates but now they are saying it does not discriminate. 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The discrimination the Leader of the Opposition is talking about means that this must be read as a whole with the sub clauses (3) and (4) that we have added. The two subclauses are meant to cure what the honourable member is raising. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we dealt with this before. This matter was sent back and the minister and the committee met on these issues and they came back with the later position. So, should we go back to the original position? If we have issues with what they have brought now, that would be ground for discussion but if you do not have any issues with this, then we can move forward. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have issues. Sub clause (2) says, “a public meeting does not include the following…” and we do not think it is exhaustive. Sub clause (3) refers to a person’s ordinary place of work. If the DP President comes to Budadiri, for example, it is not his ordinary place of work, but he is the DP President. Mr Chairman, the moment I register my company, whether public or private, I am free to hold meetings. A trade union is known under the law and these ones are not necessary. 

Once you make exceptions yet they are covered under the law - Once a company is registered, it should have its ordinary place of work and it should operate in a specific area. A trade union is well known – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, there is an extension on (3) proposed by the committee. There is a new (3) there. Have you looked at it?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have seen the new (3); it states, “For avoidance of doubt, a meeting convened by a group, body or leader in a group-
(a) at the ordinary place of business of that body…” That is their office. 
“(b) any other place which is not a public place.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, when it becomes a public place that is when you require notification to be given. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Let me give an example. There may be a private school with a very big compound. (Interjections) I wish you could listen. We may have a private school with a big compound; is there any problem if we hold a meeting there? I may invite 1000 people and we sit down; is that a public meeting?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I would like to give information to the Leader of the Opposition on the matter regarding a private school. The private bit of the school is the management and ownership. It is not government premises; it is owned and managed by private individuals but dealing with the public. They deal with children and parents who are members of the public. So, you cannot claim that the school is a private premise. Its privacy is in management and ownership. 

Indeed, if it is misused, it can end up injurious to the neighbours. So, Government should take interest in making sure that whatever happens at that private school is orderly in order to save the environment. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal of the committee is that we retain (2) in the clause with those adjustments, the heading and the other parts and then have the new inclusion of (3). In other words, the amendment in sub clause (2) is only in relation to the deletion of “Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act”. So, it will be, “A public meeting does not include…” I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The next amendment proposed by the committee is inclusion of (3), which will become (2): “For the avoidance of doubt, a meeting convened by a group, body or leader in a group or body at the ordinary place...or any other place which is not a public place in the course of lawful business of the group, body or leader is not a public meeting under this section, unless that meeting spills over into a public place”. I put the question to that. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have listened to the minister for fish. (Laughter) She said a private school can become public. I may have a school or a hotel on ten acres and I may hold a meeting there and it is a private place; how does it become a public place? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If it is a private place, it cannot be a public place. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Then let me move an amendment. We have referred to someone’s ordinary place of business; I want to add (c) to say, “This does not affect Members of Parliament, public rallies for political organisations…” -(Interjections)– Yes, because a political organisation is registered and catered for in the law. So if it is holding a lawful meeting, say a political rally, it should be allowed. So, I want to add –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But why are you going into that? The definition says, “...convened by a group, body or leader in a group or a body”. Doesn’t that capture political parties? Isn’t the political party a registered body? 

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: Mr Chairman, I am very reluctant about this clause and I think it is dangerous. I need clarification on what this clause, ordinarily, is saying on the question of a leader. I am a Member of Parliament for my constituency, Butambala, so what is my ordinary place of business in my constituency? It is the whole of that constituency. (Interjections) I am moving slowly. It is the whole of the constituency. 

Now, you come to “any other place which is not a public place”. When I am in my constituency, in any other place which is not a public place, it means my office in the constituency. Until that meeting spills over to the public, that is when I need to notify. That means by this very clause, people are saying if I am Member of Parliament for Butambala, the only place I can go to and not notify the Police is my office. (Interjections) Yes, it is my office in Butambala. This is what we are saying essentially. I beg to understand, but it is plain English and common understanding. I would have used a different word if I was not in Parliament. 

My understanding is that you are restricting me to my constituency. My reading of this, and this is in plain English, is that my ordinary place of work as a Member of Parliament is Butambala, my constituency, and that place which is not a public place that you are talking about in my constituency is my office that I operate from as a Member of Parliament. You are even saying that if I had a meeting in my office and it spilled over to the veranda - (Interjections) - to the road, to a public place, I would need to get notification. I know where my office in Butambala is. It is near a road. So, if I had my agents – (Mr Baka Mugabi rose_) Hold on with your information; I will give way. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, what the courts would also use to interpret in case this matter went up to them would be the spirit of what we wanted to pass as Parliament. Did we, in saying “(a) the ordinary place of business of that body, group or leader” - I am a Member of Parliament for Omolo County; the entire Omolo County from within its borders is my place of business. The (b) is for another category. It is for another place; it is not about (a). That is simple interpretation. I qualify under (a), so I do not have to qualify under (b). 

Under (b), it would now mean if I cross over to another place which is not my ordinary place of business and I am going to be involved and it spills over to a public place, then I would need to give notice. But (a) covers me as a Member of Parliament because under (a), it refers to the ordinary place of business of that body, group or leader. I am a leader and my ordinary place of business is Omolo County; full stop. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, your understanding of this proposal is as good as mine. Suffice it to say that if there is a spillover, which is spontaneous, that also can be regulated and understood within the next proposal which we shall be discussing later in clause 9. Every situation is taken care of in its own peculiar circumstances.

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, I want clarity on your interpretation. Is it possible for me to get clarification? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: On what I have said? 

MS AMONGI: On the other interpretation of the whole of this proposed clause, and if the Attorney-General could also clarify, better. Can I ask? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The Attorney-General? 

MS AMONGI: Yes, from the Attorney-General. In respect to the interpretation by the Chair, there are operational words in this sub-clause, which opens by saying, “For the avoidance of doubt, a meeting convened by a group, body or leader in a group or body at the ordinary place of business of that body, group or leader or any other place which is not a public place...” 

As a paralegal, my interpretation of (3) is that I am being told as a leader because it is a group, body, or leader - As a leader, both (a) and (b) would be a responsibility and would affect me. However, from the Rt Hon. Chair’s interpretation, I would only be concerned with (a) as a Member of Parliament for Oyam South. So, even if my meeting spills over to a public place as a Member of Parliament, it will not be a problem. Can you clearly, Attorney-General, interpret that for me so that I am convinced beyond reasonable doubt on this particular issue.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, I am the one who made that statement. The operating word after paragraph (a) is “or” not “and”. That means the two are independent. If it was “and” instead of “or” it would mean both would apply at the same time. It is simple interpretation. It is “or” and so, it means if this does not apply to them, the other one would be the next scenario, not both. That would be the alternative. If it was “and”, then that interpretation, which is being raised by the honourable member, would hold.

MR ANYWARACH: Honourable Chair, thank you very much for that clarification. It is very clear. Our only fear is maybe we may need to define “ordinary place of business” in the definition clause. It should relate to the jurisdiction of the elected leaders beginning with Members of Parliament, to district councillors, district LCV chairpersons, up to even sub-county councillors and LCIII chairpersons. 

That will save us because by the time you run to court for interpretation, your business would have already been interfered with. You could even already be in the coolers on the pretext that you were holding illegal meetings. I may say, “No, it is my ordinary place of business” but a police officer will say, “No, it should be your office.” We are saying it should be the whole jurisdiction - where my jurisdiction starts and stops. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We have not handled the definition clause. Can you draft a definition for that word and when we come there, you insert it there? So, can I put a question to this one?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we have looked at elected leaders and I am getting that clearly. Of course, there is also the civil society, there are leaders of a party; where is their ordinary place of work? Can you say that for UPC, their ordinary place of work is Uganda House or the entire country? We need to define that clearly. I want to understand. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If you are the elected president or chairman of an organisation called NRM, what is your jurisdiction? What would be your area of operation? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So, the whole of Uganda? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes.

MR NADALA-MAFABI: So, now that means if he comes to Budadiri West, that is the – (Interjections)-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to this amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is sub-clause (4), which says, “For the purpose of sub-section (2), a public body includes Government or any department of Government, a local government, a body established by the Constitution or an Act of Parliament, a registered political party or political organisation or a registered trade union.” I put the question to that. It is clearer than the other one.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, civil society is also a public organisation and they should also be added here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is registered under an Act of Parliament, the NGO Act.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have something under (2) (b).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Do not take us back, please.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I know we have passed it but it is talking about registered organisations. I am sure local government is a registered organisation –(Interjections)- Yes! Unfortunately, you are not moving with the Bill. Get the Bill and move to page 6. Hon. Byandala, you do not have it. The Bill says in (2) (b), “a meeting of members of any registered organisation...” “Any registered organisation” means that you have catered for all; so, what are you trying to cure with this? I want to understand what you want to cure with this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: For the avoidance of doubt again. Please, I think it clearly clarifies this.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If you are saying it is for the avoidance of doubt, under (b) any registered organisation has been taken care of-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question on (4), which now becomes (3).

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We are proposing a number of amendments in clause 7. In sub clause (1), we are proposing an amendment to substitute the words, “at least seven days” appearing in lines three and four with the words, “at least four days”. 

The justification is that there is need for the Police to make necessary arrangements to render sufficient security for the participants of the meetings. The duration is also necessary for the Police to inform the general public who may be within the neighbouring areas of the meeting. I will conclude and then the honourable members may propose amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is it on page 21 of the report?

MR TASHOBYA: I am on page 21, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. There is a bigger initial report of the committee, which has amendments. It is dated March 2012 and the chairman is on page 21 of that report.

MR TASHOBYA: Much obliged, Mr Chairman. (Mr Muwanga-Kivumbi rose_) May I finish the proposed amendments and then you can come in, honourable colleague? In clause 7(2) (b), we propose -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Maybe we should deal with that first before we overload it. You have proposed an amendment on clause 7(1) that substitutes the words, “at least seven days” appearing on lines three and four with the words, “at least four days”. Can we resolve that one so that we are not overloaded? Let us hear from the minister.

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Chairman and honourable members, I would like to propose five days as a compromise. My justification is that both the organisers and the Police need time to mobilise personnel and resources to facilitate the provision of security both to the participants and to members of the general public. So, we need at least five days for both of us to organise. That is my specific proposal, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, it was seven days in the Bill, the committee proposes four days and now the minister has proposed five days. I am processing it so that we know where we are now. There is now no seven days; it is withdrawn by the minister who had proposed the Bill. So, now we have five and four days.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Chairman, I propose two days because we have had situations where people need to demonstrate immediately. There is an example of when medical people in Mityana Hospital caused the unnecessary death of a certain lady. That happened in the evening and in the morning people demonstrated. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That would be spontaneous, I think.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: But they will still need to ask for permission to demonstrate the following morning. So, I think that we should give two days as these are sufficient. The Police are very efficient when responding to what has happened; why are they so inefficient to respond to what is planned?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, certainly you are not going to make another proposal of one day now. Those are the three prepositions. Are there any more days?

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Just like he has said that the Police are very fast in their reaction when things are getting out of hand, it is my opinion that one day is enough.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, there is one day, two days, four days and five days.

MRS OSEGGE: May I justify one day, Mr Chairman. My experience is actually of about 30 minutes and the Police were able to mobilise a whole truck of policemen without notification, just because the RDCs are misusing their positions. However, what I want to contribute here is that we are getting into a period of campaigns and this is going to affect you. If we are not thinking about that, please think about it now. You may need to hold a meeting, not spontaneously, and you may not have as much time to inform the Police. So, you need to think about it before you make a decision. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there is one day, two days, four days and five days. I think we just need to take a decision on this because no amount of justification – 

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: Mr Chairman, among the proposals I had formally moved, I had proposed to redraft this to say, “An organiser may give notice to the officer in charge of the intention to hold a public meeting.” I am very selective with words. I am avoiding the word “shall” for flexibility.

Just two weeks ago, for all intents and purposes I had a big meeting in my constituency. There is a proposed Bill here to ban miraa growing and my constituents called me abruptly and said they wanted me to go and address them. For all purposes, I never even informed the Police and I simply went and had a meeting with my voters in a public place. However, the following week, I had a rally and I informed the Police because I needed to, in order to be sure of security. Even the reading in the other law was not “shall” but “may”. 

For the number of days, Members are suggesting two or three days but in my short lifespan of activism, I have had a scenario where an event occurs in the morning – There was a time when Dr Ssemogerere won a court case in the referendum ruling by the Constitutional Court and in the evening, he asked us to go to Nakivubo Blue Primary School and celebrate. We decided to notify the Police; we went to the CPS at 10 o’clock and told them that at 2 o’clock we would have a gathering at Nakivubo Blue Primary School and we had it successfully.

Mr Chairman, we are complicating issues by suggesting, for example, three days. When you win an election in a sweet way like I did and the announcement is made at midday, in case you decide to celebrate at 4 o’clock, according to this law requiring several days’ notice means you cannot have the party. So, my humble appeal is that we should not make a law that is very rigid as though this country is devoid of reasonable people.

MR BYANDALA: Honourable colleagues, you should understand that there are always general and particular issues. We should be here legislating for the general. So, what we need here is to say five days but make a provision for Police to reduce the time period to cater for those particular situations like hon. Muwanga is talking about. We cannot go on looking for the extreme cases; we must get the general and then create exemptions.

MR PETER OGWANG: Mr Chairman, I have been listening to the debate but I have a question: in whose interest are the Police working? I thought they were working in the public’s interest. If that is so, why don’t we have a win-win situation? My proposal would be three days so that we have a situation where the Police come in handy to help. What if the situation explodes, what happens? So, for me, it is not possible to have one day’s notice. Thank you.

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We also have to talk through the experiences we have gathered along the way. Sometimes it is not only about success but it is also about frustration or disappointment. In that case, you may not need three days but you just need hours. So, if we tie ourselves, tomorrow you will also be part of it. We really need our freedom. We do not need to be tied. So, the best thing to do is to redraft the clause the way the honourable member has proposed. Otherwise, I could go for one day but even one day is too much for some of us. Thank you.

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Chairman, there could be notifications for several meetings simultaneously. We all know that the numbers of the Police are inadequate; we are stretched and yet we will not only be attending to public meetings because there are other responsibilities. So, the reason we are requesting for five days is to help us organise and be able to meet the demands of a public meeting. Please, understand us in that context.

DR MUTENDE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. My colleagues have partly touched on this issue but I would like to particularly refer to Members who have just been on Floor. We are soon heading to the campaign period and in regard to women representatives, if we are talking about having multiple meetings within a district there will be very many campaign meetings going on. So, how will Police be able to handle all those at very short notice? I think it is in your best interest that the Police be given adequate time to organise given the resource constraints. That will enable them to schedule all of you or all of us. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, when you bring in the elections, it changes the game. We all know - those of us who have participated in them – that you sit together as candidates and agree on a schedule, that is, on who will be where and at what time. That information is then given to the Police within the framework of that law. So, please, talk about other situations and not the campaign meetings that are officially gazetted.

MRS OSEGGE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am seeking guidance because I am wondering why the Minister is talking about the Police mobilising resources in order to do their work. In order for a policeman to be able to maintain law and order at a meeting, what kind of resources does he need apart from his presence and probably – (Mr Wangolo rose_) - You are an honourable member; can you please, sit down because I am seeking guidance from the Chairman. (Interjections) I do not want your information. Thank you.

Mr Chairman, I am actually lost because the resources I usually see with policemen when it comes to processions and demonstrations are tear gas canisters and those trucks. Do you really need those for a peaceful public meeting? You just need one police officer and that would suffice. I do not understand, unless there is a sinister motive behind this.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Chairman, the proposals are five, four, three and two days. However, from the practical experience, you actually do not need police presence at every public meeting. During campaigns, we have tens of thousands of meetings simultaneously taking place and the Police are not present at all of them. I do not know whether that will be covered in a different law. 

Also, from a practical point of view, there are issues that emerge that ordinarily may not call for spontaneous response, but they need quick action. Assuming they have killed someone and you want to demonstrate against a group, you cannot postpone that demonstration until you notify the Police in two or three days. It does not have to be spontaneous. They may kill someone in the morning and the following day, you want to demonstrate or even at lunch time. 

From my experience, I have written several notices to the Police and interestingly, when you do not write to them a notice that is when they come quickly. But once you write to them, they tell you we are very busy, we are stretched and all that. If you do not write to them a notice, before you leave home they are already at the gate. The last rally I held in Kireka, they came and closed my gate. I had not notified them that I would hold a rally at 2 o’clock. 

I think we should not give excuses. If the intention is to facilitate Ugandans to enjoy their freedom, the issues of time do not arise. We have beefed up the Police; there was a time when the Police were less than 20,000 but they are now more than 50,000 with vehicles, a motorcycle at almost every police station including rural ones. (Interruption) 

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. I think there is a wrong assumption that people can only demonstrate against what has already been done. At times, people can also demonstrate against what is about to be done. If somebody is going to be hanged tomorrow at 9.00 a.m. and it is already 6 o’clock and we want to stop it by demonstrating, you cannot wait for days. At times, we demonstrate to stop what is about to be done. I actually propose -   

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, you rose on information and now you are proposing; proposing means you are now debating.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: My humble submission is that we remove the time factor completely from this clause because I have seen the Police reacting within one hour. Why give days? Assuming they are about to assassinate hon. Amama Mbabazi and I want to demonstrate immediately – (Laughter) – why does the Prime Minister want me to give notice to the Police first? I would like to take action and go to the street immediately before they assassinate him. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman and honourable members, this is a matter we have visited over and over again. It is obvious that debate is on how much time should be given and there are many proposals that have come on the Floor. Mr Chairman, I think we have given it sufficient debate and, therefore, I rise to move a motion that the question be put. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there are five proposals on the number of days and we are debating those days. There are five days, four days, three days, two days, one day and no requirement for days. So, there are actually six proposals. How do we process the voting? 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have looked through the Chamber and I can see that the quorum is not realised. (Interjections) The decision we are about to take is very important and in the interest of all Ugandans. It is very important even for the Parliament that will come after the Ninth Parliament. I want us to ask ourselves whether it is procedurally right for us to make critical decisions on an important Bill when we are not properly constituted. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, certainly, it would be a complete waste of time to vote on numbers six times; can we move and come to some reasonable arrangement. There is zero, there is five, there is three. 

MS AOL: Mr Chairman, while the honourable minister complained about the number of police officers in the country, I would like to disagree with him. For us here – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable Member for Gulu, I am talking about moving from those six –

MS AOL: We should compromise and stick to one day and we should also use “may” instead of “shall” so that in case of something, which is very urgent, you do not need to forego that day. I know of a situation where we were stopped from holding a meeting because they still wanted us to communicate up to headquarters; that is wrong. It is actually oppressing people. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The honourable member for Gulu has proposed one day as a compromise. In other words, now there is zero days - 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, when you look at clause 6, which we have just passed, it takes care of Members of Parliament because they can hold a meeting any time without the Police. However, the one we are looking at is for ex officio Members like hon. Mutende. If he goes to Mbale, he will need permission because he is not an MP; he is an ex officio Member. His ordinary place of work is here at Parliament and he has no office in Mbale. (Interjections) We want to help them. So, Mr Chairman, this law which we are making is to help such people and they should be careful when passing it. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I want to inform my brother that hon. James Mutende is the official flag bearer of the National Resistance Movement for the Municipality of Mbale. As such, he is clearly a qualified leader in terms of the clause that we passed. So, please be informed. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You see, I like my brother hon. Amama Mbabazi. He likes making people happy. A flag bearer is for only a specific period and once the elections are over –(Laughter)– it is finished by the way. Do not please this gentleman in vain, because when we get him in Mbale holding a meeting, we shall ask him for a letter. So, in that spirit and given the circumstances, one day is good enough to inform the Police. 

I have known of people who want to hold meetings and they inform the Police but the Police say, “We do not have manpower; you go ahead.” On the other hand, if they do not inform the Police before they start, the lorries will already be there. So, in that regard, as a compromise between zero and whatever, one day is basically enough, Mr Chairman.

MR ASUMAN KIYINGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The question before us is: Which of the proposals do we vote on? We have a committee report and the committee members for sure took their time to listen to the proposals, digested them, and they have come with a distilled recommendation of four days. I would like to move, Mr Chairman, that you put the question that we vote on the recommendation of the committee. 

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, I want to remind my honourable colleague that he is a senior person in Government and he knows that many governments have come and many governments have gone, and that the government that he is in is not going to be the last government. So, why is he in a rush to say that Members should not make their contributions? 

MR AYOO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We have to take a decision that is a little bit practical. I would think that we go with three days. Sometimes, you give somebody one day, people act emotionally and at the end of the day, you realise you need time to think about what you are about to do. Police would need to mobilise fuel and manpower and designate who is supposed to do what. In this regulation, we are talking about meetings and demonstrations where there are going to be riots where there is a gathering. So, leave room for people to have some time to plan things and say, “Yes, this is what we intend to do.” When the law says one day or 30 minutes, it is as if you just want to act emotionally and you think that is how the world will go. 

I will propose here that we go by three days, which gives the Police and the organisers of whatever kind of demonstration or meeting enough time. This is not a general situation; there are situations where you will need the Police and there are situations where you do not need them. There are also situations where you will go to every sub-county and find that the Police are already there to assist you to ensure that there is peace and security in your meetings, unless we are talking about other intentions that are not for the good of this country. So, we think three days are enough.

MR YAGUMA: Mr Chairman, this issue under consideration was considered by our committee, which is a committee of Parliament made up of the ruling party and the Opposition. Why don’t we take four days?

MR BABA: Mr Chairman, at this stage I would like to concede to the committee’s recommendation of four days.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. One thing I want to let Members understand is that we should not think about the number of days with a preconceived mind that some people will be organising meetings for bad intentions. It is like everybody thinks maybe these people will have public assemblies to do bad things and therefore the Police must be there to ensure the bad things are not done.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, they have just said that for those bad ones, they show up even without notice.          

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: For the bad ones, actually, they even read your mind that, “I think the honourable member is about to think.” What I am saying is that one day - (Interruption) 

MR ASUMAN KIYINGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. There was a motion moved that the question be put. My colleague from the other side is introducing debate on the issues over which the question should be put. I thought the question to be determined is what we should vote on, and the overwhelming position that has come from this side is that we vote on the recommendation of the committee -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable, can you ascertain for me whether there are enough members to take a decision of this nature?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, you have noticed that the people who do not attend Parliament, those who come once, are the ones who mess us up every now and again. We were moving very well and now these voting machines here are messing us up.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Mr Chairman, I thought we were trying to see how we can solve the issue of quorum by continuing to reach a compromised situation. Sometimes, the other side is full and they have always been proud of the numbers but when we are talking about an important matter, Members are not in the House. You can now see, Mr Chairman, how they begin to come to fill the chairs to just say, “Yes”. As the ones coming in to say, “yes” come in, I would imagine they should give us time and they come in quietly so that we can continue with debate. Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, it is a well known and respected rule of this House that we should respect each other. Is it in order for my good friend, hon. Winifred Kiiza, the Woman MP for Kasese District, to suggest that the Members of this august House who have been following the debate using modern methods –(Laughter) This is the age of technology; you do not have to have physical, visible presence for you to follow what is happening. So, is she in order to suggest that these honourable members whom she was demanding to see, who have now come in, have not been following? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the people who constitute a sitting of the House are the people the Speaker can see. (Applause) The Speaker has eyes within the Chamber of this House. The Speaker does not have eyes beyond the four walls of this House. So, the Speaker is very reluctant to speak in the defence of Members who were not in the Chamber.
 
However that said, honourable members, courtesy is the cardinal rule of proceedings in the House. Language choice must not only reflect that but it must also be the rule itself. You may not be able to respect other people but at least show that you respect yourself by respecting others. This is because by making bad references to others, you are disrespecting even yourself. We have some rules that govern here; so, let us be respectful. Mutual respect and tolerance will take us a long way.

MRS WINIFRED KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Chairman, for your wise ruling. I wish to say that I will continue from where I had ended when my dear friend, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, tried to put in an point of order. 

The meetings we are intending to hold or the public intends to hold should not be preconceived as bad meetings. That is why some of us are hesitant to say that we should apply the words “shall notify the Police” but possibly say, “may notify the Police” and that, therefore, one day is good enough for members of the public to notify the Police of their intended meetings.

I was of the view that if the Police has always been available when a member has not even communicated that he or she intended to hold a meeting but they read the mind of the member and said, “I think this member is about to hold a meeting”, then one day is sufficient enough to let the Police be available and to let the organisers of the public meeting be helped. I still want to suggest, Mr Chairman, that we go by one day. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the rule of detection and prevention says if somebody is committing, has committed or is about to commit, you draw the attention of the law enforcement people in all these three situations. You have committed, you are committing or you are about to commit; those are things that go in all those – 

I think the issue is that the committee has come down to four days, the minister has come down to four days, the honourable members from this side, many of them, have said one day. So, we have- (Mr Ayena rose_) - Let me first give the situation then I will take your guidance. So, we have two situations now, one day and four days.

MR AYENA: I rise on a point of guidance. I am a member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Mr Chairman, you are a very wise man and in your wisdom when people appeared to be in a combative mood, you came with a middle position and wisely guided that a middle ground should be found between the two positions. If you maintain the position of four and one, I do not think you have come to a middle position. 

My proposal, for purposes of guidance, is that you stick to your guidance and wise counsel, that combative moods in this kind of situation will not help anybody. In any case, I do not know who will be the first victim of this law, whether it is from this side or from the other side. So, I think your line of persuasive approach to this matter, that we drop a combative approach, is good because it is for all of us. So, can you still insist on that and persuade us further? I do not want to fight with the gentlemen and ladies on that side and I do not expect a fight from them because it is for all of us.

So, maybe, reluctantly, and at the risk of being misunderstood by my chairman, but he is looking at me with a certain amount of approval, I would move in the middle and say we take at least two days. (Mrs Alum rose_)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, honourable members, the Chairperson or the Speaker also tries to balance this debate. Now, Oyam has just spoken, another Oyam is there and another Oyam is there. Okay, let me have the Oyam who has not yet contributed, hon. Alum.

MRS ALUM: Thank you, Mr Chairman, for giving me this opportunity. The opportunity I have been seeking is not far from that of my colleague from Oyam North. Actually, I have been moving from the five that the honourable minister proposed, then to four that the committee chairperson proposed, then zero and one. When you count from zero, one, you come to two; and from five, four, still you come to two. (Laughter) My proposal is that- 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The honourable member should be reminded that in the numerical numbers, there is also a three somewhere in the middle there. 

Please, honourable members, we have debated this and talked about it; can we come down to middle numbers - seven to three or zero to three - and adopt it.

MRS AOL: Let me give the mark. Thank you, Mr Chairman. Now, we have to go mathematical. From zero we can move two steps up. From four we can also move two steps up-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, it was seven, if you are talking about the original position.

MRS AOL: I think we did not zero down on seven. We zeroed down on four, which the minister conceded to, and here we were on zero. All of us have to move. So we can move two steps up and the minister can also take two steps down so that we get a middle position, that is, two. It is not mechanical; it is mathematical, statistical and the medium.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman and colleagues. An aggrieved person is always aggrieved and by the time somebody chooses to demonstrate peacefully against an action, that person has taken a wise decision. If we are to keep this person in the state of being aggrieved for long-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member-

MR SSASAGA: I am coming. Mr Chairman, I am concluding.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You are coming very slowly. (Laughter)

MR SSASAGA: My proposal is that the first day can be the day for preparations, and it is the day when somebody makes a communication. By the second day, I know the Police will be set for the person. After all, they have already set 48 hours as the standard time for somebody to be produced in court. So, I could go by the two days, Mr Chairman and colleagues. Thank you.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. First of all, before I give my view I wish to know from where we are counting these days. It is one thing to submit a letter to the Police and another for the Police to respond. The Police may take three to four days to respond. So, I would like to know. 

Secondly, with all this debate, I think we should come to a compromise of three days so that we have enough time for the Police to prepare as well as avoid prolonging the process. 

The other thing I wish to find out is: where do we capture a situation - I think it has been mentioned by somebody else – where an issue is so urgent that it must be responded to immediately? Where do we cater for this? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal from the senior member of this House is that we settle for three days. In respecting the stature and quality of the Member who has made this suggestion and in the spirit of what we are trying to process, can we agree on three days? (Mr Nzoghu and Ms Osegge rose_) Are you arguing with hon. Baba Diri? No, I think let us conclude this thing one way or the other. Let me have the committee chairperson. 

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, I do appreciate your guidance that we should try as much as possible to compromise. In the spirit of that compromise, we do concede to the three days as proposed. (Applause) (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, let us first finish with this one and then you can raise another matter later. On the number of days, we have spent a lot of time and now have agreed on three days. I think we have all agreed on three days. I now put the question on three days.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, there are other amendments proposed by the committee – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, this is on clause 7(1) but since we have finished with the days, let us deal with the issue of the Inspector-General of Police. (Interjections) I am still on clause 7(1). He has to give a letter to the Inspector-General of Police. Let us be clear on this. Someone is in Karamoja where the Inspector-General is not present and he wants to give the notice – 

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, on the Inspector-General of Police, if you refer to clause 5, it says: “The Inspector-General of Police may delegate his or her powers relating to the conduct of public meetings to an authorised officer.” Honourable colleagues, the phrase “an authorised officer” is also defined in the interpretation clause, which I would not like to go to now. I think the Member now appreciates.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Mr Chairman, this interpretation will still not cure what the Leader of the Opposition is raising because it pre-conditions that the authorisation should be given by the Inspector-General of Police. It means that if a DPC in Oyam District is not authorised, then he or she cannot conduct the function therein. So, why don’t we put it this way: “district police commander or police officer” and remove the word “authorised”. 

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: I would like to inform the honourable member that we can say, “police officer in charge of a police station”. I can imagine that if a local councillor in a given village wants to inform the Police about a given gathering for any purpose, the nearest police station to that person is the police post around there. So, even if we say, “officer in charge of a police station”, the Police have an elaborate communication mechanism and they can accordingly do whatever they want to do. So, my humble request to members is that let us not be rigid because, committee chairperson, we will even raise questions on authorised officers later but for clarity on this one, let us say – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are you giving information or debating?

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you for the information. Mr Chairman, even the way this interpretation is framed, it would mean that even the in-charge of Minakulu Subcounty, for example, if he or she does not get authority from the Inspector-General of Police, he or she would not be authorised to give me permission and yet already in this, the district police commander could also give authority to that officer in charge. 

So, if we were to end at “district police commander” and add what he has said, but in this circumstance, with the chain of command if the district police commander could be authorised to give permission to the in-charge of an area – But I think the way this was constructed was meant to reflect the city atmosphere. In the rural areas, where the structure runs from the district police commander to the lowest unit, it becomes difficult. You would have jumped the district police commander and then gone to the Inspector to give authority outside the listed officer. So, Mr Chairman – (Interruption) 

MR TODWONG: Thank you, Mr Chairman. According to the Police Act, Section 6(3), the Inspector-General of Police may delegate any of his or her functions under this Act - (Interjections) - Please listen - to a senior police officer. I believe a district police commander is a senior police officer in a district. So, I need to inform my colleague that the Inspector-General’s power can always be delegated to other senior police officers. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, we are on 7(1), on the issue of the Inspector-General of Police?

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Chairman, first of all, we had attempted to define what an Inspector-General of Police includes. We agreed to deal with the definition clause later on but the attempt we had made was that the Inspector-General of Police includes an officer authorised by the Inspector-General of Police to act on his or her behalf. 

Honourable members, the Police have a command structure and its services are throughout the country - the DPCs, RPCs and the other various categories of staff. So, they all work under the command of the Inspector-General of Police.  As hon. Todwong has said, once he has delegated his powers, these people are then authorised to receive the notifications. When we come to the definition clause, we intend to propose that the Inspector-General of Police should include – (Interruption) 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. During the campaigns, we went to a place called Nakapiripirit and we wanted to hold a rally right in front of the police station. The DPC told us he did not have authority from the Inspector-General of Police. We had to engage in unnecessary fights because the DPC could not allow us to hold our rally, waiting for powers from the Inspector-General of Police. Do we really need this?

I say this because I have campaigned in my constituency and yet I have never been to the police station. I do not need them because I do not organise riots. I simply meet people and talk to them. 

We seem to have ill motives behind this law. Let us make a law that will propel us as a nation. The problem we have in our country is that the systems under Government have more or less collapsed because we have failed to grant people power at the various levels. Let an OC station have power so that when I want to hold a small meeting in the village and there is a police station, the man has power to authorise an MP to hold his meeting. If he must wait for the IGP, then the system will collapse because you have centralised all the power in State House, the IGP’s office and the army commander. A country should not be run like that. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, “An organiser shall give notice in writing signed by the organiser or his or her agent to the Inspector-General of Police...” This is where the debate is. There was an attempt - I do not know where that attempt is - to define the Inspector-General of the Police. (Interjection) It is in the report of the committee. 

You also have in the definition section a definition of an authorised officer. If you look at “an authorised officer” and look at this particular provision, would you consider looking at “authorised officer” again? Would it fit better than “Inspector-General of Police”? 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, you are right. The problem is, as usual, we will be coming to the interpretation clause afterwards. 

The point which the minister was making is that the Police is a force that is managed on command basis. You cannot have different authorities independent of a single command in the police force or the military. So, I think it would be alright for us to say in 7(1), “the authorised officer”, and when we come to define an authorised officer we clearly do not attempt to break the command of the Police. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I think for the first time, you have said something good – (Laughter) – because if you left it here at this stage, you would be limiting. If you look at page 3, it talks of an Inspector-General of Police, the Commander of Kampala, Regional Police Commanders and other officers. So, I think it is at that time that we can improve it. 

DR EPETAIT: The proposal made by the Prime Minister is welcome because it is broader. However, when you look at the definition of “authorised officer”, it does not take care of the concerns – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, we will deal with that when we come to defining it. 

DR EPETAIT: In addition, in order to capture the spirit of wide coverage, wherever “Inspector-General of Police” appears in the Bill, it would be better to replace it with “authorised officer”. In that way, we will have captured the fact that the Inspector-General of Police can delegate powers to a senior officer. Instead of mentioning the specific rank of the IGP, we put “authorised officer” throughout the Bill. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, there might be instances in the Bill where that has to come from the IGP. So, we cannot just change everything. There might be specific cases where it must be the IGP. If you are talking about the authorised officer, for example, who would do the authorisation? There has to be somebody. So, where it applies, we can change it. Let us deal with it on a case by case basis. 

MR TODWONG: Mr Chairman, I seek guidance because I have really failed to understand what we are seeking to cure. Under the interpretation on page 3 of the Bill, what the Prime Minister referred to, is very clear.  It says, “In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires- 
‘authorised officer’ means the Inspector-General of Police, the Commander of Kampala Metropolitan Police, a Regional Police Commander, a District Police Commander or other police officer authorised by the Inspector-General of Police.” He went ahead to clearly state that. So, I do not know what-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is the point we are on. We are saying we will amend clause 7(1) and in the place of “Inspector-General of Police” we will put “authorised officer”. We will then come and perfect the definition of “authorised officer” when we come to the definitions. I think that is the proposal. 
So, I will put the question that.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We are kind of debating on “authorised officer” but my imagination is that any officer at any rank in the police force - the OC station, DPC, name it - all act and do their job in the name of the Inspector-General of Police. Correct me if I am wrong. So, I do not know what other authorisation we need apart from that which is already established. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: “‘Authorised officer’ for purposes of this law...” That is what the definition is about. It says that in this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, this word will mean this. That is what it is trying to do; it is trying to be specific. So, “authorised officer” will not have the definition that is there now. The definition will now be generated from whatever we would have captured in the rest of the Bill that will inform the final definition of “authorised officer”. That is the position we have agreed on.

MS AOL: It is important that we get this clarification right. Also, the Police should be given the power because tomorrow, you will try to go to maybe an OC in a rural area and he will start fidgeting around, saying he must get authority from up there. That authorisation should be already given by the position of that person instead of trying to fidget around seeking for authority. It happened to us in Gulu when the DPC said, “let me first seek authority and please, it cannot be in two days but in three or four days.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Because this law was not in place.

MS AOL: The law was not in place but it should also be made clear so that tomorrow, we are not put to task.  

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Chairman, we cannot put all administrative measures in the law. Once this law is passed, then it will be incumbent on the Inspector-General of Police to make sure all officers under him are aware that when notifications are issued, they will have to act on his behalf. This will be administrative. We cannot put everything in the law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we dealt with the three days and now the amendment that is proposed on this particular clause is for “authorised officer” to take the place of “Inspector–General of Police”. I put the question to that. Instead of saying that all agents write to the Inspector-General of Police, we now say that they write to the authorised officer and then we come and purify the definition of “authorised officer”.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Chairman, my problem is with the word “authorised”. Once somebody has been given responsibility by appointment, then he is deemed authorised. Once you are in charge of some areas, then you are already authorised because that is your area.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, what should be here? 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: The area officer -(Interjections)- Yes, the officer in charge of that area.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, even at a police station or police post, not all the police officers are authorised to conduct business on behalf of the station or post. That is what you are saying. That person who takes care of the police post is an authorised officer for that responsibility. That is what it is saying. Not every police officer in the police force can do that. So, the one in charge is the authorised one to be in charge of that police station. Please, let us not split the words too much; they will lose meaning. 

I will put the question to that change to put “authorised officer” in the place of “the Inspector-General of Police.” I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The committee proposes an amendment to clause 7(2) (b) to substitute the words, “which shall be between 6.00a.m. and 6.00p.m.” with the words, “provided that political meeting shall not be held beyond 6.00p.m.” The essence of this proposed new sub clause would be the proposed date and time of the meeting – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, it is here. Are you reading from the report?

MR TASHOBYA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You are saying in clause 7(2)(b) substitute the words, “which shall be between 6.00a.m. and 6.00 p.m.” with the words, “provided that political meetings shall not be held beyond 6.00 p.m.” That is what you are proposing.

MR TASHOBYA: Yes, Mr Chairman and we are trying to provide the upper limit beyond which the meeting will not be held.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, first of all, I am surprised that the committee is now bringing another type of meeting. I thought we were talking about public meetings. So, I would propose that we delete the word “political” because we are talking about generally public meetings. Now he is going into specifics of categorising political meetings. 

Two, the 6.00 p.m. seems to be, in my opinion, so early. Should we not say, “not beyond 7.00 p.m.”? This is because ordinarily, by 6.30 p.m. it is still bright and if we limit ourselves to 6.00 p.m., I bet you some people will be clamped down on when a meeting has gone to a quarter past 6.00p.m. If we could talk about “not beyond 7.00 p.m.”, I think it would be reasonable. I beg to propose.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think on the issue of political meeting, the “political” bit should be “public.”

MR TASHOBYA: I concede. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You concede to that. So, it is not a political meeting but a public meeting because that is what we are dealing with. 

The next one is the proposal that instead of 6.00 p.m. it should be 7.00 p.m. Is 7.00 p.m. okay?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Beyond 7.00p.m., it is late. Up to 7.00 p.m. is okay.

MR BABA: Up to 7.00p.m. is okay. It should start after 6.00 a.m. and not go beyond 7.00 p.m. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think that is okay. Honourable chairman, a meeting can start even at midnight-

MR JAMES BABA: Not beyond 6.00 p.m., sorry. (Interjections)- Not beyond 6.00 p.m. That is my proposal, Sir.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Then why have you stood up, honourable minister? We thought you had just said not beyond 7.00 p.m. should be the provision but it should start after 6.00 a.m.

MR BABA: I meant not beyond 6.00 p.m. From 6.00 a.m. to 6.00 p.m.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In other words, you have maintained the position in the Bill?

MR JAMES BABA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, we will just vote on that now. If you are maintaining the position in the Bill, the proposition from the committee is that it should not be held beyond 6.00 p.m. They did not prescribe a starting point, which could be problematic because a meeting can start at 3.00 a.m. I thought that was the point you were making, honourable minister, and I had already respected you for it. 

The actual proposition of the time when a meeting should terminate should be at least 7.00 p.m. not 6.00 p.m. That is the proposition. The minister insists on 6.00 p.m. and he – (Interjections) - Please, let me help so that we can take a decision on this. The minister is still holding on to 6.00 p.m. but the starting time – Honourable chairman, you might need to help us with it.

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, after careful reflection on this matter, I think it is also important that meetings start during day time. So, we propose 7.00 a.m. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposition in the Bill is 6.00 a.m. to 6.00 p.m. I think the initial position of the committee of saying beyond 6.00 p.m. only is now abandoned. So, the chairman has adjusted that position. The position we have now is the position in the Bill, but now there is a proposition that the ending time should be at least 7.00 p.m. I will put the question to that one. 

The meeting shall be between 6.00 a.m. and 6.00 p.m.; that is the proposal from the minister and the committee. The proposal that is coming for amendment is that it should be from 6.00 a.m. to 7.00 p.m. So, the amendment is on 7.00 p.m. I put the question to the 7.00 p.m. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I am happy to propose an amendment, which is a compromise amendment. Mr Chairman, I propose that the meeting begins at 7.00 a.m. and ends at 7.00 p.m. because this is during the day, for obvious reasons. To begin at 6 a.m. –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That means the position of the ending time now being proposed by the Prime Minister is 7.00 p.m. Can we agree on the ending time? I put the question that the ending time for any meeting will be 7.00 p.m.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now the starting time.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to give the Prime Minister information.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, just propose.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: In Bugisu where I come from, by 5.45 a.m. the sun is up.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, this is a rule of general application not Bugisu application.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am trying to explain that for those who are saying 6.00 a.m. is dark, in Bugisu 6.00a.m. is light. (Interjections) Yes, it is a serious matter. Anyway, some of you have not travelled. You better travel and see.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Surely, honourable Leader of the Opposition, really, to start a meeting at 6.00a.m. in the morning! Let us be reasonable. Let us be helpful in this situation. (Mr Wafula Oguttu rose_) Honourable Member for Bukooli, I have not authorised you.

MR AYENA: Mr Chairman, a proposition has been made. You know, as a member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, we consciously considered the time limits between 6.00 a.m. and 6.00 p.m. but it is not all about us as members of the committee. After very serious reflection, - in fact, we were exchanging glances with the chairman and other members of the committee - we conceded on the issue of the ending time of 7.00 p.m., which is more important. So, wouldn’t it be a good idea if we also lose on the other side so that in the spirit of give and take, we go with the starting time of 7.00 a.m. and then we end at 7.00 p.m.? It is give and take.

Mr Chairman, I think we want to believe that we want to get engulfed in the spirit of give and take. When I saw hon. Amama Mbabazi give, I said who are we not to give? (Laughter) We took it; let us give for him to take.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think there are two issues here. One is geographical in nature. What is the length of day or night when the sun is at the Equator? What if it migrates to the latitudes, north and south -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, the issue is whether it is 6.00 p.m. or 7.00 p.m. not the Equator or the Capricorn.

MR ANYWARACH: I am coming to that. Eventually, you realise that when the sun is directly above the Equator, where I come from, Nebbi, by 7.00 p.m. there is still sunlight. Now, when the position changes and maybe it migrates to the north, by 6.00 a.m. it is actually bright in the morning and by the time you are getting to the evening at 6.00 p.m., it is beginning to get dark.

Another issue is that to hold a meeting there must be preparation. If we want a meeting that will be called to order at 7.00 a.m. sharp, it will require that by 6.00 a.m. you begin making arrangements and those arrangements may be made by many people. Therefore, even if we were starting at 7.00 a.m., at least preparation will start at 6.00 a.m. We are safer to say that we start at 6.00 a.m. and end at 7.00 p.m. Thank you very much.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Mr Chairman. First of all, the owner of the Bill, the Ministry for Internal Affairs, is in agreement with the starting time of 6.00 a.m. The only bit that we have effectively amended is the ending time. Even when organising a meeting, the organiser will have to determine the practicality of the timing. I do not think if a meeting would ordinarily start at 10.00 a.m. and go on for 30 minutes, such an organiser would insist on putting it at 6.00 a.m. I do not see the harm. Let us maintain what the Bill had proposed as a starting time of 6.00 a.m. and end at 7.00 p.m. I do not see why we should waste a lot of time. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let me read the position. “The public meeting, which shall be between 6.00 a.m. and 7.00 p.m.…” I will put the question on the amendment to start at 7.00 a.m. but the position in the Bill is 6.00 a.m. So, I am putting the question on the amendment. Are we together? For the end, we have agreed and now I am talking about the starting time of the meeting. I put the question to that –

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: I need some clarification, Mr Chairman. (Interruption) 

MR ASUMAN KIYINGI: Mr Chairman, I heard you say clearly that you are going to put the question on the amendment and then hon. Wafula Oguttu stood up and said, “No, no, no” and took on the microphone. Is he in order to violently oppose the Chairman’s decision?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let me just explain what I had said; maybe it will help me rule on that. The proposed date and time of the public meeting shall be between, the Bill says 6.00 a.m. and now we have agreed on the end time of 7.00 p.m. That one is done. Now, the proposed amendment is that the starting time of the meeting should change to 7.00 a.m. That is where I was going to put the question, on that amendment. Is it clear? [Hon. Members: “Yes.”] If it is clear, then let me put the question.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you, Mr Chairman, for protecting me. (Interjections) I am not wasting time. In the modern world – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now you are.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: No I am not, Mr Chairman. I just need clarification. If hon. Amama Mbabazi is launching his presidential campaign and he wants to reach a maximum number of people, he might call a town hall meeting at 9 O’clock in the evening. The clarification I am seeking is: Where do we provide for him here? (Interjections) It is a public meeting when you are launching a presidential campaign, for goodness sake. It is a public meeting but now you want to maximise the audience by using television. That is where we are now going. Do not be analogue; we are now digital. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What you are raising is a matter we have already decided on. Now, on the starting point of the meeting, they say that the general principle is that the public meeting should be during daylight. That is the framework that has been agreed. What you are proposing is a new situation that can be created as an exception, if you so desire. 

On this, however, the principle was that this meeting should be regulated, one that you are going to ask for permission for. In other words, nobody is going to give you permission for a meeting to be held at night. That is what they are saying. So – (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_) - Let me first deal with this. (Interjections) Let me first finish with this because we agreed on this one. The only disagreement was whether it should be 6.00 a.m. or 7.00 a.m. So, I am going to put the question on the amendment that it should be 7.00 a.m. I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, before we go on maybe – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The committee still has amendments on the same clause.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: On clause 2?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, still on clause 7. Let the committee finish with whatever amendments they have on clause 7 and then I will come to you. (Interjections) No, we are coming back to the whole clause. 

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to seek clarification. In some cultures, there are important public meetings that must take place before sunrise and it depends on the geographical area. Therefore, we do not want to interfere with other cultures.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You mean even those ones should ask for permission from the Police to carry out their rituals? If you have other activities you do at night, you want – (Laughter)

MR OLANYA: What I mean, Mr Chairman, is that in some cultures, important meetings must take place before sunrise. If you put the time to be 7 o’clock, automatically, we shall be interfering with other cultures. So – (Interruption)

MR KYEWALABYE: Thank you, hon. Olanya, for giving way. Mr Chairman, I think we have already seen in this Bill that cultural meetings are not considered to be public meetings. Therefore, if you are holding your cultural meetings, they are not affected by this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In other words, hon. Olanya, you can do whatever you want at night- (Laughter)– whatever meeting – and that would not be part of this Bill. 

MR OLANYA: What I mean, Mr Chairman, is that in some cultures, important decisions need to be made before sunrise and not necessarily on cultural issues. You never know, the decision could be political –(Interjections)- I mean important decisions. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, that does not fall under this Bill (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_) Hon. Mafabi, I am proposing that we finish with this because the committee has a long list and then I will come to your amendment. It does not matter where we start from. (Interjections) Do you want us to finish with sub clause (2) first? Is that the principle? Let us see if we can handle only clause 7 and then we adjourn. 

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Chairman, on clause 7(2), I have an addition, a new (d) to read as follows: “indication of consent of the owner of the premises”. That is the proposal I want to add, so that the owner is aware of such a meeting in his premises.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What was the amendment, again?

MR JAMES BABA: To add a new (d) to read, “indication of consent of the owner of the premises.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment by the minister that evidence of the consent of the owner of the premises should be part of the application.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to seek guidance – (Mr Onek rose_)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, just hold on; we are still on sub clause (2).

MR ONEK: Mr Chairman, my concern is about the permission from the owner of the premises – (Interjections) – It is passed, but the rights of the owners– 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, this is a moment when a cup of water could be very useful. (Laughter) So, let it be for now, because we have passed it. You will find another way.  

Is there any other amendment? We want to see if we can deal with clause 7.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, they say that you must fill in Form A, but you may go to a police station and they do not have Form A. There must be another mechanism to deal with this. In fact, I have an example. The Regional Police Commander in Mbale attacked my petrol station and robbed us with his colleagues. When I went to report to the Police, they withdrew the counter-book. Even in this case, you can go to a police station and they tell you that they do not have Form A. What is the alternative? So, I propose that we introduce (d) so that in case there is no Form A, a letter written by the person asking will suffice. 

MR ONEK: I think we should just make sure that Form A is available. 

MR OKUPA: There is something in the amendment of the committee that caters for that. Let me read: “The written notice shall be filled in triplicate and upon immediate completion of part 9 thereof, copies shall be given to the applicant and the proprietor of the venue where the public meeting shall be held.” 

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. There is a serious point hon. Baba Diri mentioned when you were giving us the benefit of the three days. She mentioned that we should provide for emergency meetings. In my constituency, for example, farmers who were not paid close to Shs 360 million by a cotton company were going to demonstrate and they were attacking and abusing Government. We were called to action and we ran there. They were in the mood to demonstrate. Right away, we addressed them and explained that it was not on account of Government that that money delayed. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, what amendment are you proposing?

MR ANYWARACH: The amendment is that we should introduce 7(2) as follows: “Notwithstanding 7(1), an organiser may give notice of a public meeting where the matter constituting the reason for the meeting is urgent in nature and is of public interest”. So, if it is within two hours that this matter is going to explode and you are there to provide guidance– Of course, the matter is of public interest but here it is for the general good of everyone, so you do not need the two or three days. It is an exception for the three days.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. As the honourable members have heard, we are first of all providing for spontaneous meetings. However, to respond specifically to the issues raised by the Member, if you are talking about urgent meetings that is introducing subjectivity on what would constitute an urgent matter. So, I would rather that we take your concerns under the issue of spontaneous meetings. Remember, the backbone of the Bill is to protect the people, to make arrangements for the people you are going to meet against those other people who may not be interested in that meeting. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, if you want to create an extension, it could be under the spontaneous meetings that may not require notice. 

MR KASULE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think the matter we are deciding on is an alternative to Form A, not urgent meetings or otherwise. We are saying, in case there is no form then we should have a written instruction from the Police. That is my proposal. 

MR BAKA MUGABI: I am persuaded by the proposal of hon. Anywarach. (Interjections) Allow me make the point because I need clarification. Hon. Anywarach talked of an urgent meeting, which I think we did not envisage. You said it can be handled under the spontaneous arrangement, but spontaneous is not organised, it just erupts. An urgent meeting, which hon. Anywarach is talking about, is organised and of an emergency nature. It is organised within a space of a day or two days. We need to harmonise that because for spontaneous, it is not organised, yet the emergency meeting is organised by someone within a space of one or two days. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, those are exceptions to what we are dealing with now. So, can we wait for the time when we are dealing with exceptions and deal with them rather than including them now when we are dealing with the core principles of the rule itself? Spontaneous meetings are part of the exceptions, that they may not require notification, then you can make a qualification there for emergency meetings also. That is what the proposal was. 

On Form A, the proposal is that if there is no Form A, you can write to the police officer. Is that the proposal?

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I would like to persuade the Minister for Internal Affairs that there are circumstances where the Police will ordinarily run short of Form A. Even in hospitals sometimes they run short of those prescription forms. I would like to request the minister to accept the proposal of the organiser to notify the Police in writing; in case there is no Form A, they can put in a handwritten notice and that should suffice, because you may not be able to provide it all the time to all stations. 

MR ONEK: Accepted. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, how is it going to be structured? How did you formulate it? Can you state it again?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I was saying that in case there is no Form A- 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What will that be under? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Clause 2(d) because it is dealing with-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Will it be a new sub-clause (d)?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes. In case there is no Form A, a letter will be written by the organisers.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let the chairman help with that. 

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, I am at pains to disagree with the minister because I do not see how you can legislate for failure to provide forms. For lawyers, there are many forms provided for under different laws and I have never witnessed a situation where we legislate and include in a Bill providing for failure to have forms. That is why we have institutions. We have Parliament. If the minister cannot do that, we should be –(Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Can I give you real information?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, you are using the microphone already.

MR TASHOBYA: I do not think it would be the right way to go, that we provide for failure to have forms and we write letters in the law. 

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. At least, the proposal had already been conceded to by the honourable minister. I would like the chairman of the committee to know that we live in Uganda and he knows the situations that exist in Uganda. Sometimes, we release funds to such ministries very late and also to take them down to the district is not easy. Please, accept that there are certain situations when the Police will not have Form A. On a number of occasions, we have children who are defiled and - (interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Chairman, this is a national Parliament doing the best for this country and setting standards. Is it in order for us to pass a law that condones a weakness in the formality of the Police procedures? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, what this House passes is the law. So, if it is passed, it is the law. If it is passed as a letter, it is the law. If it is passed as a form, it is the law. Whatever this House passes is the law. The proposal that is before the House is on Form A. There are proposals being made in addition to Form A. If the House passes them, it will be the law; it will be no illegality. The honourable member for Lira was still on the Floor. 

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for your wise ruling. These are situations that exist on the ground and we must accept that as Parliament or as Government, there are certain loopholes that exist. Certain releases are late and they may not be having Form A. So, allow us accept that in case there are no forms, then one can write. All the particulars will be there. The name of the applicant and the occupation, the age and what he or she wishes to do will be included in the writing – (Mr Ayena rose_)- I take the information.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, stop negotiating from there, honourable members. You had finished your contribution; let the minister make his contribution.

MR BABA: Mr Chairman, I can appreciate the concern of the Leader of the Opposition but the chairman of the committee had recommended an additional (3) on page 22 of the report, that the report notice shall be filled in triplicate. That will also assist to follow up on your notification. Now, if you write a letter, how will that help you? - (Interjections) - So, really-
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think it is a good time for us to - (Laughter). I was hoping we were at least going to deal with clause 7 but it looks like we have reached practical limitations where we will not be able to make much progress. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.41 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is for the House to resume and the Committee of the whole House to report thereto. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The Hose resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.42 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Public Order Management Bill, 2011,” and considered and passed clause 6 and clause 7(1) with amendments, and clause 7(2) was not concluded. I beg to report.


MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much for your perseverance and concentration on this important Bill. The House will resume tomorrow but let us start at 2.00 p.m. Today, we would have gone a long way if we did not lose some time at the start. Please, Members, come in time so that we can start business quickly. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 0’clock.

(The House rose at 7.45 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 16 May 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 

