Thursday, 23 May 2013

Parliament met at 2.26 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting this afternoon. Today, depending on how we move, I am almost certain that we will be proroguing to enable you go for a brief recess and prepare for the resumption of Parliament to commence the Third Session of this Ninth Parliament. We have important matters on the business today that have got to be completed, and I will be making necessary modifications to enable us move forward with the matters that are before us. Thank you.

2.28
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you so much, Rt Hon. Speaker. Yesterday in your remarks, you did assure us that at the end of the sitting you would be updating us or giving guidance on how the amnesty issues have been resolved. You promised to offer guidance but because of the time and the way we ended, you either technically, or using your powers, did not. I am anxious because the country is waiting. We have one day to go before it lapses and everyone is worried about what will happen. So, it is my humble prayer that you-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that matter has been resolved. We had a meeting this morning with the Minister of Internal Affairs, the Attorney-General and three officers, including the head of drafting from the Ministry of Justice. I am sure the final text of the instrument has been signed and it will be published in time. So, that matter has been resolved.

2.30
MR MATHIAS BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto South, Masaka): Thank you so much, Rt Hon. Speaker. Yesterday, the Minister of Internal Affairs made a statement on the closure of media houses and you asked him - in fact, the Parliament asked him - to bring the search warrant, which he did not. We thought that today it would be brought but it is not on the Order Paper and Parliament is going to be prorogued. Rt Hon. Speaker, don’t you think- (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. Maybe my colleague had stepped out a bit but the search warrant and other documents were brought here. What has happened is that the same court that had issued the warrant ordered yesterday that the Police should leave immediately because they had overstepped the orders given by court. We went there to see if they had gone but the Police are still there and they said they will not leave. Maybe I will ask the Government to explain what they are still doing at the Monitor premises when the document they were issued by court has expired.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think that is information that can form discussions later. Let us go to the Order Paper now.

LAYING OF PAPERS
TAX EXPENDITURES FOR QUARTER THREE, FINANCIAL YEAR 2012-2013

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to seek your indulgence. These papers are being brought now and at an opportune time during the course of this sitting, I should be able to lay them. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will defer item No.3. Can we handle item No.5?

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I really did not intend to disrupt the flow of proceedings, but I noticed that under agenda item No.3 there are two items. Whereas the minister is not ready, I, the chairperson of COSASE, am ready to lay our paper on the Table. May I proceed to lay it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please call item No. 3(2)

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE SPECIAL AUDIT OF LOANS PORTFOLIO FOR UGANDA DEVELOPMENT BANK, 2013

2.33
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Patrick Amuriat): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Auditor-General on the Special Audit of Loans Portfolio for Uganda Development Bank 2013. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that report of the Auditor-General. Okay, can we now go to the next item?

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER THE SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 1 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/2013

2.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, this House received Supplementary Schedule No.1 for the year 2012/2013. I beg to move that the House resolve itself into a Committee of Supply to consider the supplementary schedule for this financial year.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Minister without Portfolio in charge of Political Mobilisation.  Are you justifying your motion?

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, this House did pass the budget for the financial year 2012/2013 and in the course of implementation of this budget, there was need to raise supplementary funding to address very important expenditures. These expenditures amount to Shs 558 billion. 

The law allows us to request for supplementary funding where the funding appropriated by Parliament is not able to cover all the expenditures. It is in that spirit that Government tabled before this House a request for supplementary funding amounting to Shs 555 billion. This request has gone through the Budget Committee, and the Budget Committee has produced a report, which is ready for this House to consider to enable Government fulfil its mandate of funding the necessary activities. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this request was received by this House and forwarded to the Budget Committee. May I now ask the chairperson to report on this matter. Please, make your presentation within 15 minutes.

2.38
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON THE BUDGET (Mr Remigio Achia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on Budget – copies are being given out – on the Supplementary Schedule No.1 of 2012/2013. 

On 9 April 2013, the Executive presented to this Parliament Supplementary Budget Schedule No.1 of 2012/2013 amounting to Shs 555.78 billion for consideration and approval. The Schedule was referred to our committee for scrutiny and now I beg to report.

The committee consulted a number of people, including the Ministry of Finance officials and technical staff. We also requested chairpersons and members of sector committees, which were indicated in the supplementary request, to go into details of the supplementary request.

The committee addressed itself to four key issues in considering this request: 
    1. To determine whether the supplementary expenditure is in conformity with the law, that is: 

    • if the supplementary expenditure is below the statutory requirement limit of three per cent provided under the Budget Act of 2001; and 
    • whether the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development indicated the impact of the supplementary expenditure on the original financing arrangements and sector work plans as required by Section 16 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003.

2. Whether the Ministry of Finance indicated the sources of funding for the supplementary expenditure;

3. Whether the supplementary expenditure was occasioned by unforeseeable emergencies that the relevant sectors could not capture in the normal budgeting process; 

4. Whether all the deserving emergencies were covered under the supplementary expenditure.

Findings and Recommendations
Under Article 156(2) (a) and (b) of the 1995 Constitution and under Section 16 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003, Government is allowed to lay before Parliament a supplementary budget if the amount of funds appropriated in the budget is found to be insufficient or for a need that arises for expenditure for a purpose for which no funds were appropriated by Parliament.

Section 12(1) of the Budget Act, 2001 stipulates that, “The total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources over and above what is appropriated by Parliament shall not exceed three per cent of the total approved budget for that financial year without prior approval of Parliament.” In addition, Section 12(2) provides that where funds have already been spent, then estimates shall be laid before Parliament within four months after the money is spent. In addition, Section 12(3) provides that any reallocation of funds shall be made in consultation with all the affected ministries.

Lastly, section 16 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003 requires that supplementary expenditures should be accompanied by a statement indicating the impact of the supplementary expenditure and the changes thereon to the original financing requirements at the time of appropriation, and any expected changes to the original statement of outputs and outcomes, or revised work plans.

Observations and Recommendations

The national budget, which culminates into passing the Appropriation Act, is an elaborate process where ordinary and statutory expenditures should easily be captured. Consequently, a supplementary expenditure should be made for activities and programmes that were not foreseen or arose as a matter of emergency. 

The committee noted that there was some consultation between the losing votes and the gaining votes through Cabinet. However, the committee was not satisfied that the Cabinet debate on the supplementary expenditure constituted the consultation between the affected departments and agencies as is required by law. Over the years, the budget committee has recommended again and again that consultations should go beyond the Cabinet to involve technical staff, to be able to establish the impact on work plans and procurement plans for each sector. The committee reiterates its earlier position on this matter. 

The total supplementary expenditure of Shs 555.8 billion is detailed in the table. In this request, 52.5 per cent is for recurrent expenditure, 38.8 per cent for development expenditure and 8.7 per cent for statutory expenditure.

Further Observations
    • The total supplementary expenditure request is 4.84 per cent of the total approved national budget, necessitating that the Executive seeks Parliament approval prior to spending. 

    • Of the total supplementary request, 52.5 per cent is for recurrent expenditure, 38 per cent for development expenditure and 8.7 per cent is for statutory expenditure as detailed above.

Mr Speaker, we also wanted to know from the Ministry the sources of funding for this supplementary expenditure. This supplementary expenditure is going to be financed as follows:

a) 	Government suppressed the expenditures of some of the activities in the budget and caused re-allocations and made a total saving of Shs 313.68 billion.

b) 	Government also issued Treasury Bonds through the Central Bank amounting to Shs 200 billion.

c) 	Issuance of treasury bills plus non-tax revenues and non-resource taxes amounting to Shs 42.10 billion. These are some of the monies which were returned by the ministries, departments and agencies, including local governments. 

Observations and Recommendations

1. 	The committee noted that part of the supplementary expenditure request under Schedule No.1 for this financial year would be funded through budget cuts. This approach severely affects programmes - they lose their money to suppression - and activities that had been earlier approved at the appropriation stage. The list of ministries and departments that were suppressed and the yields realised is attached as Appendix 1. 

2. 	The committee noted that Article 157 of the 1997 Constitution provides for the contingency fund, which has not been operationalized. We are happy that this is one of things in the Public Finance Bill, before us. The committee recommends that the provisions under the contingency fund should be used to fund supplementary expenditure instead of suppressing vulnerable budgets of ministries, departments and agencies. 

3. 	Contracting domestic debt over and above the programmed level in our MTEF raises concerns on the rising domestic debt burden and its implications on the national budget and the private sector. Government should consider alternative sources of financing rather than resorting to the domestic market to finance the budget. This has implications for the jobs in the private sector and this is a very critical issue.

Emergencies under this Supplementary Request

The committee’s attention was drawn to a request for a supplementary amounting to Shs 24.817 billion required by OPM for relocation of people from Mt Elgon region. However, the Ministry of Finance did not include this request in this supplementary due to budget cuts. 

As you are aware, Mr Speaker and Members, there are other emergencies including the one in Kasese and many other parts of the country. The committee recommends that this money be provided in the next supplementary schedule as it is an emergency. 

Spent and Unspent Supplementary Expenditures

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development informed the committee that out of the total supplementary request of Shs 557.78 billion under this Schedule, only Shs 275.44 billion, equivalent to 2.4 per cent of the approved budget, has been spent by Government prior to submission of this Schedule to Parliament, in line with the law. So, Shs 280.24 billion has not been spent yet and requires Parliamentary approval. That is why we are here to consider this request before the end of this financial year. The schedule detailing those specifications of which ministry has received money and those which have not yet received money is attached as Annex 2 to this report.

Observations and Recommendations

The committee observed out that of the spent amount, Shs 1.61 billion was erroneously, allegedly, spent on combating Ebola in Luwero. As we know, Ebola has not been in Luwero recently. The committee recommends that Government should recover this money. 

The other unspent amount included Shs 265 million to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for acaricides, among others. However, the committee observed that these same items were sufficiently budgeted for during this financial year. 

In addition, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries demonstrated poor absorption capacity for released funds during the half-year period of 2012/2013 on this same item that Government is seeking additional funding. Therefore, the committee does not approve the supplementary request for this item. Mr Speaker, in consultation with the Ministry and the Minister, they agreed with the committee that this item be stayed. 

The Effect of Budget Cuts from Our Development Partners on the Budget Implementation for FY 2012/13 

Government is seeking for a supplementary request of Shs 45.6 billion to repay money lost in the OPM fraud. The committee strongly recommends that money lost in the OPM should quickly be recovered from those responsible, and those involved should be prosecuted and face the full wrath of the law.

Justification for the Committee Recommendations under Agriculture and Health Sectors 

The Health Sector 

The Ministry of Health is requesting for an additional Shs 5.3 billion for combating the outbreak of Ebola in the North and Luwero District, and Marburg disease in Kabale, Mbarara and Ibanda districts. However, the committee established that there was no such thing as Ebola in Luwero for which Shs 1.6 billion is supposed to be spent. The committee recommends that this money should not be spent. 

Further, the Ministry of Health received Shs 43 billion for recruitment of health workers at health centres III and IV in various parts of the country. Honourable members shall recall that during the budget process of this financial year, Government provided Shs 6.5 billion for the above recruitment exercise and Government also made a commitment to provide for a balance of Shs 43 billion. We are happy that Government has honoured its request and we recommend that this money be approved. 
Agriculture Sector
The Ministry of Agriculture requested for Shs 13 billion for counterpart funding for on-going development projects. Of this amount, we recommend that Shs 12.7 billion, which is Government counterpart funding to cater for outstanding VAT obligations, be approved but the Shs 265 million be stayed. 

Conclusion

The supplementary request being sought for is Shs 557.78 billion of which Shs 275.44 billion was spent, representing 2.4 per cent of the approved budget, which is within the provisions of the Budget Act, 2001. The balance of Shs 280 billion in annex 2 requires approval of Parliament before it can be disbursed. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee recommends Parliament to approve a total sum of supplementary expenditure request of Shs 563.91 billion - less Shs 265 million - of which Shs 290.22 billion is for recurrent expenditure, Shs 216.2 billion is for development activities, and Shs 48.49 billion is statutory expenditure. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chair, you should have indicated that there is a minority report to this report; in which case, you would have asked the Speaker to call the person with the minority report. It has come to the attention of the House but the usual procedure is that the chair announces.  

It has come to the attention of the Speaker that there is a minority report on the subject. I now ask the member who drafted the minority report to speak to it in the same timeframe, 15 minutes.

2.54
DR MICHEAL LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought that my vice-chairperson was going to make the announcement before you called me, but he has declined to take the prerogative. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now the Speaker has announced it, which is ok.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Mr Speaker, in private discussions this afternoon with my friend, I thought he was inclined to drop the whole thing, but I am happy to receive his minority report.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, proceed. You have 15 minutes. 

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the 9 April 2013, Government presented to Parliament a supplementary budget (Schedule No.1). The rest of the information is as in the introduction of the majority report. The final position of the Budget Committee on the Supplementary Budget, Schedule No.1 was largely to pass this supplementary request and only to reject vote 014 for Ministry of Health towards fighting against Ebola in Luwero, which is not there, and vote 010 –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where are copies of the minority report? 

DR BAYIGGA: They are part of the report. 

Mr Speaker, this is a statement of dissent from the majority report. Under rule 194 of Parliament’s Rules of Procedure, it is stated that, “(1) A member dissenting from the opinion of a majority of a Committee may state in writing the reasons for his or her or their dissent, and the statements of reasons shall be appended to the report of the committee. 

(2) The Member dissenting from the opinion of the majority of the Committee shall be given time to present the minority report at the time of the consideration of the Committee report.” That is the prerogative I am using. 

I will go to part 3 of this minority report, reasons for dissent: 

    1. Legal Limitations of the Supplementary Expenditure and Contravention of the Budget Act Provision 

The request violates the provision of Section 12 of the Budget Act, which stipulates that, “The total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources over and above what is appropriated by Parliament shall not exceed three per cent of the total approved budget for the financial year without prior approval of Parliament.” This supplementary expenditure before Parliament exceeds three per cent of the total approved budget for the financial year 2012/2013 as it stands at 4.84 percent and hence violates the legal provisions that must be observed by Government.  

In addition, supplementary expenditure should be occasioned by unforeseen circumstances. Most of the expenditures in this supplementary are categorically disqualified. 

    2. Unforeseen Circumstances 

The supplementary budget expenses are not occasioned by unforeseen circumstances yet the known emergencies which were approved by Government were not considered in this supplementary. A case in point is the emergency relief for the landslide victims in the Elgon region and the floods victims in Kasese. 

In addition, I wish to draw your attention to the fact that a supplementary request of Shs 24 billion was received by the Ministry of Finance in August 2012 for emergency relief for landslide and floods victims. However, this was ignored in this supplementary schedule under consideration. 

The Budget Committee engaged the Minister of Finance on these issues and sought clarity on why this was not considered. In his response to the committee, hon. Omach informed the committee that due to budget constraints, it was not possible to provide the required funds in 2012/12013 and that this activity may be financed next financial year. This response was unsatisfactory as it is insensitive to the plight of the Ugandans who are dying daily yet most of the other supplementary requests are not for emergency related expenditures. The fact that the supplementary is not prioritising emergencies is not fair and we are not being accountable to the citizens who we claim to represent.

    3. Supplementary Request for Consumer Expenditure 

The minority report is based on the fact that this Supplementary Schedule No.1 is a consumer expenditure budget as opposed to being a development expenditure budget. I wish to bring to your attention that the consumer to development ratio of this supplementary budget stands at 66 to 34 per cent. Hence, it does not address key concerns of taxpayers as it is a consumptive supplementary budget.

    4. Unjustifiable and Exaggerated Figures for State House and the Office of the President 

The Budget Committee did not receive justifiable reasons for the concerns raised above as detailed below - these are the cases in point which we put to members of the committee that oversees these votes and we did not get answers, and I will even lay these reports on the Table: 

    a) Vote 001, the Office of the President
Under this request, Shs 6 billion was sought without submission of the following: procurement plans, work plan, and certification from the chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee. Parliament should take note of the fact that when we appropriate funds, these are based on budgets, work plans and procurement plans which are all submitted at the time of presentation of the ministerial policy statement.

b) 	Vote 002, State House 
A five-year trend analysis of supplementary funding requests by State House indicates that the requests continuously far exceed the amounts appropriated. It is observed that most of these activities are neither emergencies nor unforeseen activities and should always be budgeted for during the budget process. In addition, it is worth noting that such activities are a replica of various ministries that have their separate budgets and mandates; for instance: 

i) 	Under Project 0008, from 161172 to 161178 in this supplementary request No. 1, amounting to Shs 7.11 billion, are neither emergencies nor are they occasioned by unforeseen circumstances that cannot be captured in the 2013/2014 financial year. 

ii) 	State House project under code 161106, – community outreach programme and welfare activities - supplementary request amounting to Shs 49.826 billion for 20 community functions is a matter of serious concern. Using simple mathematics, each community function will cost Shs 2.49 billion on average. This does not include the President’s security because it is separately catered for even in this supplementary being sought.

	The committee did not get justification for this size of expenditure. As Parliament, given the reality of Uganda’s economy and our people’s living realities, our biggest question should be two-fold. Should His Excellency the President spend Shs 2.49 billion, that is Shs 2,490 million, on a single community outreach? How is the balance of any particular community event used? With the Busoga case, for example, where His Excellency the President gave a cash hand-out to the youths of Shs 250 million, how is the outstanding balance of this community outreach function, amounting to Shs 2.240 billion, used?

iii) 	In the same vein, for project code 161103, whose output is to mobilise masses towards poverty reduction, peace and development, a supplementary request amounting to Shs 13.748 billion to host 25 district delegations is equally shocking. Again using simple mathematics, it means that each delegation from these districts will cost Shs 545 million. That is what you get when you divide Shs 13 billion by 25 delegations. We asked questions about the size of the delegations, the targeted population to be hosted by the President wherever it is, and we did not get answers until this report was written. 

iv) 	Further, this minority report is premised on the principle that double budgets on the same output should be rejected for being unreasonable and insensitive, and they cannot be justified by the Ministry of Finance. The committee noticed with concern that this supplementary has double budget entries on the same output and in some areas activities involved were neither listed nor justified. Project 0889, code 161103, whose output is to mobilize masses towards poverty reduction, peace and development, is charged twice - Shs 13.784 Billion under Programme 01 under headquarters, and Shs 2.5 billion under Project 0889, Poverty Alleviation Project under State House.

v) 	In the current financial year, an additional amount of Shs 128.59 billion is required by State House, representing a 219.6 per cent increase of the approved recurrent budget. The reasons to justify this are: money for Prosperity for All programme, travel abroad, inland travels and so on.

Mr Speaker, you will recall that the President once said that prosperity for means NAADS and SACCOs. I did not see a supplementary expenditure for NAADS and SACCOs, which puts that kind of talk into question.

c) 	Suppression of Key Social Service Sector Budgets, especially Health 

Mr Speaker, as the Shadow Minister for Health and member of the health committee of Parliament and a certified health practitioner, I wish to assert my minority report on the premise that the supplementary request is occasioned by suppression of already suppressed sector budgets, especially the healthcare sector. My submissions are based on the following grounds and facts:

i) 	The health committee of Parliament had earlier noted the dire state of health facilities in the countryside, especially in terms of the provision of beds and mattresses, which were found rotten or completely non existent. This is on the backdrop of a plan by National Medical Stores to procure beds and mattresses for all health facilities nationwide. However, funds to enable them do that were not released by Ministry of Finance; instead, the Ministry of Finance relocated these funds without the knowledge and consultation or approval of the National Medical Stores. Indeed, National Medical Stores had contracted suppliers for procurement of hospital beds and mattresses at a cost of Shs 16.8 billion. 

	Mr Speaker and honourable members, as the Shadow Minister for Health, I wish to bring to your attention the fact that patients are now sleeping on cold and dirty floors. As a health committee, we visited Rubare and Kitagata hospitals in Ntungamo and Sheema districts respectively, and Kawolo Hospital in Buikwe, among others. It is beyond belief that this supplementary request does not include the urgently required funds, which the Ministry of Finance reallocated.

ii)	 Furthermore, regional referral hospitals are in a dire state. They cannot function effectively and yet, as we all know, they handle the bulk of patients who, in any case, surpass their capacities as patients do not go to lower health facilities at the district. It is unthinkable that the Ministry of Finance sought to cut budgets for regional referral hospitals as well to finance this supplementary request. 

	This insensitive and unrealistic suppression of the healthcare budget allocation towards the regional referral hospitals questions the Executive’s priorities, political will, responsiveness and commitment towards improved health outcomes –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, just one minute.

DR LULUME BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This supplementary request does not even pass the moral test. For this Government to finance theft, without guarantee of recovery of the funds, is a question that we must ask.

I would like to remind this House that with impunity, Government presented for approval huge amounts of money to return donor funds that were stolen from the Office of the Prime Minister. This amounted to Shs 38 billion from bilateral donors, as you all know, against a backdrop of poor health and education and agricultural problems that we have in this country. If this Government does not have guarantees for recovery of this money, how can we begin to burden the taxpayer to foot the bill for theft, which occurred in the Office of the Prime Minister without guarantees of recovery?

Mr Speaker, let me jump to the Parliamentary Commission. You will all recall that without soliciting, Shs 5 million was credited on every member’s account. Without taking offence, I and 19 other Members of Parliament returned this money, which amounted to Shs 100 million. Passing this supplementary as it is without mathematical consideration would mean that we are passing it with this Shs 100 million included. When we put this issue across, there was no satisfactory response. Mr Speaker, it is the intervention of this Parliament that can provide us with the correct answer.

Let me conclude by saying that the power of appropriation and oversight over the implementation of the budget is under the docket of this Parliament. I wish to say that this minority report recommends as follows: 
1. 	That Parliament rejects this Supplementary Schedule No. 1 on basis of the aforementioned reasons.

2. 	That Government tables a new supplementary schedule that: 
a) 	Captures all the emergencies, relief and other problems that require urgent attention, which Government had approved and those at hand;

b) 	Ensures adherence to the requirements as clearly stipulated. Ministry of Finance should be responsive and follow the procedural, statutory, institutional and consultative requirements that govern supplementary budget requests. These include: presenting sufficient evidence as requested on some votes, consulting the key sectors, presenting work plans and procurement plans along with ministerial policy statements, among others.

3. 	As a matter of urgency and priority, Government should provide funds in the next supplementary request for Kawolo, Kitagata, Rubare hospitals, and Jinja Regional Referral Hospital;

4. 	Government assures Parliament and the country that the Shs 38 billion, which was paid to donors as a result of the theft that occurred in the Office of the Prime Minister, will be recovered from the culpable individuals and political elites; and that in future, such incidences shall not be addressed through the suppression of budgets of the already suppressed sectors such as healthcare.

It is my humble appeal that the House adopts these recommendations laid down in this minority report for the development of this country, to curb corruption, appreciate a pro-people budgeting process, enhance budget discipline and for social accountability. Mr Speaker, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, the Chairman of the Committee and Dr Lulume Bayigga for those contributions to this report. 

Honourable members, the motion is that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider the Supplementary Schedule No.1 for financial year 2012/2013. That is the motion before the House. From the Order Paper, we have finished that time for this item. However, the debate will take 40 minutes and we will have to agree on a timeframe that is friendly to the overall time. So we will be using three minutes each or two? Okay, three minutes.

3.16
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report and at the same time, I would like to thank hon. Lulume for his minority report. Mr Speaker, I say this because when you analyse both reports, they have substance. The issues that are being raised in the minority report are very critical. At the same time, the issues that are coming from the main report also befit the circumstances. So, what is the way forward? What do we need to do?

Mr Speaker, we have had enormous issues with supplementary budgeting. I remember when I first spoke in this Parliament I spoke about the weaknesses brought about by supplementary budgets. So as a way forward, it is time now to consider getting away with supplementary budgets forever and we can achieve this by amending the law. So I pray that in the near future, efforts be made to get away with supplementary budgets and maybe we provide for a contingency fund. If we keep bringing unplanned expenditures to be approved at the last minute by this Parliament, it creates worry about where we shall be taking our country in future. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.18
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and thank you, chairman and the members of the committee, for the report. 

When we look at Article 156 of the Constitution, we find that actually, “supplementary” refers to additional spending over and above what has been budgeted for. I am not quite sure whether this is a supplementary or not because what is happening is that money has been reduced from some votes and is being passed on to others. In other words, we are increasing and reducing at the same time. So, what does this qualify to be? Should we call it a supplementary?

Mr Speaker, we supply money here by the power of the Appropriation Act. I think once we have supplied the money, Government is duty bound to ensure that what has been supplied is spent. An exception may be when there is no money to be spent, but where the money is available Government is bound to spend that money. So, when we look at a situation where Shs 313 billion is actually withheld by Government and it is not spent deliberately and re-channelled to other activities, I wonder whether this is respect for the decisions made by this Parliament.

Mr Speaker, we have been informed that one of the sources of this money - apart from the suppression of expenditure - is what the report calls non-resource taxes. If I am not mistaken, I think the non-resource taxes are monies, which are returned by districts and other departments to the Treasury. We have had many questions surrounding this money. Sentiments abound that this money is actually misused and sometimes shared by those who purport to return it and those who purport to have received it. 

I would like to seek clarification from the chairman on the amount of money that was actually returned from districts and other government departments to the Treasury, so that we can know that this amount of money is well accounted for. I have always been asking where this money is reflected in the budget because when we are giving estimates for the next financial year, we do not see it anywhere in the revenues. Now you are telling us here that part of it is actually what came from the funds, from the unspent amounts of money. So, how much was it? If we could get a clear schedule that this amount of money was returned from these sources, it would help this Parliament- (Member timed out_)

3.22
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (DP, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I stand in support of the minority report but I would wish to, first of all, draw the attention of this House to some important facts.

Mr Speaker, Uganda as it stands today is the most indebted East African country as far as foreign debt is concerned. In fact, Uganda is in debt up to about US$ 5 billion, the highest in the history of this country. I get concerned seeing people setting up programmes with very sweet names given to offices and you would think they are reaping honey from heaven for this country. A programme like community outreach is allocated Shs 49.8 billion in this supplementary. Another one is welfare activities to community, and you wonder how this one is different from community outreach. There is also mobilisation of masses and you would still wonder how this one is also different from the other ones. There is also peace and development, and this one with a vote different from that of agriculture, health and education.

Rt Hon. Speaker, there is a lot of inflation and everybody knows this. We have our employees, teachers and health workers whose salaries reduce with the effects of inflation in the country and the supplementary request does not mention anything about that. Almost every week, we get not less than 10 loan requests even when we are highly indebted, the highest in the region of East Africa and the history of Uganda. For the first time, Uganda is ranked as the first in terms of foreign debt.

I want to emphasise the issue of money swindled in the Office of the Prime Minister- (Member timed out_)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have in my right hand the committee report and in my left hand, our Rules of Procedure. Rule 193(1) says, “A report of a Committee shall be signed and initialled on each page by at least one third of all the members of the Committee and shall be laid on the Table.”

Mr Speaker, I have gone to the page where members signed and there are 13 signatures but when you go through these pages, you can only see five initials; where are the other signatures? Is this report complying with rule 193(1)?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to improve on this aspect because it is really unnecessary for us to get into these things all the time. Committee chairpersons, save the House these unnecessary issues because if you sign the report and fail to initial it, it raises issues. Honourable members, we should also understand the reasons for those rules – why they are cited the way they are cited. It is to avoid forgeries. Honourable member for – wherever you come from – (Laughter) – please, let us observe some order. I am not going to name you for the record. Please let us ensure that the reports that we bring are duly signed by the required number of members, if not all members, and initialled on all the pages. Please, let us make sure that happens. 

That notwithstanding, we have a broad constitutional principle in search for justice and handling of these matters under Article 126(2) (e): “In adjudicating cases of both civil and criminal nature, the court shall, subject to the law, apply the following principles...” - and this applies generally to all those handling issues of procedure – “…(e) substantive justice shall be administered without undue regard to technicalities.” In other words, the principle that is in this Constitution provides that we should not cite technicalities to avert the course of justice. We should use these procedures as handmaids to deliver justice and results. 

Honourable members, it is true that 13 members signed on the signature page and five members initialled the rest of the report. Can the members confirm that they are part of this report so that we can proceed? I see that the chairperson has signed and initialled. Hon. Remigio Achia, have you initialled on all the pages? 

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Mr Speaker, I think this is very important – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you initialled on all the pages?

MR ACHIA: You see, honourable members, I think this is an oversight.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can imagine; he has not initialled on all the pages and yet he is the vice-chairperson of the committee. 

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, I have no problem with your citation of the Constitution in relation to leaving out technicalities in deciding over procedural matters, but this is a unique situation. We are appropriating public funds and when we have signatures on a report with a title, “Signatures of the members of the Budget Committee on the report of the Supplementary Schedule 1 of financial year 2012/2013”, there are two possibilities. Members may have members walked in, signed and left and therefore we have a document that they did not even participate in making or even reading. 

Mr Speaker, from the last two days of the intense debate on the Floor of this House, this House is facing a very serious integrity and credibility problem. Here we are setting precedents with very serious implications. I completely divorce politics from policy. I am very worried that we are here rushing to go – perhaps members are very eager to prorogue - and appropriate public funds as if we are appropriating people’s pocket money. 

Simply standing here and saying, “Yes, I did sign” is not enough. The chairperson should tell us whether we have another report cleverly authored in somebody’s room and members were called over the weekend to sign. I have a problem with the way we are proceeding and I seek your guidance. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Committee vice-chair, can you explain why you did not initial the pages?

MR ACHIA: Mr Speaker, you asked me whether I initialled on all the pages; I did initial on the main report up to the last page but I did not do it on the attachments, the annexes. As you can see, my signature is on every page of this report. However, if you ask me whether I initialled on all of them, because the annex is not – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is okay. That is fine. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, I stand on a point of procedure. Precedents are important things to look at. Since colleagues here are paying much attention to technicalities, I am seeking your procedural guidance. We have reports that we have considered in this House from various committees. We have all been chairpersons, including hon. Tinkasiimire, and we have a clear precedent where we have considered reports that have not necessarily been initialled on each and every page – (Interruption) 

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker – (Interjections) – Can I be protected? I am well aware that my minister, hon. Frank Tumwebaze, whom I expect to do much better, knows that this is the Ninth Parliament; we have progressed from the First Parliament to the Ninth Parliament and there have been improvements along the way. We review our Rules of Procedure for each Parliament and that means we want them to conform to the rules of the Parliament of the time. 

Is the honourable minister in order to refer us to the mistakes of the past, therefore insinuating that this Parliament does not learn, and that we do not deserve to improve on our past mistakes and make things better as we serve this country? Is he in order to be that controversial in this House? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what the rules say is what the rules say. In this case, the rules say the Members who sign a report should initial on the pages and that has not been done and honourable members have made it an issue. I have cited a principle; where there is no contestation as to the genuineness of the report, we should be able to proceed even if these irregularities can be visibly seen. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. The mischief that rule 193(1) was trying to cure was to avoid a situation of members signing the last page and then the chairperson inserts new recommendations, like we witnessed yesterday, in my opinion. So, the purpose of that drafting was to cure that mischief. 

I am aware there is a Supreme Court Case decision which held that Article 126 should not encourage floppy drafting, that you should not make a mistake and then you hide under Article 126. So I would propose that if the Members of the committee are here, which they should be, and in such a number required by the rule on signatures, let them stand up in such a manner that you order and let them express their consent evidenced in writing for the record and then the mischief would ordinarily be cured. However, in the absence of some members, these five signatures initialled on all pages would not give a competent report. If you want to solve the problem, that is the way out, in my opinion. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we find a way forward? 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, in law there is a general rule on the doctrine of non est factum, which governs the territory of documentation. The failure to insert a signature where it was supposed to be inserted is an omission which you cannot debate as a technicality. So under the general rule of non est factum, it is mandatory for those signatures to have been inserted. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, we should not read these rules in isolation. Read rules 181 and 182 – (Interjections) – Just have the courtesy to listen; it is not shouting that will make the point. Rule 182(1): “In Committees, these Rules shall be observed so far as may be applicable.” If I sign the last and I am not able to initial, does that render the committee work null and void? What does this rule intend to cure?

MR ALEX RUHUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a member of the budget committee and one of the signatories who appended a signature on every page. I have a strong observation on the way business is conducted and the way Members take the business of the committee. 

We have seen on several occasions quite a number of Members coming in and out. It is a nightmare to get Members of Parliament to append a signature on a report – (Interjections) – I am giving you the reality. You can go and ask the clerks and the chairpersons. When the report is completed and you want Members of Parliament to read it, internalise it and append a signature, it is a nightmare – (Interruption) 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise with pain to raise a point of order against my good friend from Fort Portal Municipality. He signed on a page where 13 Members have signed and he is misleading the House intentionally that it is a nightmare for the 13 to initial on each page. Is he, therefore, in order, having documentary evidence that Members are readily available to sign, - we have 13 members here and on this page we have four - to mislead the House and what is his motive? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, Members of Parliament who sit in a committee and the chairperson have different experiences about what members do. That is a testimony from the honourable member about his nightmare on getting members who have approved a report to actually sign it. I cannot rule the Member out of order; that is his experience. 

Honourable members, let us get serious about these matters. All these issues are coming up because members take these matters lightly. We should start taking these matters seriously so that we do not get into difficulties like these. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, the people of Uganda voted for all of us here to come here and we know it. Hon. Ruhunda is confirming to us that people signed the last page but very few of them signed the other pages. Does it mean that the chairperson of the budget committee opted to put a paper to be signed and brought these other pages later on? The guidance I want from you is: do we take this report to be authentic or not because it is a problem?

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The guidance I am seeking from you is whether when it comes to signing these reports, the element of quorum at the time of taking a decision remains important. If the element of quorum at the time of a committee taking a decision is important, wouldn’t it therefore be necessary for members to read and sign in the committee meeting. It is a matter of our rules and you can only approve and therefore sign in a meeting. So, if somebody is just going to present the last page for people to sign, what happens to our rule that requires the presence of quorum? Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MS NTABAZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have a humble submission and a way forward. We have all listened to the report and we have seen its importance and urgency. I am of the view that you adjourn, or maybe suspend the House for 15 minutes, and then the members go and sign as we handle other matters on the Order Paper because the Order Paper is too long. The members should come back with the report and then it becomes authentic for this House. That is my proposal.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleague. My worry about that proposal is that it suggests that if these members are not here and therefore we are unable to have the one-third initialling every page, then we will not take a decision on this matter. It is because of that that originally I had intended to rise to support the proposition by the hon. Odonga Otto. That had been my original position. However, in light of what is going on, and to be in absolute accord with what the Speaker stated quoting Article 126(2)(e) of our Constitution- (Interjections) - no it is a point we apply generally. 

Mr Speaker, I rise to move a motion under rule 15 of our Rules of Procedure, which reads as follows: “Any Member may, with the consent of the Speaker, move that any rule be suspended in its application to a particular motion before the House and if the motion is carried, the rule in question shall be suspended.”  They have listed the exceptions in sub-rule (2).

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If I have the same Constitution as that of the Prime Minister, Article 126 of the Constitution, which he has referred you to for direction, first of all is in Chapter Eight of our Constitution, and it is to do with the Judiciary and administration of justice. Clause 2, which he has referred to specifically, reads, “In adjudicating cases of both a civil and criminal nature, the court shall, subject to the law, apply the following principles...” These include the one he is emphasising, that substantive justice be administered without undue regard to technicalities. That is in court, in adjudicating on matters of a civil and criminal nature, and that is legislation. Parliament is covered in a different part of the Constitution. 

Even then, it says, “substantive justice to be done without undue regard”. Due regard is permissible. That is the first leg of my point of order that I rose up to raise. Is he therefore in order, in misleading this House - for us to rely on his seniority which we have relied on substantially in the past - (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, principles are principles. I am the one who brought this from the Chair. I cited the example of the courts where this principle is applied. So, in situations of this nature, nothing stops us from considering the application of such principles where they can help us move forward. That is the spirit in which it was brought. So, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister was simply re-echoing what the Speaker had stated, that that principle could apply in a situation of this nature. 

Should we focus on the rules even where there is no contestation? Should we focus on technicalities of this nature if there are no contestations on a matter? Where there is nobody saying, “no, the report is not genuine” or “this was forged”, should we focus on this? I still remember an incident where a report was presented and there was unanimity and the report was signed when we were all here because when it was brought, the members had not initialled all the pages. The report was signed when we were sitting here. That is the spirit we should adopt in this House if we are to process business; otherwise, we will be completely bogged down. 

What would explain why a member did not sign this report? For some of these things, unless we exercise a bigger purpose, we will not be doing business in this House. Honourable members, we need a certain level of manoeuvrability. The Speaker is also given some discretion. If I see that the issue at hand does not raise any serious matter of conflict, why shouldn’t we process it? That is the only thing I am asking you, honourable members, to do. If we agree, like we have always agreed in the past, to proceed, we will proceed.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your ruling. I have stood to move a motion that in light of the technicalities we are facing now, and in light of the importance for this Parliament to pass this supplementary request in order for activities of Government to continue in this country – (Applause) – in order not to paralyse Government, I move that we suspend rule 193 for this purpose so that we can debate this motion and take a decision on it. I so move.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order, pursuant to the intentions of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in moving a motion that I have not heard of before. We are going to create a precedent that we may never defend constitutionally. This House has never pronounced itself on matters of that kind, on the basis of what is not contained in our Rules of Procedure. So, is it in order for this House, on the basis of a lacuna, to move to pronounce itself on something over which we have never pronounced ourselves on in the past yet we have a guiding set of Rules of Procedure? I would like to hear your ruling before we go in for what he has moved.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the instant case, there is no lacuna in the rules because where there is such gap that is not handled by the rules, under rule 8 the Speaker has the authority to interpret and that interpretation is final on that subject. So, there is no gap in the rules.

On this particular case, however, rule 15 of our Rules of Procedure has been quoted and it is on suspension of rules,  though there are specific rules that you cannot suspend and they are also listed - rules 5, 6, 11, 12, 13 (1) and 88. The motion that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has moved is under rule 15 to suspend the application of rule 193 in respect of this motion. So, there is no violation by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister of any rules, and there is no order violated in this particular instance because the motion he has moved is in consonance with our Rules of Procedure. All we need to do is to decide on that motion when the time comes, if possible. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The motion moved here is that rule 193 be suspended, but the Rules of Procedure are here to guide debate. So, how many more rules will the Rt Hon. Prime Minister move to suspend since even rule 208 has already been violated? 

Mr Speaker, you are aware that rule 208 provides that a report shall be laid together with the minutes but when the chairperson was presenting the report, no minutes were laid. I still wonder how many more motions the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is going to move this evening requesting the House to suspend rule this and the other. I also fear that he might move a motion to suspend the right to keep this Mace as it is here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Our Rules of Procedure, and specifically rule 15, allows for suspension of rules. There is a motion seeking to suspend rule 193 in its application to this particular motion. That motion was moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and seconded by hon. Frank Tumwebaze and hon. Aston Kajara. In the circumstances, I now put the question to the motion on whether we should use rule 15 to suspend rule 193 in its application to the motion on the Floor at the moment. I now put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The effect of this is that rule 193 is suspended in its application. So, can we continue with the debate?

MR SEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, rule 208 requires that a report shall be laid on the Table together with minutes. That requirement is to authenticate reports that are brought before Parliament. This Parliament should not be in a hurry to violate and suspend its own rules. So, are we procedurally right to continue with a report that was not signed and whose minutes were not laid on the Table as the rules require?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman of the committee, you did not seek permission to lay the full text of the report and the accompanying minutes during your presentation.

MR REMEGIO ACHIA: Mr Speaker, while I was finalizing with the main report, you asked me to give way for the minority report to be presented. It was in that process that I was not able to lay the minutes on the Table; otherwise, I have the minutes with me here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How many sets of minutes do you have?

MR REMEGIO ACHIA: We took minutes for about three weeks.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How many sets of minutes are in there?

MR REMEGIO ACHIA: I have minutes for 23 meetings – (Interjections) – Each meeting has to have minutes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How many sets are there?

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: There are 13 sets here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thirteen sets of minutes from 13 meetings? Okay, lay them on the Table. Let the records capture the minutes of the meetings.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee meetings on Supplementary Schedule No.1 for the financial year 2012/2013. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Lay the report as well.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Supplementary Schedule No.1 of 2012/2013.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

DR LULUME BAYIGGA: Rt Hon. Speaker, I made reference to the work plan, which was presented to the budget committee by the Committee on Presidential Affairs. I would like to lay it on the Table. This is the work plan for supplementary funding for financial year 2012/2013.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who authored it?

DR BAYIGGA: It was authored by the honourable Col (Rtd) Mugyenyi, who is the chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is that document? Why don’t you lay your minority report on the Table?

DR BAYIGGA: Rt Hon. Speaker, I made reference to this document, which was presented by the committee in support of this sector when we interfaced with them. I would also like to lay the minority report on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minority report of the honourable member. Honourable members, let us proceed.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of procedure. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister has moved a motion, which means we have to pronounce ourselves in accordance with whether we have quorum. Do we have a quorum in this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, at the time the vote was taken, the House was properly constituted.

4.09
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker and Members. I rise to support the motion and the proposals in the report as presented by the chairperson basing on the following grounds: 

All honourable members and I are beneficiaries because nurses have been recruited and posted to health centres. This was because of that additional funding. So, I beg that we support it because those people who were recruited must get their pay and the health centres also must be raised to a good level.

In addition, I sit on the Committee on East African Community and whenever we go abroad, we find our embassies in a sorry state. Therefore, in order to portray a good image, the arrears should be paid. We should not just look bankrupt wherever we move.

Another observation, Mr Speaker, is on the absorption capacity. On page 9, they say the Ministry of Agriculture had no absorption capacity. I would like to comment on that because many times the Ministry of Finance sends money at awkward times and yet there is need for procurement. We think that the ministry should always send money in time so that this issue of absorption capacity is eliminated.

Lastly, I think that shortfalls should not be recurrent whenever we are asking for supplementaries. Let the budget committee and the ministry ensure that they do what we call budget forecasts, so that we do not come here for supplementaries unless it is necessary. Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker.

DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I am amazed at the priorities in this supplementary request. One is that out of the Shs 555 billion, State House alone will take Shs 128.5 billion, representing about 40 per cent of the supplementary request before us. Computing the amount of Shs 128.5 billion for the State House supplementary against what was earlier allocated, this is an increment of 219 per cent. 

At this rate, when health is being given a mere Shs 5.3 billion, Ugandans should know that we have a government which cares, and that Shs 5.3 billion is ostensibly for the Ebola issues in Luweero. Mr Speaker, we are aware that there is a problem of Hepatitis B in this country. We have had a problem of nodding disease. For Hepatitis B, the Ministry of Health promised that something would be done but there is nothing provided. Ugandans are dying, and the rate at which Ugandans are dying because of Hepatitis B is alarming. For want of time, I am not going to dwell on the statistics of the prevalence of Hepatitis B region by region. 

It is deplorable to note this kind of priority, where 40 per cent of the supplementary goes to one entity - State House - for donations. This is really alarming. There is a requirement for Shs 24 billion for emergencies under OPM to relocate people from Mt Elgon region and in passing, the chairperson while presenting the report said part of the money would go to Kasese. May we know how much?

Moreover, there are a number of emergencies across the country. Many times Members have come to the Floor lamenting about schools and government institutions across the board being de-roofed and bridges collapsing. Some of the bridges have taken over three years without attention. Now we are talking about Shs 24.8 billion for emergency to relocate people of Mt Elgon. How much goes where?

Lastly, Mr Speaker, there is the issue of a constant argument about poor absorption by the Ministry of Agriculture. We interfaced with Ministry of Finance and the indicators being used for absorption capacity for the Ministry of Agriculture are rather misleading. The official from Ministry of Health who appeared before our committee attested to this. Now what is being given to Ministry of Agriculture is simply for the outstanding VAT obligation, and a small amount of Shs 265 million that the ministry requires for control of tick borne diseases has been denied. May I inform you, honourable members, that our livestock are getting decimated majorly because of tick borne diseases and their treatment is extremely costly. 

I would like to beg that the Ministry of Agriculture need not be misunderstood for poor absorption because, after all, the finance ministry has accepted that the indicators used for measuring absorption capacity in Ministry of Agriculture are rather erroneous. I insist that the Ministry of Agriculture gets that allocation that the committee proposes to be stayed, the Shs 0.265 billion for tick control. I insist that it should be taken into consideration. I also request State House to style up; style up and help Ugandans. There is no way you can have – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have exceeded the time; it was supposed to be three minutes. I do not think they have been timing it right now, but the time is three minutes. Those who are timing, please time it correctly. 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.17
MRS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion, but I have some concerns to raise. 

On page 4, the committee, under its recommendations, says that whereas Cabinet sits, it should include the technical people to guide and establish the impact on the work plans and procurement plans of the sectors, which has not been attended to. I think this recommendation is vital and it should be embraced as soon as possible because this would enhance and streamline the budgets of the sectors. It would also enhance targeted spending and value addition.

Mr Speaker, on page 9, the report mentions the agricultural sector. I belong to the Committee on Agriculture and indeed, it is not that the sector returns much of the money; it is because of the bottlenecks that the sector has experienced. This recommendation of getting the Shs 13 billion as counterpart funding, I believe, will go a long way in addressing the gap of this counterpart funding such that the sector will be in position to concentrate on the development projects that have stalled for quite some time. So, this recommendation is well timed but, of course, I would have loved that all the Shs 13 billion that has been requested for be availed to the sector.

In the same vein, indeed there is money that has been denied under the vector control - the Shs 0.26 billion - and many of you might know that once there is an outbreak of diseases, if it is not contained in time, it tends to spread – (Member timed out_)

4.20
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have few observations to make on this report. One is that the report would have been more meaningful if they had shown us where they were cutting these funds from, because these are not additional funds. Now that they are not, who is suffering the cuts? So, we expect the Minister and the committee chairperson to show us the affected sectors.

Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Finance deliberately delays to send money to districts so that maybe they provide for these cuts. Last year, the people of Kisoro suffered cuts because they never received the fourth quarter and the contracts that had been engaged by Government were never paid. So, it seems now Government is actually getting loans from the citizens. We should not encourage these kinds of things. Supplementary is a disease that is eating into the pockets of the citizens.

When you look at this supplementary and you look at the recurrent expenditure being allocated - 52.5 per cent - and development expenditure of 38 per cent, this culture means that our economy cannot grow. You cannot have an economy growing when you are spending 52 per cent on recurrent expenditure and spending only 38 per cent on development expenditure. 

Mr Speaker, there seems to be some lack of co-ordination because in some attachments here, you are giving UNRA Shs 200 billion and yet the office of the Auditor-General found out that on Kabale-Kisoro Road, there was actually overpayment to the contractor, SBI, by Shs 9 billion. Now I see here that they are going to be given an additional Shs 6 billion. This means that they are going to have an overpayment of Shs 15 billion. So, I do not know if those figures are reconciled.

Mr Speaker, I see that there is some money going to the disaster areas but I am not seeing Kisoro yet we suffered the same. Thank you.

4.22
MR ABDU LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Looking at the two reports, the main report and the minority one, I only want to appeal to Members. I know as we debate, we may take a decision which may not be in the interest of the people we represent, given the fact that we have suspended the rule and indeed we are almost there.

Mr Speaker, when you look at the minority report and you see the expenditure for State House, it is almost 44 per cent of the entire supplementary budget. We go back to our constituents, including your constituents, Mr Speaker, with their basic needs and we sit here and pass a luxurious budget for State House and later complain that we do not have functional hospitals and good roads and better schools; I think those are double standards.

I believe that it is this Parliament that empowers and gives a lot of money to State House and then when we are invited to State House, we instead become beggars and yet we are the ones who appropriated that money. When we go to the President, we start begging that we need this and that yet we are the ones who have done this.

Mr Speaker, I believe that we are not doing justice to the people we represent; we are doing a very big disservice to them. I know that when the Members go back and read the minority report, they will understand that they have made a decision not in the interest of the people they represent but in the interest of someone else. I believe that this House has all the powers to say “no” to this kind of expenditure in State House. If we continue to allow State House to get away with all this money, then do not complain in your constituencies because you are cause of the suffering of the people in your constituencies. 

4.26
MS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. 

In their report on page 6, they identify the sources of funding for this supplementary budget. One of the sources is Non-Tax Revenue (NTR). This House has discussed on several occasions the state of our embassies abroad. Non-tax revenue is generated from those embassies and it would be good for us to use the NTR to rehabilitate the buildings there, but now this money is being used for other things. I wish this House does not accept that so that the embassies, which reflect the image of our country abroad, are renovated with such funds. This is my humble submission. 

Furthermore, in their recommendations, the committee found out that there were some funds - they call it contingency funds - that were not utilised. Can I know from the presenter or the chairperson of this committee where the contingency funds have been put? We would like to see here where the money has been appropriated to, other than cutting on the budget. Cutting the budget has caused suffering to our people. The Committee on Public Accounts went to my district, Lira, and they realised that Lira cannot perform because monies which should have been used for budgeted items was cut. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I am annoyed; I represent the people of Lira and I want to express their disappointment on the monies that have been returned to the donors. This is money that should have helped us. Even the deaf pay taxes in Uganda. Our people are paying taxes but the money that should have helped them is being used to pay off donors. Our question is: where is the money that the donors sent to us; where has it been spent? If the persons who embezzled this money have been arrested, have we taken trouble to attach their properties or their bank accounts? These people are going scot-free. I know that at the end of it all, they will be found guilty but our people will continue to suffer – (Member timed out_).

4.29
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want, first and foremost, to thank the chairman of the committee and also to thank Dr Lulume Bayigga for bringing out pertinent issues that need to be addressed in future if we are to receive such supplementaries. I say in future because the report of the committee raises fundamental issues that need to be funded at this time. However, at the same time, hon. Bayigga brings out issues that we do not need to repeat as Parliament by passing such supplementary budgets. 

One is the issue of suppression. We sit on committees to appropriate money for these activities in ministries, departments and agencies. These agencies have work plans but in the middle of a financial year, Government suppresses their vote and the activities of those ministries are affected. This is not good for Government. It is not good for Government to suppress one sector to uplift another. The services you are suppressing are also important to the people of Uganda. So in future, we should look for other sources of funding other than suppressing the other sectors of Government. 

Secondly, I support hon. Bayigga on the issue of paying for the stolen money. The money stolen by officers from the Office of the Prime Minister and officers from Bank of Uganda and the Ministry of Finance should be given back by those who stole the money, not the people of Uganda getting from their own pocket as if the theft by those officers benefited the people of Uganda. I do not support that part of the report where money will be taken from the Consolidated Fund to pay for the people who stole people’s money; on that matter, I support the minority report.

On the other sources of money, the chairman intimates in the report that there is an annex where we can find other sources of money apart from the suppression, but the annex is not there. I want the chairperson to lay the annex on the Table, which shows the agencies that are suppressed so that we know them because we do not want to see health being suppressed – (Member time out_)

4.32
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for this report and I rise to support the approval of this supplementary request with a few observations. 

Allow me to draw your attention to page No.5, table 1, which is a summary of supplementary expenditure for FY 2012/13 Schedule No.1. You notice that 38.8 per cent is allocated for developmental expenditure out of this supplementary request. In future, Government should forecast the development needs of this country and capture them in our national budget. In my opinion, supplementary expenditure should exclude development expenditure. Supplementary expenditure should capture unforeseen circumstances, unless otherwise for exceptional circumstances. Including development expenditure in supplementary expenditure as a routine practice should be discouraged. (Interruption)

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, my colleague, hon. Okello, for giving way. Mr Speaker, what is surprising in line with the development budget is that this supplementary budget is seeking for money to upgrade a number of roads. These are not unforeseen expenditures; these are expenditures that can be planned for within our normal planning process. I wonder why such items continue coming in our supplementary schedule. Thank you, my colleague.

MR OKELLO: Thank you. We are all aware of the budgeting process and we know the stakeholders that are always involved in the budgeting process. When the committee observes that the supplementary expenditure request under schedule No.1 for this financial year would be funded through budget cuts, like my colleagues have observed, I get worried about the credibility of our national budget. After our budget has been approved, who determines which budget line to be cut? This process needs to be clear, otherwise it will tantamount to interference with our national budget. (Member timed out_)


4.36
MR PHILLIP WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the minority report. This afternoon we are once again going through the emotions of supporting a tasteless ritual of approving a supplementary budget. The Prime Minister says it is urgent. We have had to change our rules when obviously the committee itself was almost 50-50; those who signed were five and those who wrote a minority report were four. Nevertheless, we have suspended our rules because it is urgent. 

I have been looking through both reports and I do not see what was urgent. Having the President meeting people in State House cannot be a matter of urgency. Ebola in Luwero, which is created because there was never Ebola in Luwero – (Interruption) 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you so much, my colleague, for giving way. I want to inform you that when it comes to surveillance of diseases, - now I am talking as a doctor- when a disease is suspected, some people are organised to make sure they just do real surveillance. To do surveillance, you must use money to start tracing people who have been suspected. You have to test them and in the end, you have to spend money. So, I want to inform you that though there was no Ebola confirmed in Luwero, money was spent. I thank you.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Dr Bitekyerezo. It is good to budget for disasters, especially health related disasters. Many of us here do not go to the public hospitals. Maybe even our relatives do not go there. However, the state of hospitals in Uganda is disastrous. The hospital in Bugiri, where I come from, is a disaster. Instead of passing money for presidential meetings, where the President meets people and carries sacks of money to Busoga, if only we had money carried to repair hospitals, put water and medicine in the hospitals and pay doctors so that they work. 

Our leaders seem to be living like the leaders of the French in the 14th Century. They do not seem to see that there is a problem. That is why our President never visits hospitals. He does not know what happens there, otherwise he would not be pushing for a supplementary budget for meetings that cost half a billion shillings in State House. (Member timed out_)

4.40
MS BRENDA NABUKENYA (DP, Woman Representative, Luwero): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I want to support the minority report. I have a few issues to raise. 

I want to say that my heart is bleeding for this country. When I look at this report generally, I think we are putting priority where it is not supposed to be. When you look at page 7 of this report, they recommend Shs 500 million per district delegation that is visiting State House. Can you imagine? We all know that hospitals do not have beds and drugs. Recently, patients were demonstrating in Luweero with so many people coming out; they do not even have where to stay or sleep but we are spending on 25 districts. I think this is so shallow. This is uncalled for and we should think as Ugandans and love our country. 

Another point I want to raise concerns the budgeting. Several colleagues have raised it. There are those issues that are unforeseen. You cannot say that you want a supplementary budget to pay rent for an embassy. Everyone knows that Uganda has foreign missions and these missions should be budgeted for. But look, we are seated here trying to find money for something we should have included in our earlier budget and found the money for. 

Mr Speaker, on the issue of Ebola, I moved with the Minister from here to Luweero and there was a place gazetted for these patients. That time there were about three patients there and three had passed on. I got reliable information from the District Health Officer that the whole budget was Shs 300 million. I am very surprised to find Shs 1.6 billion in this budget. 

I want to ask that a detailed breakdown be availed because I think you are concocting diseases to extort money from taxpayers. It is very important that we apportion money to where it is supposed to be. It would be very prudent if poor people are not used to extort money. It is an allegation. A lot- [Ms Kataike: “Information.”]- Hon. Minister I do not need the information. (Member timed out)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Kataike):  I want to thank you for giving way and allowing me to make a small clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Her time is up, but you can speak as a minister.

MS KATAIKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am happy that the previous speaker acknowledged that there was Ebola in Luweero, which was a question raised in the presentation by the committee. I want to confirm, as the earlier speaker said, that there was Ebola in Luweero. I even have a detailed report. However, on issues regarding the cost, the ministry used Shs 700 million whose breakdown we can bring.  

MS NABUKENYA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of clarification. I did not say that the people who died, died from Ebola. Three people died and by the time we visited with hon. Opendi, they were saying that they were trying to check if it was Ebola. At the end of the day, the report said there was no Ebola. So, I did not say we had Ebola; actually, that money was spent on people who died of different diseases.

MS KATAIKE: After the tests which were carried out, and we have a detailed report approved by World Health Organisation and other international bodies, it was clearly confirmed that the three patients who died in Luweero died from Ebola. In fact, the total number of people who died in that incident was seven, with spillovers in hospitals like Mulago and Jinja where those patients were and family members visited. I can provide a detailed report and the accountability regarding the Ebola outbreak to this House. The bottom line is that there was Ebola. 

Regarding the surveillance, other teams participated. We can give a report as well as other pictorial information to you to prove that. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.44
MS JENNIFER NANTUME EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I also stand to support the motion on the supplementary budget though I would like to make some amendments. 

For Government to ask for a supplementary, it means there is some sector from which money can be diverted to other sectors. Look at this scenario where Government seeks Shs 550 billion as supplementary for different sectors but the committee discovers that some money, for instance the money that is in the agriculture sector, had already been budgeted for. This is according to the committee’s findings. So, where are we going to put this money? My view is that we should first get the money Government planned to inject in agriculture, which was already budgeted for and is now coming as a supplementary, and then we supply it. 

Secondly, on this money to Luweero for Ebola programmes, I do not see any contradictions here from the responsible minister and the honourable Member from Luweero. The committee is saying that this money should be recovered. That is what the committee recommended. If someone stands to support the recommendations of the committee, I then do not see the essence in the minister saying that though they support the committee recommendations, they do not support what the area member is saying. You can see that the budget committee is already saying Government should recover this money. That means the committee is in agreement with what the area member is saying.

Mr Speaker, I want to say that from this Shs 550.78 billion, we should find out how much was not taken and we supply it to other sectors because Government budgeted knowing that this money was already there. I also want to add my voice to those that have distanced and dissociated themselves from the proposal to get money from Government and refund donor money, which was stolen by people in the Office of the Prime Minister. I am saying this because the people who stole the money are there; some of them are in prison – (Member timed out_)

4.47
MS NAUWAT ROSEMARY (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion although I have some concerns from the report of the. 

My first concern is about the request by the Office of the Prime Minister for funds to facilitate the relocation of people from Mt Elgon region, which the Ministry of Finance did not capture in the supplementary request. Was this due to lack of co-operation or what? Who doesn’t know of the catastrophe that occurred in Mbale? How could Ministry of Finance fail to capture that? I want to support the recommendation of the committee that this money be released to facilitate that relocation.

On page 8, it is said that some money was used to combat Ebola in Luweero. However, the same report says that there was no Ebola – (Interjections) – I beg your pardon. I was saying that while the report in some parts says there was Ebola in Luweero, the same report says there was no Ebola. Money might have been spent at the initial stages, but when it was discovered that there was no Ebola, I would expect a balance on that money. That balance should be indicated so that it is reallocated to other activities. I thank you.

4.49
MS ANITE EVELYN (NRM, Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would not want to waste people’s time because anyway, there is no time to waste. 

Let me draw the attention of the House to page 8 on the budget cuts. Mr Speaker, whereas I would like to support Government so that Government gets more money in form of supplementary, I also find it so hard to support Government on this particular request for a supplementary of Shs 45.6 billion to repay money lost in the OPM fraud. 

I want to dissociate myself from this particular fraud because if, as Parliament, we kept on saying that the Permanent Secretary, Mr Bigirimana, and Mr Kazinda should pay back our money, how can we now supply more money to the Office of the Prime Minister when Mr Bigirimana is still the accounting officer? We will not be fair to ourselves if we did that. The man will still mishandle this money. 

The people of Northern Uganda will not benefit from this money. As a youth MP representing the young people of Northern Uganda, I want to say that I cannot support the allocation of this money unless Mr Bigirimana is out of that office and unless Mr Kazinda pays back that money. Members will recall that this Parliament passed a resolution for these people to pay back that money. Before anyone reports to us that the money has been paid back, they are busy requesting us to allocate more money; for what? We are not going to do that. I want to call upon my colleagues not to support the allocation of money to the Office of the Prime Minister. We can support other aspects of this supplementary, but not allocate money to OPM to support and repay the fraud that has been taking place there. The fraud is still going to take place; as long as that accounting officer is still there, this money will still be misused. (Member timed out)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I would like to thank the honourable members for their concerns, especially those who have spoken in support of this supplementary schedule.
 
Secondly, let me clarify on a few issues starting with the issue of emergencies and unforeseen activities. I would like to acknowledge the observation of the committee that a supplementary should be for only emergencies and unforeseen activities. However, I wish to inform the House that this matter has been outstanding for a long time and we have taken action as Government. In the proposed amendment to the Public Finance Bill, we are proposing to address this financing in the contingency fund, which will cover all these activities. A contingency fund will be created for financing the supplementary expenditure in order not to disrupt the planned activities of ministries, departments and agencies.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of the domestic debt, we have indeed taken into consideration the implications of domestic borrowing in the economy. The borrowing is basically for paying outstanding road certificates. If you see in our supplementary schedule, the Shs 200 billion that we are borrowing is actually to address the outstanding certificates on road construction, which do not only amount to Shs 200 billion but we are trying to address the problem so that we do not attract a lot more interest if we do not pay it.

Still on emergencies, especially on the Shs 24 billion for Mt Elgon region, we explained to the committee that we provided cash limits of Shs 6 billion to the Office of the Prime Minister to handle the most urgent activities in disaster areas. In addition to that, we have allocated Shs 8 billion for the relocation of the people of Mt Elgon region next financial year in addition to Shs 10 billion, which is allocated to the Office of the Prime Minister for emergencies next financial year. Given that the current financial year barely has a month to end, we seek your indulgence to defer this matter to next year because it may not be possible to undertake that process as of now.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of cuts especially from the development partners, it is true, and I fully concur with the committee recommendation, that officers involved in the scam should refund the money. In order to do that, Government has taken a number of actions. Over 100 files have been opened at CID and a number of officials in the Ministry of Finance, the Office of the Prime Minister and Bank of Uganda have been interdicted and some have been charged in court. We have opened a specific account in Bank of Uganda to recover these stolen funds. However, colleagues will appreciate that this can only be done after the due process. 

Mr Speaker, we had to pay this money because the donors put a condition, among other things, that this money should be paid back and also action should be taken on the people who had misappropriated the money – (Interruption)

MS BAKO: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister for giving way. I would like to seek clarification. There are these districts that were affected by these cuts as a result of the donors withdrawing their resources. A classic example is Arua District. You are withdrawing Shs 720 million from Arua District local government budget. From Mbarara, which never faced these PRDP concerns, you are withdrawing Shs 442 million.

You have also blatantly lied here about Arua Municipality and Mbarara Municipality. The budget for Arua Municipality is Shs 6 billion; in the same way, it is Shs 6.08 billion for Mbarara. You suggest a withdrawal of Shs 64 million from Arua Municipal Council and you have indicated here that you are also withdrawing Shs 146 million from Mbarara Municipality. I would expect that then the Mbarara Municipality budget reduces to Shs 5.8 billion. Unfortunately, what you have shown here is that instead the budget for Mbarara Municipality has increased to Shs 6.2 billion. What is this that you are doing, Mr Minister?

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, that is a detail that we can look into. I must say that I do not have that details now and I cannot be in position to say how much we have withdrawn either from Arua or Mbarara. However, I would like to ask the Member to forward that detail so that the ministry can look at it- (Interruption)

MS BAKO: Rt Hon. Speaker, this document is a document of a committee of this House and it is the minister’s ministry directly responsible for this request on behalf of the President. I am not quoting my own figures but I am using a document duly laid before this House. Is the honourable member, therefore, in order to suggest that he does not even know what he has requested for and what we are supposed to approve?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, those figures are in the report. You do not have to ask another Member to supply it to you; it is before the House. Please.

MR KAJARA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that clarification. I have noticed that these figures are actually in the schedule that is attached to this report. However, I must say that, first of all, to fund this supplementary funding, we rely on three or four sources. One of them is revenue that has accrued and been collected. The second is suppression of votes and budget cuts. We do quite a lot of examinations to see where we can cut to address what. The other method we use is borrowing internally and externally. It is in that process that the decision the member is referring to was arrived at.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to address the issue that was raised by hon. Kasibante regarding public debt. We are aware of the issue of public debt, but it is not true that Uganda is heavily indebted. As we speak, and according to international practices, Uganda’s debt is sustainable based on the ratio of debt to exports which is still used to measure debt sustainability. Uganda’s debt is at 95 per cent compared to the threshold of 150 per cent. If you are to be judged as having no debt sustainability, then you must be below 150 per cent and we are at 95 per cent.

Hon. Kasibante also raised the issue of inflation. Based on the latest household survey data of UBOS, the inflation of Uganda today stands at six per cent, which is a single digit. It is not true that Uganda is experiencing high inflation. Inflation was at 30 per cent and we managed to squeeze it to six per cent, which Members should be grateful for.

Addressing the minority report, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of order very reluctantly. I pressed very hard to demand some clarification on specifics but the minister holding the portfolio of-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, did you say you were seeking clarification?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: This is a point of order but I was giving a background. I am standing on a point of order. Is it in order for the honourable Minister of Finance, well knowing that the Members of Parliament are the spokespersons on matters relating to taxation in this country, to avoid the demand that he states the magnitude of indebtedness that we have as of now? Is he in order to dodge that matter yet we would like to know how we stand in terms of international debt?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please wind up.

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, in addition, the Ministry of Finance, for every financial year, gives a detailed report of loans and their performance to this House. The debt situation of the country is laid before this House and like I said, the debt position has remained sustainable as measured against economic variables like export performance and domestic revenue collection. I have said that the IMF has said that Uganda is able to service its debt for the next 20 to 30 years and the external debt is expected to remain resilient by all standards.

Mr Speaker, I would like to address the issues in the minority report. First of all, on the legal limitations of the supplementary funding, while it is true that Schedule No.1 constitutes 4.84 per cent of the approved budget, I wish to inform the House that out of this supplementary, only Shs 275.4 billion constitutes 2.4 per cent of the approved budget, which was spent prior to approval of Parliament. This is in line with Article 156 of the Constitution and also Section 12 of the Budget Act. Therefore, the supplementary expenditure before the House fully conforms to the legal provisions. There is no bar stating that Government cannot spend beyond the three per cent. All the law says is that if you spend well above three per cent, then you have to come and explain to Parliament within four months, and this is exactly what we have come to do, Mr Speaker.

On the issue of unforeseen circumstances, I would like to state that these expenditures were as a result of under budgeting in a number of cases. In the Budget Framework Paper recently presented to Parliament, this issue has been addressed by increasing the budgets of the ministries which are perennially underfunded. With regard to the issue of Mt Elgon, I have already responded. 

Mr Speaker, there was an assertion that we have spent most of these funds on consumables. While I agree that there is a big proportion of the supplementary that is consumptive, this is necessitated by the expenditure on health workers, for example. Shs 43 billion of the money that is in this supplementary is for health workers and security, all of which facilitate national development. As honourable members can see, the Shs 555 billion – (Interruption) 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, this House is dealing with a matter of appropriation, allocation of money and so this supplementary budget requires due diligence by Members. For several times, a number of members have risen up to demand clarification, and I believe they are not just wasting time, but the Minister has persistently refused to yield to their demands. It is based on clarification that we may form an opinion to give or not to give. So, can the Minister conform and clarify members’ issues? He has refused to do it and yet we may make a wrong opinion unjustifiably for lack of clarification from him. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Speaker does not control the flow of clarification points and points of information; it is up to the member holding the Floor to do that. The Speaker cannot direct a member to receive information or clarification. That is beyond the rules. 

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I remember something happened here last financial year or the year before; well above the three per cent had been spent as supplementary and Government sought Parliament approval. I remember it being put to the government side whether the Budget Act in the section where it states that three per cent should be the limit is unconstitutional, but they did not comment. Now the Minister of Finance is saying that Government can spend even over three per cent and come to seek Parliament approval yet the Budget Act limits the amount, which must be spent to three percent. I am therefore asking whether the Minister is in order to come and inform the House that Government is at liberty to spend 50 or 100 per cent and then come after four months to report to the House. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, for clarity, let me read Section 12(1) of the Budget Act on supplementary expenditure: “The total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources over and above what is appropriated by Parliament shall not exceed three per cent of the total approved Budget for that financial year without prior approval of Parliament.” 

There is no prohibition on this law. What the law is saying is that if it is going to exceed three per cent, then there must be Parliament approval within four months. That is what the law says and that is what the Minister is saying by stating that what has been spent without Parliament approval is 2.4 per cent. The total that is sought from this budget is 4.8 per cent but what is required under Section 12(1), and also in line with Article 156, is now 2.4 per cent that has to be approved. So, there is no excess of three per cent according to the law because what is not yet used is going to be approved anyway. What has been used without Parliament approval is what has been brought for approval prior. Is that now clear? Please, honourable minister proceed.

MR KAJARA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. For the clarifications, I am moving on the premise that the members had an opportunity to debate. Also since this afternoon, we have been debating and I have captured the issues and I am trying to address them as I captured them. 

MRS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, it is with much pain that I put my Minister on a point of order. I want to believe that we are in this House for the good of this country. If we have the intention to debate and contribute to a motion on the Floor for purposes of making good decisions and for the good governance of this country, then an honourable minister persistently refuses to give clarification to members, who at the end of the day are supposed to make a decision, are we helping this country? Mr Speaker, I want to believe that in your position – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that the point of order? Can you please raise the point of order?

MRS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, it is very disappointing to see a senior minister behave the way he is doing. Is he in order to continuously deny members clarification to enable us make an informed decision? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is no rule or law violated by the honourable minister; it might only be bad manners. (Laughter)

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, I think there is exercise of discretion and not bad manners – (Interruption) 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am sure the honourable minster got the point in the Speaker’s ruling about behaving in a particular way. 

First of all, I am concerned that year after year, whenever you come up with a supplementary, the figures you bring are so small; they are illegible, they cannot be read. I think next time the minister should come with clear figures. 

Having said that, you are seeking a supplementary of Shs 550 billion or more but what you are not telling us is how much of this is already spent. We have around six weeks to the end of the financial year. We want to gauge whether there is enough time to absorb the money we are giving you. Can you tell us how much has already been spent and how much will be spent in the remaining five or so weeks?

MS ONGOM: Mr Speaker, I do not have the capacity to rule, but we are handling matters of finances and matters of finances are not a joking issue. When we are appropriating for a supplementary schedule, it means we are appropriating for emergencies, things that were not foreseen. In this circumstance, I see a situation where money from an unconditional grant is reallocated from Mukono and Nakapiripirit districts to cater for an unconditional grant for I think Kakooge Town Council in Nakasongola. My question is: do you want me to believe that these other two districts were better off and that is the reason why funds are being removed from their districts and reallocated to support the other district?

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, let me clarify what the honourable member is asking, the reallocation from Nakasongola and Ntungamo. First of all, the allocation had been done in error and that is why that money was reallocated to other areas. 

Secondly, if you look at page 7 - the Shadow Attorney-General asked how much money we have already spent - we said that out of the Shs 555.78 billion under this schedule, Shs 275.44 billion, equivalent to 2.4 per cent, has been spent. The balance of Shs 280.24 billion has not been spent and requires Parliamentary approval. 

If you also look at Schedule No.2 of this supplementary funding, you can see vote 113, Uganda National Roads Authority, is going to benefit from this schedule by Shs 200 billion. This Shs 200 billion is money that has already been spent. The certificates for this money are awaiting settlement, they are awaiting payment. So, it will not take long - it can take a day or a week - to transfer this money to cater for the debt arising from Atiak–Moyo Road, upgrading of Kabale–Kisoro–Bunagana Road, upgrading of Kampala–Gayaza–Zirobwe Road. All these are monies that are due and which require settlement thereof. 

The Shs 200 billion out of the balance awaits to settle these roads under Uganda National Roads Authority. So, it is not true that we have a very small period and cannot dispose of these funds. The money going to other projects like Ministry of Education is VAT, which is also already accrued, which will also be transferred to those votes as soon as it is approved by this Parliament.  

The minority report also points out unjustified figures for State House and the Office of the President, and that there was no work plan and no procurement plan. I want to state that these work plans were availed to the sessional committee when it was discussing the supplementary request, and output figures quoted by the minority report are extracted from those work plans. These work plans for which this money is budgeted are on-going projects. They were initiated but there was no funding for them, so they were unfunded priorities.

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Speaker, I laid on the Table the work plan that was presented to the budget committee and I attended all the meetings of the budget committee. This is property of the Sectoral Committee on Presidential Affairs. What was presented as a work plan was seeking clarification from those who had to avail that information which was not given. This information was not given to the Sessional Committee on Presidential Affairs and was not passed over to the budget committee as well, the basis of which is the argument of my minority report. 

We did not get the breakdown of the work plan and therefore the budget for each of the activities that are supposed to be done. Is it in order, therefore, for the honourable minister to insist that these work plans were given to the budget committee yet I was there and I have the documents which I have tabled?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue is whether there is a work plan and the minister is saying there is a work plan and figures attached to it. That is what I have heard. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, we appeared before the Sectoral Committee on Presidential Affairs and we gave a good justification for these shortfalls. We made the same points to the budget committee, that State House, which is often talked about and often criticised, lays down its requirements every financial year. If you are to assess the last three years, for the requirements we put forward, 20 per cent financing is provided- 20 per cent of those requirements. This argument was appreciated by the Committee on Presidential Affairs and that of budget. I remember them agreeing with us and saying that they would try as much as possible to enhance our budget in the near future, maybe to mitigate the chronic underfunding. 

The work plans he is talking about are not that we are initiating new activities. The work plans were laid, indicating the unfunded priorities. It is those variations and shortfalls that the supplementary budget seeks to cover. Thank you so much. 

MR ACHIA REMIGIO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In fact on this matter, we received this detailed response which was brought to us from the Committee on Presidential Affairs. The details which were given to us and which were part of these minutes were that for the last three years, State House presents to Ministry of Finance a budget of about Shs 210 billion or Shs 213 billion including this financial year. In this financial year, of the Shs 213 billion they requested, they were given Shs 60,234,000,000, which constitutes about 33 per cent of the actual request by State House. So, the question we are putting to the Minister of Finance, which I think he is trying to respond to, is: why do you give Shs 60 billion to an agency that asks for Shs 200 billion and you put us in a situation where State House has to come for money for salaries, water and electricity under supplementary? 

The recommendation in the report of the committee is that come this financial year, please give Shs 200 billion to State House and we see whether they will come and ask for a supplementary. That is what they have been asking for for the last three years, and we have been giving supplementaries on the basis that they have been getting only a small percentage – (Interruption) 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: I thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Chairman, are you telling us that the Ministry of Finance actually cut the salaries of State House? You have referred to salaries. Is that true?  

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, anybody who sits on any sessional committee, when you look at the MTEF of each and every ministry and department, usually the money available is around 33 per cent. That is for all ministries and departments. 

Currently, the legal and parliamentary affairs committee is looking at the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Let me give you an example. The domestic arrears in terms of court awards and compensation is Shs 254 billion. Ministry of Finance has only provided Shs 4 billion - one, two, three, four - whereas the domestic arrears for court awards and compensation are Shs 254 billion. So, the issue you are raising about State House is not unique to State House. When you look at the needs of all ministries, Ministry of Finance gives them between 10 to 20 per cent. State House actually gets the highest. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to wind up. 

MR KAJARA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. All we are saying is that because of that perennial underfunding to State House, it has caused a supplementary and estimates- (Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Minister. When you talk of unfunded priorities, there are people serving this country and they are based in different countries in winter, in the cold, and this Government is not able to pay for the tuition of their children. Every year it comes in the budget, it is an unfunded priority and now you are talking of State House and forgetting the foreign officers who are in missions, who are not able to cater for their children. Why isn’t that taken as a priority, Mr Minister?

Secondly, look at Mulago Hospital. If you go to the Cancer Institute now, Mr Minister, you will see people in the corridors and you take that one as an unfunded priority but you take State House, which has got Shs 128 billion. I do not understand the use of budgeting. When we sit every year, every 15th June, we listen to the budget and then you go behind there and do the cuts without involving Parliament and then you come here to do post-mortem. Is that really fair to the Members of Parliament in this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please wind up.

MR KAJARA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That is why in this budget, it is not only State House that is being catered for. There is Ministry of Health, which is being catered for in this supplementary budget. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is also being catered for in this supplementary funding as well as State House. All we are saying is that there is a shortage of funds and we rationalise and see how we can share out this money to ensure that all sectors can get some funding.

Mr Speaker, you told me to wind up and so I am winding up. There is no double budgeting in State House because allocations are made under vote functions. The impression created by hon. Bayigga is that there has been double budgeting, which is not true. A vote function is a combination of programmes, projects, and local government grants if any that aim at achieving similar objectives on a vote with a vote. So, in the case of State House and Office of the President, there are programmes such as Office of the Vice-President, poverty alleviation projects which have activities pursued by His Excellency the President, His Excellency the Vice-President and the presidential initiatives who mobilise masses towards poverty reduction. This is not a case of double budgeting but rather allocative efficiency to the relevant cost centres. 

Regarding the agriculture sector, this matter has been raised but Ministry of Agriculture received a presidential directive to procure specialised equipment to support tick control intervention, an acaricide analyser. This followed a concern that drugs for spraying to kill ticks were no longer effective, thus leading to the death of livestock. This specialised equipment was budgeted for and since there was an emergency to control death of livestock, Ministry of Agriculture reallocated Shs 265 million from other priority areas in order to address that intervention. The supplementary expenditure, therefore, is meant to replenish the item under the respective projects which were affected by the reallocation.

On the issue of lack of absorption challenges in the Ministry of Agriculture-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to wind up.

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, I would like to conclude by asking the House to appreciate the challenges of budgeting in view of limited resources that we have, and to appreciate that we need this money, Shs 555 billion, to address the areas for which we have spent. Finally, I beg the House that this supplementary expenditure for the financial year 2012/13 be approved by this House. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider Supplementary Schedule No. 1 for Financial Year 2012/13. I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

Vote 001 – Office of the President

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 6 billion, under vote 001, Office of the President, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2012/13.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 002 – State House

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I propose the question that a total sum of –

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I rise on a point of procedure. I have been counting the Members present in the House and realised that we do not have quorum to pass this important motion. This is a very serious matter for us to pass when we do not have quorum. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we ascertain the numbers? Honourable members, I have just established that the number of members in the House is 104 as of now. For that reason, we will suspend.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto. I now put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

5.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered Supplementary Schedule No. 1 of the Financial Year 2012/13 and passed only vote 001.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

5.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee of Supply. I now put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the House is suspended for 15 minutes.

(The House was suspended at 5.43p.m.)

(On resumption at 5.53 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House was suspended for 15 minutes to allow us establish if we can build quorum. I now need to find out if we have quorum. If not, this House will be prorogued immediately.

Honourable members, this is an official sitting of Parliament. We will do a roll call of the Members present today. Can I have a list. We are going to do a roll call of Members present in the Chambers now. 

    1. Hon. Aadroa Alex Onzima 			
    2. Hon. Ababiku Jesca      			
    3. Hon. Acayo Christine     		
    4. Hon. Acheng Joy Ruth   			
    5. Hon. Achia Remigio			Present   
    6. Hon. Achia Terence Naco      		Present 
    7. Hon. Achieng Sarah Opendi    		
    8. Hon. Achile Manoah           		Present
    9. Hon. Acire Christopher      		
    10. Hon. Adong Lilly            		Present
    11. Hon. Ajedra Gabriel         		Present
    12. Hon. Ajok Lucy              		
    13. Hon. Akello Judith Franca    		
    14. Hon. Akello Rose Lilly      		
    15. Hon. Akena James Michael    		
    16. Hon. Akol Rose Okullu       		
    17. Hon. Akora Maxwell          		
    18. Hon. Alaso Alice             		
    19. Hon. Aleper Margaret        		
    20. Hon. Aleper Simon Peter     		
    21. Hon. Alero Tom Aza         		
    22. Hon. Alengot Proscovia Oromait 	
    23. Hon. Ali Moses          			Present
    24. Hon. Allen Andrew		   		
    25. Hon. Alum Santa Ogwang  	   	Present
    26. Hon. Alupo Jessica 				
    27. Hon. Amali Caroline Okao  		
    28. Hon. Amama Mbabazi  			Present
    29. Hon. Amero Susan  				
    30. Hon. Amoding Monicah  		Present
    31. Hon. Amodoi Cyrus 				
    32. Hon. Amoit Judith Mary  			
    33. Hon. Amongi Betty Ongom  	     	Present
    34. Hon. Amongin Aporu Christine 	  	Present
    35. Hon. Amongin Jacqueline  			
    36. Hon. Amuge Rebecca 			  Present
    37. Hon. Amuriat Oboi Patrick  			
    38. Hon. Angina Charles  				
    39. Hon. Anite Evelyn  			  Present
    40. Hon. Anywarach Joshua 			
    41. Hon. Aol Betty Ocan  				
    42. Hon. Arinaitwe Kariisa Joy  		
    43. Hon. Aronda Nyakairima  			
    44. Hon. Asamo Hellen Grace  		Present
    45. Hon. Asupasa Isiko Wilson 		
    46. Hon. Arinaitwe Rwakajara  			
    47. Hon. Atiku Bernard  				
    48. Hon. Atim Anywar Beatrice  			
    49. Hon. Atim Joy Ongom  			Present
    50. Hon. Atim Ogwal Cecilia 			
    51. Hon. Atuku Bigombe Betty  			
    52. Hon. Auma Juliana 			Present
    53. Hon. Auru Anne  					
    54. Hon. Awongo Ahmed  				
    55. Hon. Ayena Krispus  				
    56. Hon. Ayepa Michael  				
    57. Hon. Ayoo Tonny  			Present
    58. Hon. Baba Diri Margaret  			
    59. Hon. Baba James  					

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But do you vote?	

MR BABA: But I have been called.		

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, but you know what we are doing.

MR BABA: But I am present. (Laughter)		

    60. Hon. Babirye Veronica Kadogo  		
    61. Hon. Badda Fred  				
    62. Hon. Bagiire Vincent 				
    63. Hon. Bagoole John 				
    64. Hon. Bahati David  			Present
    65. Hon. Bahinduka Martin  		
    66. Hon. Bakka Stephen Mugabi  		Present
    67. Hon. Bakabulindi Charles  			
    68. Hon. Bakaluba Mukasa Peter  		Present
    69. Hon. Bakeine Mabel 			Present
    70. Hon. Bakireke Nambooze Betty  		
    71. Hon. Bako Christine Abia  		Present
    72. Hon. Baliddawa Edward  			
    73. Hon. Balyejjusa Sulaiman Kirunda  	
    74. Hon. Balyeku Moses 				
    75. Hon. Bangirana Anifa Kawooya  	Present
    76. Hon. Banyenzaki Henry  			
    77. Hon. Barumba Beatrice Rusaniya 		
    78. Hon. Baryayanga Andrew 			
    79. Hon. Baryomunsi Chris  			
    80. Hon. Bayigga Michael 				
    81. Hon. Bbumba Syda Namirembe  	Present
    82. Hon. Besisira Ignatius  			
    83. Hon. Bigirwa Julius 				
    84. Hon. Bintu Jalia Lukumu 			
    85. Hon. Biraahwa Mukitale 			
    86. Hon. Biraaro Ephraim 			 Present
    87. Hon. Bakirekerawo Nsubuga Mathias	
    88. Hon. Bitekyerezo Medard  		 Present
    89. Hon. Boona Emma  			 Present
    90. Hon. Bucyanayandi Tress  			
    91. Hon. Bukenya Gilbert  			
    92. Hon. Businge Rusoke Victoria  		
    93. Hon. Busingye Mary Karooro Okurut  	
    94. Hon. Bwambale Bihande 			
    95. Hon. Byabagambi John  			
    96. Hon. Byamukama Nulu  				
    97. Hon. Byandala Abraham 		Present
    98. Hon. Byarugaba Alex 				
    99. Hon. Byarugaba Grace 			Present
    100. Hon. Cadet Benjamin  				
    101. Hon. Chebrot Steven 				
    102. Hon. Chekwel Lydia  			Present
    103. Hon. Chemaswet Abdi Fadhil 			
    104. Hon. Chemutai Phyllis  			Present
    105. Hon. Daudi Migereko			Present
    106. Hon. Dombo Emmanuel 				
    107. Hon. Drito Martin 				
    108. Hon. Ebil Fred  					
    109. Hon. Ecweru Musa 				
    110. Hon. Egunyu Nantume 			Present
    111. Hon. Ekanya Geoffrey  				
    112. Hon. Ekuma George			Present
    113. Hon. Ekwau Ibi Florence		Present 
    114. Hon. Engola Sam			Present
    115. Hon. Epetait Francis
    116. Hon. Eriaku Peter Emmanuel		
    117. Hon. Fungaroo Kaps Hassan
    118. Hon. Gudoi Yahaya
    119. Hon. Hood Katuramu Kiribedda		Present
    120. Hon. Iriama Margaret			Present
    121. Hon. Iriama Rose			Present
    122. Hon. Isabirye Iddi
    123. Hon. Jacan Omach Fred 
    124. Hon. Kaabule Evelyn 
    125. Hon. Kaahwa Tophace 
    126. Hon. Kabaale Kwagala Olivia		Present
    127. Hon. Kabahenda Flavia 
    128. Hon. Kabajo James 			Present
    129. Hon. Kabakumba Masiko 		Present
    130. Hon. Kabasharira Naome
    131. Hon. Kaddumukasa Ssozi Jerome
    132. Hon. Kafabusa Werikhe Michael	Present
    133. Hon. Ssekitoleko Robert		Present
    134. Hon. Kafuda Boaz			Present
    135. Hon. Kahinda Otafiire
    136. Hon. Kahunde Helen
    137. Hon. Kajara Aston 			Present
    138. Hon. Kajura Henry Muganwa		Present
    139. Hon. Kakoba Onyango		
    140. Hon. Kakooza James			Present			
    141. Hon. Kamanda Bataringaya		Present
    142. Hon. Kamara John 	
    143. Hon. Kamateeka Jovah
    144. Hon. Kamba Saleh Moses 
    145. Hon. Karuhanga Gerald
    146. Hon. Karungi Elizabeth
    147. Hon. Kasaija Matia
    148. Hon. Kasaija Stephen 			Present
    149. Hon. Kasamba Mathias			
    150. Hon. Kase-Mubanda Freda 		Present
    151. Hon. Kasibante Moses				
    152. Hon. Kasirivu Baltazar Atwooki
    153. Hon. Kasule Justine Lumumba
    154. Hon. Kasule Robert
    155. Hon. Kataaha Janet Museveni
    156. Hon. Kataike Sarah Ndoboli		Present
    157. Hon. Katirima Phinehas 
    158. Hon. Katoto Hatwib			Present
    159. Hon. Katumba Wamala 
    160. Hon. Katuntu Abdu			Present
    161. Hon. Katwiremu Yorokamu 
    162. Hon. Kawuma Mohamed
    163. Hon. Kayagi Sarah 
    164. Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi John 
    165. Hon. Khainza Justine			Present
    166. Hon. Khiddu Makubuya 		Present
    167. Hon. Kiboijana Margaret 
    168. Hon. Kibuule Ronald
    169. Hon. Kiiza Ernest Apuuli		Present
    170. Hon. Kiiza Rwebembera James
    171. Hon. Kiiza Winfred			Present
    172. Hon. Kikungwe Issa				
    173. Hon. Kintu Florence			Present
    174. Hon. Kipoi Tonny Nsubuga
    175. Hon. Kitatta Aboud
    176. Hon. Kiwanda Godfrey 
    177. Hon. Kiyingi Asuman
    178. Hon. Kiyingi Bbosa Kenneth 		Present
    179. Hon. Kiyingi Deogratius
    180. Hon. Kiyonga Chrispus 
    181. Hon. Komuhangi Margaret
    182. Hon. Kusasira Peace Kanyesigye 
    183. Hon. Kutesa Kahamba Samuel
    184. Hon. Kwemara Ngabu William
    185. Hon. Kwiyucwiny Grace Freedom
    186. Hon. Kwizera Eddie 			Present
    187. Hon. Kyambadde Amelia 	
    188. Hon. Kyanjo Hussein 
    189. Hon. Kyeyune Haruna
    190. Hon. Kyooma Xavier Akampurira
    191. Hon. Lakot Susan 			Present
    192. Hon. Lanyero Sarah Ochieng
    193. Hon. Lematia Ruth Molly 		Present
    194. Hon. Lokeris Peter			Present
    195. Hon. Lokeris Samson
    196. Hon. Lokii John Baptist
    197. Hon. Lokii Peter Abrahams
    198. Hon. Lokodo Simon			Present
    199. Hon. Lolem Micah 
    200. Hon. Lowila Oketayot
    201. Hon. Lubega Godfrey 	          		Present 
    202. Hon. Lubega Medard Sseggona
    203. Hon. Lubogo Kenneth			Present
    204. Hon. Amos Lugoloobi
    205. Hon. Timothy Mutekanga Lwanga
    206. Hon. Sam Lyomoki
    207. Hon. Suleiman Madada 			Present
    208. Hon. Maganda Julius 
    209. Hon. Magyezi Raphael 			Present
    210. Hon. Makhoha Margaret 
    211. Hon. Mandera Amos 
    212. Hon. Matovu Gregory 
    213. Hon. Matte Joseph			Present 
    214. Hon. Mayende Stephen 
    215. Hon. Mawanda Michael 
    216. Hon. Mbabazi Betty			Present
    217. Hon. Mbagadhi Frederick 
    218. Hon Mbahimba James 
    219. Hon. Kezekia Mbogo
    220. Hon. Robert Ndugwa Migadde		Present 
    221. Hon. Mpabwa Sarah 
    222. Hon. Beatrice Mpairwe
    223. Hon. Mpiima Dorothy
    224. Hon. Mpuuga Mathias
    225. Hon. Mubito John Bosco
    226. Hon. Muzaale Martin			Present
    227. Hon. Mugema Peter 
    228. Hon. Mugume Roland 
    229. Hon. Muhumuza David 
    230. Hon. Muhwezi Jim 
    231. Hon. Mujungu Jennifer 
    232. Hon. Mujuni Vicent Kyamadidi
    233. Hon. Muruli iMukasa			Present
    234. Hon. Mukula George Michael 
    235. Hon. Mulimba John 
    236. Hon. Mulindwa Patrick			Present
    237. Hon. Mulongo Simon
    238. Hon. Muloni Irene 
    239. Hon. Musasizi Henry 
    240. Hon. Musinguzi Yona
    241. Hon. Mutagamba Maria			Present
    242. Hon. Mutebi Balikudembe
    243. Hon. Mutyabule Florence		Present
    244. Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi
    245. Hon. Muwuma Milton 			Present
    246. Hon. Muyingo John
    247. Hon.	Mwebaza Sarah
    248. Hon. Mwesige Adolf
    249. Hon. Mwesigye Fred
    250. Hon. Mwiru Paul
    251. Hon. Nabbanja Robinah
    252. Hon. Nabirye Agnes
    253. Hon. Nabugere Flavia
    254. Hon. Nabukenya Brenda
    255. Hon. Nabulya Ssentongo 
    256. Hon. Naggayi Nabilah
    257. Hon. Najjemba Rosemary 
    258. Hon. Nakabale Patrick 
    259. Hon. Nakabira Gertrude Lubega
    260. Hon. Nakadama Rukia Isanga		Present
    261. Hon. Nakato Katusiime
    262. Hon. Nakawunde Sarah 
    263. Hon. Nakayenze Connie Galiwango 	Present
    264. Hon. Nalubega Mariam 
    265. Hon. Nalubega Mary Tuunde
    266. Hon. Namaganda Susan 
    267. Hon. Namara Grace
    268. Hon. Namayanja Florence 
    269. Hon. Namayanja Rose Nsereko
    270. Hon. Namoe Stella Nyomera		Present 
    271. Hon. Namugwanya Benny Bugembe
    272. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi Nathan 
    273. Hon. Nankabirwa Ann Maria 		Present
    274. Hon. Nankabirwa Ruth Sentamu
    275. Hon. Nansubuga Rosemary Seninde
    276. Hon. Nantaba Idah 
    277. Hon. Nanyondo Carolyn 
    278. Hon. Nasasira John 
    279. Hon. Nauwat Rosemary			Present
    280. Hon. Ndeezi Alex
    281. Hon. Nebanda Florence 			Present
    282. Hon. Nekesa Barbara Oundo
    283. Hon. Ninsiima Ronah Rita
    284. Hon. Niwagaba Wilfred 
    285. Hon. Nokrach William Wilson 		Present
    286. Hon. Nsanja Patrick Mabirizi
    287. Hon. Nsereko Muhammad 
    288. Hon. Nshaija Dorothy			Present
    289. Hon. Ntabazi Harriet 			Present
    290. Hon .Nyakecho Okwenye Annet		Present
    291. Hon. Nyakikongoro Rosemary    	Present
    292. Hon.  Nyanzi Vicent
    293. Hon. Nyiira Mijumbi
    294. Hon. Mateke Sarah			Present
    295. Hon. Nyombi Peter 
    296. Hon. Nyombi Thembo			Present
    297. Hon. Nzoghu William
    298. Hon. Oboth Marksons Jacob 
    299. Hon. Obua Denis 
    300. Hon. Obua-Ogwal Benson 
    301. Hon. Ochola Stephen 
    302. Hon. Ochwa David 			Present
    303. Hon. Odoi Fox
    304. Hon. Odo Tayebwa
    305. Hon. Odonga Otto
    306. Hon. Oguttu Wafula
    307. Hon. Ogwal Deusdedit
    308. Hon. Ogwang Peter			Present
    309. Hon. Okello Anthony 
    310. Hon. Oketa J.F						
    311. Hon. Okeyo Peter			Present
    312. Hon. Okot John  
    313. Hon. Okot Ogong Felix			Present
    314. Hon. Okumu Reagan				
    315. Hon. Okuonzi Sam				
    316. Hon. Okupa Elijah
    317. Hon. Olanya Gilbert				
    318. Hon. Oleru Huda			Present
    319. Hon. Omara Geoffrey			Present
    320. Hon. Omolo Peter				
    321. Hon. Omona Akena			Present
    322. Hon. Omonya Stanley				
    323. Hon. Onek Hilary 				
    324. Hon. Obote Clement Kenneth		
    325. Hon. Opolot Jacob 			Present
    326. Hon. Oryem Okello				
    327. Hon. Osege Angeline				
    328. Hon. Otada Sam					
    329. Hon. Owesigyire Jim				
    330. Hon. Ruhindi Fredrick			Present
    331. Hon. Ruhunda Alex				
    332. Hon. Rukutana Mwesigwa			
    333. Hon. Rwamirama Bright		Present
    334. Hon. Sabiti Jack					
    335. Hon. Sabila Nelson			Present
    336. Hon. Safia Nalule Jjuuko			
    337. Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba			
    338. Hon. Sejjoba Isaac				
    339. Hon. Sempala Mpuuga Edward 		
    340. Hon. Sezi Prisca Mbaguta		Present
    341. Hon. Sali Baker				Present
    342. Hon. Sasaga Jonny				
    343. Hon. Sebagala Abdu Latif		
    344. Hon. Sekandi Edward Kiwanuka			
    345. Hon. Ssekikubo Theodore				
    346. Hon. Ssemuli Anthony				
    347. Hon. Ssempijja Vincent			Present
    348. Hon. Ssemugaba Samuel		Present
    349. Hon. Semujju Ibrahim Nganda		
    350. Hon. Sewungu Joseph				
    351. Hon. Ssimbwa John			Present
    352. Hon. Sinabulya Sylvia			
    353. Hon. Taaka Kevina 				
    354. Hon. Tanna Sanjay				
    355. Hon. Tashobya Stephen			Present
    356. Hon. Tete Chelengat			Present
    357. Hon. Timbigamba Lyndah		
    358. Hon. Tinkasimire Barnabas		
    359. Hon. Sejusa David				
    360. Hon. Todwong Richard			Present
    361. Hon. Tumwebaze Frank			Present
    362. Hon. Tumwesigye Elioda			
    363. Hon. Tumwine Elly				
    364. Hon. Turyahikayo Mary			Present
    365. Hon. Twa-twa Mutwalante		Present
    366. Hon. Wadada Femiar				
    367. Hon. Wadri Kassiano 			
    368. Hon. Waira Kiwalabye Majegere	Present
    369. Hon. Wakikona David			Present
    370. Hon. Wamakuyu Mudimi			
    371. Hon. Wamanga Wamai Jack			
    372. Hon. Wangolo Jacob			Present
    373. Hon. Yaguma Wilberforce		Present

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are also those who came after the roll call had started. Let them be go order by order.

    1. Hon. Amos Mandera		Present
    2. Hon. Aronda Nyakarima		Present
    3. Hon. Arinaitwe Rwakajara		Present
    4. Hon. Mbahimba James 		Present
    5. Hon. Gudoi Yahaya			Present
    6. Hon. Aleper Margaret Achila	Present
    7. Hon. Awongo Ahmed		Present
    8. Hon. Kyooma Xavier 		Present
    9. Hon. Mubito John Bosco		Present
    10. Hon. Okot John Amos		Present
    11. Hon. Muhwezi Jim Katugugu	Present
    12. Hon. Opendi Sarah Acheng		Present

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have been here for a week and some Members have been frustrating debate. At the time of counting, the very people who raised the issue of quorum ran out and interestingly, they have left their papers and bags here.

Shortly, when we resume, they will come again to frustrate the proceedings of the House. The procedure I am seeking is when we came here, we signed the book and Members are in the gallery. Others are in the lobby. In the spirit of this House, where we are committed and referred to as “honourable members” is it procedurally right to proceed using this list when Members are actually present but perceived to be absent? Isn’t this corruption of the highest order, Mr Speaker?

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Further to the contribution of the honourable minister, under our rules and Code of Conduct as Members of Parliament given under Rule 76 in Appendix F, we have a mandate to the public under sub rules 5 and 6, under public trust and allow me to read it: “Members shall at all times conduct themselves in a manner, which will maintain and strengthen the public’s trust and confidence in the integrity of Parliament and never undertake any action, which may bring the House or its Members generally, into disrepute.” That is 5.

And under 6: “The acceptance by a Member of a bribe... including any fee, compensation or reward…” - and I would interpret a reward in terms of presumed appreciation by their party – “…in connection with a promotion of, or opposition to, any Bill, motion or other matter submitted, or intended to be submitted to the House, or to any committee of the House, is contrary to this Code of Conduct.”

Mr Speaker, clearly, the Members especially those on the Opposition side are intending to frustrate debate and approval of a supplementary budget that permits Government to execute its mandate and service delivery to the people of Uganda. This is criminal and not acceptable.

Again, under our rules, when you are paid an allowance to execute a job and you get the allowance and walk away - I would appeal to you, Mr Speaker, to exercise your authority to ensure that these types of Members are brought to order because if in any case, they now attempt to come in simply to frustrate the work of this House. I would regard this as misconduct and contrary to our Code of Conduct. Mr Speaker, these Members need action and order.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I do not think we have to hide our heads under the sand. The Members who have walked out have serious reservations about what is going on here, and they have decided they do not want to be party to the process and that is very legitimate; it offends no rule. That is why my colleagues are running to some general rules. You see, if you are talking about Members who have walked in, why don’t you talk about Members who are walking in to vote only? They have not been party to the debate and are only walking in here to vote issues, which they do not know. So, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, I am somebody who is very respectful of this gentleman, hon. Abdu Katuntu. He has been here and he is the Attorney-General for the Opposition. Hon. Wafula Oguttu, who is very close to his heart and his party, got up and raised an issue of quorum. Hon. Katuntu was not sleeping; I was watching him properly. Now, he is here telling us, after we have complained that the people who raised the quorum issue have gone out. Is he in order to start attacking his party and Members who have remained here to vote on this very important issue? Is he in order to justify fraud? Isn’t this pretence, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you want to find a disappointed Member of this House, do not go far, just look at me. I am extremely disappointed and for purposes of keeping within the rules of language to be used, I restrain myself from using words that would otherwise not be unbecoming of the House. This is very un-dignifying of this House and the honourable members who call themselves honourable.

The rules of the House allow for a “yes” vote, a “no” vote and an abstention. It is clear! If the issues are so involving that you want to be on record to vote “no” or to abstain, the options are there. You can move this House that we take votes by “roll call and tally” so that we know who has voted for and who has voted against. But to walk out after raising the issue of quorum, when the Speaker suspended the House for 15 minutes to establish this and those who raised the quorum issue walk out leaving their papers behind, is beyond shame. And I am sure the honourable members think they are very dignified in their action; I do not think so. They are out of order and let the records show that the Members who have walked out and left their files in the House, when we were establishing the issue of quorum, are running away from responsibility and they are completely out of order.

The results of the roll call show the Members who were inside. Honourable members, it also shows another problem; that I had to suspend the House for 15 minutes because many of you were not here, and that is a fact. It is really insulting to a person presiding over the House; that I have to suspend the House to allow Members who are actually in the lobby, who are in the canteen, who are in their offices to come - really, Members! This supplementary cuts across all the sectors, including the Members of Parliament. 

I have no option at this material time 
because after the roll call and tally, I have 119 Members, meaning I do not have quorum to proceed with business. We had gone to Committee of Supply stage, where we would be taking votes on each of those votes in the supplementary. But we are unable to do that because we do not have the appropriate numbers. We had analysed general debate, put the question and approved that we should now go to Committee of Supply. All the next items require voting.
6.56
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, I share your sentiments. All of us are saddened by this unbecoming behaviour of our colleagues and I really have nothing to add to what you have said. I rise to reiterate the point that in the past – our previous rules – we needed a quorum to transact any business and because of this problem of quorum, we changed the rule to say that the quorum would only be required when it comes to voting. What this means is that, actually we can discuss the subject matter conclusively and then when it comes to the decision in terms of voting, the numbers are required.
Now, since we have other subjects – I know that on the supplementary question, we had reached the stage of taking a decision and we cannot take a decision now. But there are other items on the agenda today. We had the report on the KCCA; we have the Public Order Management Bill. So, I would, therefore, suggest – and my suspicion is that, for instance, if we are to talk about Kampala, I would not be surprised if the number would be more than hon. Kiiza and hon. Katuntu – they are the only reasonable people across.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is item 3(1) which was not dealt with. (Ms Amongi rose_) Hon. Members, the rules of accessing the microphone are clear; for you, hon. Member, to access the microphone and start yelling to it, is not orderly. Okay, proceed with your point of order.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have sat in this House for 12 years and I have made my contribution in this House. So, for the Prime Minister to stand up to say that there are only two reasonable people – (Interjections) – No, you said, “…on that side.” I want to know whether it is in order for the Prime Minister to state that there are only two reasonable people on this side. I am seated here with more than seven elected people, and we have been contributing on the Floor of this House. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, unless you can explain what you meant, I will rule accordingly.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I think I was interrupted mid-sentence. I was talking about the frontbench, which was full when hon. Wafula Oguttu raised the point about quorum, and which walked out in order to deny this House a quorum. And you can see the evidence – all their bags are here! So, those are the people I was talking about; I was not talking about my dear sister and my dear friends on the other side because they are all reasonable people. I know them. So, I simply meant those who moved out and hon. Winnie Kiiza and hon. Katuntu remained. And I said, in remaining, they exhibited reasonableness. That is all. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I think that explains it. Point of procedure –

MR KATUNTU: I am very uncomfortable by the continuous reference to the side on which I sit. First of all, the report we have been debating all along, the majority of the Members who sit on that committee belong to the ruling party. And the first point of contention has been that actually, the majority of the people did not endorse each and every page. And that took us close to two hours to the extent that we had to suspend our own rules to cure a defect by the ruling party. 

The party that prides in numbers, standing alone could be more than twice the quorum needed, does not have the numbers and yet they are busy pointing at my side. You alone, as the NRM, could have formed a quorum. So, Mr Speaker, it is unfair for anybody to insinuate that actually, the problem has been created because five or 10 Members have shown great disappointment and walked away. The biggest problem – (Interruption)

 MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank my colleague, for giving way. The point hon. Katuntu should appreciate is that, it is not a matter of party contestation; it is a matter of individual integrity of a Member of Parliament. It is that accountability – whether it is done by the NRM or Opposition MP. If I come and sign in the attendance register and purport to be present and yet, I walked away, it is an integrity issue. (Interjections) I do not care - yes, both sides. So, I wish we could join hands and agree that when we come to this Parliament, we come to transact business for the people of Uganda. 
So, if the biggest culprits today are on this side, acknowledge it and go and give them counsel that they are shaming the reputation of this Parliament and it should not be tolerated. If you are dissenting, say so; you have the ability to express your dissent. You can walk out in protest.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I think the issue of dignity and integrity is pertinent. I cannot imagine that somebody who has not been party to a debate would leave Owino market and come here saying he has come to vote. (Laughter) The issue of integrity should be taken seriously; we are not voting machines. Such characters should be equally condemned. I agree with hon. Tumwebaze that if we talk about dignity and integrity, it should be total – (Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, I am sure that hon. Katuntu has been here longer than I. when we were beginning debate, I can recall very well that the Prime Minister moved a wonderful motion and we agreed to it. What hon. Katuntu is talking about is what we did earlier. 

Now, according to Rule 78 of our Rules of Procedure, on decisions of the Speaker or Chairperson, let me go to sub rule (2): “The decision of the Speaker or Chairperson upon any point shall not be open to appeal and shall not be reviewed by the House, except upon a substantive motion made after notice”. Mr Speaker, is hon. Katuntu right to go back to where we came from? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the comment from the honourable member for Bugweri is on what transpired in this House. He was simply recounting what happened that we even had to suspend our rules to allow certain procedures to be acceptable within the rules. He has not violated any rule or any order in this House. Honourable members, we go to item 3(1).  

LAYING OF PAPERS

TAX EXPENDITURES FOR QUARTERS THREE FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/13

7.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIVATISATION (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Article 152(2) of the Constitution obliges the Minister of Finance to report to Parliament periodically on the exercise of the powers conferred by any law to waive or vary taxes imposed by law. 
In accordance with that law, I wish to table before Parliament the Tax Expenditures for Quarters Three of the Financial Year 2012/13. I beg to lay. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE PETITION BY THE LORD MAYOR OF KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY, MAYORS OF DIVISION URBAN COUNCILS AND AUTHORITY COUNCILLORS SEEKING FOR THE INTERVENTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PROBE INTO MATTERS PERTAINING THE MISMANAGEMENT OF KCCA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you recall that at the conclusion of our debate yesterday, I referred some three issues to the Clerk for verification and to come back to the House. I also offered dissenting Members the first hour of discussion on this particular item to air out the dissenting views they have. 

I now have a report of the Clerk to Parliament on the issues I requested her to find out for the House. I now read what the Clerk has written to the Speaker on her findings. It is dated 23 May 2013:

“To the Rt Hon. Speaker,
RE: Brief on the matter referred to the Clerk in regard to the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government.

Rt Hon. Speaker, at the close of the sitting of the House held yesterday 22 May 2013, you did direct that my office reports back to you on matters pertaining to the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. You gave three instructions namely, 
    1) To verify the minutes of the committee. 
    2) To establish that the report that was circulated was certified by the Members who signed and 
    3) To submit the attendance register.

Rt Hon. Speaker, I wish to report as follows:
    1) On the minutes, there were 16 sets of minutes tabled by the committee chairperson. I have analysed the minutes which to my judgement are the true record of what transpired. In particular, I have confirmed that -
    i) the names of Members and witnesses in the attendance register for both Members and witnesses match with those indicated in the minutes on the respective dates;
    ii) the highlight of the minutes match with the written submissions of the witnesses;
    iii) the minutes are signed by both the chairperson and the committee clerk. 
The only departure from the above sequence is in the minutes of 15 May 2013 that was written by the vice-chairperson of the committee, who signed as the minute secretary. The failure by the committee clerk to have taken the minutes arose from the following circumstances:
    1) A meeting was called on the 15 May 2013 in Room 013 to consider the draft report on the petition by the Lord Mayor.
    2) Four Members namely hon. Besisira Ignatius, hon. Bakeine Marble, hon. Matte Joseph and hon. Nanyondo Caroline came for the meeting. After waiting for close to three hours from the time when the meeting was scheduled to start, Members left the committee room without the meeting that was called taking place. 

The record (minutes) tabled before the House, however, shows that a meeting took place on the 15 May 2013 with one of the Members as the minute secretary. This specific record shows that the draft report was considered and approved in this meeting. Reading through the above minutes shows that:
    i) The committee conducted a closed meeting and excluded the committee clerk under minute 2.1. 
    ii) The meeting adopted the proposal to have the vice-chairperson take the minutes of the meetings under minute 2.2.
    iii) The report was drafted by the vice- chairperson of the committee under minute 4.2.
    iv) Members reviewed the report and adopted it under minute 4.5.

Certification of the report 
The signatures appended on the report that was circulated to the House are genuine. 

Attendance register
As directed, I have attached:
    1) A copy of the Members’ attendance register of the 16 sittings and two field trips conducted by the committee. 
    2) A copy of the witness attendance register for the 15 different meetings with witnesses. It should be noted that two meetings were held on the 17 April 2013 with two witness groups. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, this is my clarification on the matter as directed. 
Clerk to Parliament.” 

Honourable members, those were the issues that I had referred to the Clerk to verify and that is what we have confirmed about what happened. This report, as I had ruled, was properly before the House. It was an authentic report signed by 10 Members of the committee, as I ruled, and I now say we debate this motion. I had given one hour to people who had dissenting opinions to speak and if there are dissenting opinions, this would be the time to respond to them.

MR KIYINGI BBOSA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a Member of this committee. Allow me to report that yesterday, when you had assigned us, as the Clerk has presented, what was adopted in this report was actually adopted after the meeting was closed. So, the report that we received yesterday detailing what the special meeting held on Wednesday in Room 18 in Parliamentary Buildings - (Interjections) – yes, the meeting had been closed. 

So, I was in a dilemma. Unfortunately, my signature still appears here. There was no harmonisation that took place. There was just an exchange of words between Members of Parliament. So, as a Member of the committee, I have reservations on the contents of the report because -(Interjections)– yes, I signed. We need to be very transparent here for the good of - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report, indeed, said there was just chaos in the committee meeting. In other words, what was referred to the committee was never discussed. There were just exchanges and nobody came to any conclusion on any matter, that is what is in the report that you are holding, which apparently, you signed.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, you read the report very clearly and in a language that is understood by all of us. You said you directed the Clerk to find out and you were actually reading the feedback. Is it procedurally right for a Member who is part of the committee, now, to start challenging a report that was independent to help the Speaker to pronounce himself on the matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report of the Clerk, which I have just read, does not include the meeting of yesterday which took place in the committee. It was about previous meetings that led to the adoption of this report that is before the House. It had nothing to do with what happened yesterday.

MR BAKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. A few minutes back, we notified you that as soon as we go to another item, we would have an inflow of more Members and indeed, as you see, the House is becoming full. So, I want the Clerk to continue ticking those present such that - (Interjections) - you remember, we had 118 plus about 10, we are now getting closer to the quorum. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.         

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance in relation to the report of the committee and in relation to the KCCA Act. I want to refer you to Article 176 of the Constitution for your guidance. “Local government system: The system of local Government in Uganda shall be based on the district as a unit under which there shall be such lower local government units and administrative units as Parliament may by law provide.”

Mr Speaker, this provision outlaws - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Article 76? 

MR KWIZERA: Article 176. If you read it together with the Act, the Act is inconsistent with the Constitution. And I think that is why we have a number of issues with this Act. I would seek your guidance, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, that is partly why this petition was brought to Parliament. There was difficulty implementing the law that was passed by this House and part of the confusion resulted from this law. This is what brought this petition to Parliament. 

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure, under Rule 75. We have submitted to you a petition against hon. Odonga Otto, hon. Moses Kasibante and hon. Betty Nambooze. Hon. Nambooze submitted a petition as a person and she was listened to. I would like to request that you do attend to our petition because it impacts greatly on the debate that would follow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which petition?

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, we have a petition against hon. Odonga Otto, hon. Moses Kasibante and hon. Betty Nambooze by the Members of the Committee on Public Service and Local Governments. I beg to lay it on Table. 

MS ALUM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it in order for the Vice-Chairperson of the Committee on Public Service and Local Governments to bring a petition where we Members sat yesterday and did not discuss and by the report they presented yesterday, we Members who sat, our names were not included? Is it in order for the vice-chairperson to bring a petition on behalf of Members when it is not resolved? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what I am not sure of is under what procedure this particular matter is being raised. I wish the Member raising it would address me on what procedure he is using because petitions, as we understand them in the rules, are from Members of the public and presented to the House by Members of Parliament. I would like to understand how you are bringing this petition.

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, I am bringing this petition under Rule 75 of our Rules of Procedure and I beg to read it: “It is out of order to use offensive, abusive -” (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, all petitions are brought under Rule 29. We should not be misdirected.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I finish listening to the honourable member, please. Allow the Member to finish presenting his petition before you intervene.

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What rule were you citing?

MR MAGYEZI: I was citing Rule 75 of the Rules of Procedure, pursuant to the meeting which you directed the committee to hold. With your permission, let me read it out: “It out of order to use offensive, abusive, insulting, blasphemous and unbecoming words or to impute improper motives to any Member or to make personal allusions.”

Also under Rule 76 within Appendix F, sub rule 5, Members are required at all times to “conduct themselves in a manner, which will maintain and strengthen the public’s trust and confidence in the integrity of Parliament and never undertake any action which may bring the House or its Members generally, into disrepute.”

Mr Speaker, when you sent us into a meeting yesterday, something happened, which raised a lot of question and brought a lot of disrepute to our committee, which is a committee of this House. I beg that you permit the Members who have brought this to you because it touched very much the conduct of the Members of this House. The undersigned Members of the committee –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you raised a matter that has got to do with the use of language of a type that is prohibited by our Rules of Procedure, but that use of language was not done in this House; it was done outside this Chamber – it was done in the committee. The Rules of Procedure authorise complaints of this nature to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline.

I do not see how it comes to the House in that form. If there was a privilege of Members of the committee, it would be proper for that matter to be raised formerly and forwarded to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. That is the proper procedure. But we cannot again start debating that complaint before an investigation into the fact alleged is done. That would not be proper procedure because we might degenerate into the kind of situation you had, if at all you had, in the committee meeting. It is not in the interest of this House to get into that.

My recommendation on that matter is that, you follow the proper procedure as persons in charge of discipline in the committees. You also know that your rulings and guidance – if those were violated, the proper channels would be to access the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. 

Honourable members, I had requested that if there were views that are contrary to what I had ruled in regard to the report of the committee and after reading the findings from the Clerk to Parliament - if there are dissenting opinions on what has been put before the House, this would be the proper time to air such views and opinions out.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This matter seems and actually looks ugly. For the number of years I have been in this House, this is the first time I hear of a committee of Parliament locking the clerk to it out. It is more or less like this House sitting and we tell the Clerk to Parliament to get out before we assign one of us to take over that seat and write minutes. It is a fragrant violation of the ethics of Parliament and our Rules of Procedure, which are very explicit and clear.

The guidance I am seeking is, under what circumstances can a committee of Parliament with Members of Parliament sit and kick the clerk to that committee out of a meeting? And under what rule does one of the Members of the committee turn themselves into a clerk to the committee? This is something that does not happen in any Parliament and it is the first time I hear of it in this Parliament since I joined in 2001.

Therefore, I would like to say that this rather unusual situation has forced many Members to regard this report with a lot of suspicion, and look at it in a manner that suggests that there is something very strange. I still wonder what was confidential – and this is coupled, Mr Speaker, with minutes some of which are being disowned by Members of the very committee. How do you expect us to proceed on this report? How do you expect us to proceed under these circumstances?

My view – and I seek your guidance – is that the controversy surrounding this report renders it irreparable. (Interjections) We passed that stage before the report was put in place and now, we have a report in place, but which makes us rethink about what we had passed because there is something irregular that has happened. 

So, my view is that under the circumstances, it might not be very useful for us to continue as if everything is correct and so, we need your guidance on this matter. Which report is this that was prepared after the clerk to the committee had been kicked out of the meeting, which we are busy considering?

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to seek your guidance in respect to the report by the Clerk to Parliament. The last paragraph of the report of the committee talks about the attendance list, but the report by the Clerk to Parliament says that after crosschecking the attendance lists, she was only able to ascertain attendance for 16 meetings and two field trips.  This means that the meeting that took place on 15 May 2013 had no attendance list. 

I would like to seek your guidance. In the circumstance that, that particular meeting was outside our Rules of Procedure and secondly, the Clerk could not even ascertain whether or not Members attended that meeting, how can we be sure that that meeting actually took place when the attendance list could not be ascertained by the Clerk according to the report of the attendance register?

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The further guidance I am seeking from you emanates from a number of our rules. Rule 196(2) provides: “The Clerk of a committee shall record the minutes of proceedings of the committee.” In other words, the clerk is the minute secretary and the clerk, as a civil servant, takes a particular oath of the clerk. Further, Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which rule?

MR SSEGGONA: Rule 196(2). Further, Mr Speaker, you have Rule 186: “The Clerk shall be the Clerk to every committee and may delegate his or her duties to a Deputy Clerk or any clerk assistant.” I do not want to imagine that any circumstances ever arose when the Clerk of Parliament delegated her functions to a Member of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, we are dealing with a meeting that took place on Sunday, 12th in the office of the chairperson, outside the committee room without notification and authorisation of the Speaker and without a committee clerk. But problems are more compounded. 

Rule 185(2) states: “The number of Members required to form the quorum of every committee under sub-rule (1) shall be in addition to the Chairperson or any other Member presiding.” In other words, there is a quorum prescribed for every committee meeting and under no circumstances has this quorum ever fallen to two, that is, including the chairperson and the vice-chairperson who has substituted his title with a clerk of the committee.

Mr Speaker, the element of quorum goes to the root of our proceedings and the integrity of this House. I seek your guidance on what precedent we are setting, one, by allowing and proceeding to debate a report drafted and approved by two Members and then circulated in the corridors for Members to sign; two, where you have no mandatory minute secretary who is the clerk. Number three, at a venue changed on a Sunday without authorisation from the Speaker. Guide me, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what I have attached to the report, regarding the signing of attendance, are as the Clerk has said. There is no list of attendance attached for the meeting of the 15th in which this final report was adopted. There is no page; I have all the sets here: 24 January 2013, the Members who were present were there; 28 January 2013, the Members who attended this meeting are there; 28 January 2013 - This is the meeting where they had to meet twice. The committee met twice on the same day but they had to sign twice also. 

There is a meeting of the 29 January 2013; another one of the 1 February 2013 and yet another one of 5 February 2013. The next one is 6 February 2013. There is another one on the 6 February 2013. Then another meeting - the date is photocopied badly but I suppose it is the one that follows. Then there is another one on the 20 February 2013. There is another meeting of 21 February 2013. The next meeting was 26 February 2013. There was a meeting on 17 April 2013. There is another meeting of 17 April 2013. I guess these are days when they had two meetings. 

There is another meeting on 24 April 2013; there is another meeting on 22 May 2013. There is another meeting of 8th February - Yes, I think this is forwarded. These are field trips. There was a field trip on 8 February 2013 to Mabua Road, Sezibwa Road and Kafumbe Mukasa and then also on the 8th February, a visit to City Mortuary and Kiteezi land-fill. These are the records from the registers that are available and in all this, except for one, the honourable member who presented the petition has signed on them and in all this, hon. Mugume was, actually, present. So, the issue is on the meeting of 15th May.

Honourable members, I think there is a way forward in this. Certainly, the committee had done its work in terms of interaction and also there is another list of witnesses. I do not need to go through the witnesses. Do I? The list of witnesses is not in contest; I see the MPs from the city have all been here and they include: hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, hon. Nabilah Sempala, hon. Moses Kasibante, hon. Latif Ssebagala, hon. John Ssimbwa, hon. Sebuliba Mutumba - All of them appeared before the committee. In this meeting, all these Members from the other side of the House were there.

Honourable members, this work that has been done by the committee should not go in vain because they have interacted even with the Lord Mayor and the technical staff, including Madam Jennifer Musisi. All of them are on this record. So, the committee has done some work; the problem is the meeting of the 15th, which has issues, regarding the way it was done and the way the report was framed. That is where the contestation is - Well, the absence of the Clerk is not fatal; maybe that is where we now need to find a way forward because the report from the Clerk as to what happened is here. How do we proceed? 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I look through our rules, it is the committee that is responsible for making reports. Rule 193, which we have all along been talking about says: “Members of the committee are required to sign…” In sub-rule (2), they have collective responsibility for the decisions contained in the report. In Rule 194, on minority report, Members who dissent make their own report. In 194(3), it says: “In preparing a minority report, a Member shall be accorded reasonable assistance by the Office of the Clerk.” So, the Office of the Clerk may accord them reasonable assistance. The only requirement that I see in our rules, for the Clerk to perform a duty, is what hon. Sseggona read in Rule 196. And it says: “The clerk of a committee shall transmit written notice of each meeting, addressed to each member of the committee, together with a copy of the agenda.” And sub-rule (2) says: “The clerk of a committee shall record the minutes of proceedings of the committee.”

Obviously, the “record of the proceedings” is different from the “report of the committee”. A record of minutes and a record of the proceedings of a committee is not the same as the report itself. So, the point I am making for those who are able to discern it – (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Prime Minister made similar remarks yesterday and you made a wise ruling, which was well reasoned but would be sending a message to anyone who is able to understand. Now, the Prime Minister is making similar remarks today, insinuating that there are people in this House who cannot discern what the rules say and what he is saying. 

In my mind, that continues to bring into ridicule and disrespect the entire House, especially where he does not point those, who in his eyes, are not able to discern. And he is very consistent in his conduct and it hurts some of us, who are able to discern. Is he, therefore, in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, are there Members in this House that are not able to discern what you are saying? Please, put it on record and then I will make my ruling.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, my assumption is that everyone discerns and, therefore, they see this obvious and logical point.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should keep the decorum of the House so that we avoid – and you see, honourable members, it is also not proper to constantly interfere with a Member who is speaking. And this is a habit I have noticed from both sides. This is what brings this kind of reaction. When someone is speaking from this side, there are people speaking from the other side and all of a sudden, their barbs going off. This is not proper. 

So, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, let us keep ourselves within the rules of the House.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The point I was making, which I know everyone understands, is that when you look at the rules, which I have cited, which is Rule 194(3), I see the duties imposed by this rule on the clerk as: “Afford reasonable assistance to the committee members in making reports” and particularly that cited by hon. Sseggona, 196 (2) “…record the minutes of proceedings of the committee meeting.” I have not seen any provision, which says that the clerk must write the report. Therefore - (Interruption)

MR AYENA-ODONG: Mr Speaker, I am one of those who, by the Grace of God, do not only discern but also comprehend very well. (Laughter) From what I know, a donkey cannot produce a horse. Is it, therefore, in order for the Prime Minister to suggest that it is now possible for the donkey to produce a horse by saying that whereas the recording of the proceedings of the committee meeting is by the clerk, somebody else can competently write that report? That is tantamount to saying that a donkey can produce a horse. Is that in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a problem. On the meeting of the 15th, the Clerk says that reading through the above minutes shows that: “The committee conducted a closed meeting and excluded the clerk.” This is minuted in the committee report. It is minute 2.1, which is signed. “The meeting adopted the proposal to have the vice-chair take the minutes of the meeting.” This is recorded in Min. 2.2, which is laid before this House. “The report was drafted by the vice- chairperson of the committee.” This is Min. 4.2 of these minutes, which are before the House. “Members reviewed the report and adopted it.” (Min. 4.5) In other words, it is not an issue that 10 people reviewed the report and adopted it; that is why they signed. 

But now, the issue of the clerk – you see, two field trips were held successfully by this committee. I am sure there must have been – what I want to suggest is that this last meeting be conducted properly. (Applause)

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the point you have just made, Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance. What constitutes a committee? If we Members of a different committee found ourselves in the corridors, would that constitute a committee? Could I be enlightened more on the functions of the Clerk as far as our rules are concerned? 

I say this because we are in a growing democracy and we are trying to grow in leadership. I foresee a situation of connivance. The report that we received in the House yesterday and what I watched on the television - I must say that my heart perceived connivance in the committee. That is why I agree with you, Mr Speaker, that the rest of the minutes are fine but the problem is with the last meeting. But let me ask, what was the motive? (Applause) 

According to what has transpired in the committee, I see that there is a problem of interpersonal relations among the persons in that committee. Actually, it is a shame that we should sit here as Parliament for two or more days discussing a report. It is an abuse to me as a Member of Parliament that we should sit in a committee without a Clerk. Therefore, I propose that you provide a select committee to review – (Interjections) – am I protected, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: While you are moving that, let me give you some advice. We have already agreed that up to a certain point, everything was there. The interviews were there and all the Members agreed. It is only one meeting that has a problem. So, should we constitute a select committee for the final report of the committee or the committee can still do that final thing? 

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With your wise guidance, it is true all the minutes of the committee are properly written apart from one where the report was authored. That is a very important meeting because it comes out with the recommendations, which recommendations Parliament will base on. That is why I say that I have perceived connivance in the committee. I ask myself, what was the motive of the committee? Therefore, I propose that as a Member of Parliament, I have developed mistrust in that committee. (Applause) I, therefore, propose that you appoint a select committee to examine the minutes and to come up with a report that can be duly accepted by this House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are all capable of making mistakes. But if you make a mistake once, that does not mean that it should be the end and start of your condemnation. You see, the problem is very small in my opinion. Even hon. Nambooze and hon. Roland Mugume who are Members of this committee were part of that process that led to the 16 meetings and the two field visits; there is no disagreement on this. 

They have had this matter and the complaint that brought in all this case is that the final process was not done properly. Can we give the committee the opportunity to do it properly? 

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, as you may be aware, yesterday, I made a very passionate debate on the Floor of Parliament. But today, I am very disappointed that the committee that we have entrusted to carry on affairs on behalf of this Parliament can behave in this manner; in total disrespect of our Rules of Procedure.  I totally agree with other Members that the chairperson and the vice-chairperson of the committee should be referred to the disciplinary committee of Parliament because this is humiliation to the integrity of this Parliament, and it is direct reflection on the reports that we present on the Floor of this Parliament. (Applause)

We are all Christians – (Interjections) – we are all religious; I beg your pardon. We are religious and we believe in the omnipotent God. Whatever we do must be done in good faith. Therefore, we as Parliament cannot again refer this matter to the same committee because the integrity of the committee and that of the chairperson and the vice-chairperson is in question. So, whatever report they bring here will be questionable. Therefore, I want to make a proposal. 

One, that as Parliament, we register our displeasure to the conduct of the chairperson of the committee and the vice- chairperson. (Applause) Secondly, I beg to move that the affairs of KCCA that were referred to that committee of Public Service and Local Government should be referred to another committee that is competent to address this matter.

I beg to move - because we have handled and debated this matter for a long time and the more we debate it the more we undermine the integrity of this Parliament. Therefore, I would like to move a motion that, one, this report - (Interruption)

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With due respect, we all know that Members of Parliament are designated to committees and are supposed to do work on those committees. According to the information you have given us, the Members of the committee sat consistently, including people with dissenting views, for over 15 sittings. In light of that, we observed that at the tail end of the process, there were mistakes or people decided to ignore the meetings. 

During the plenary, yesterday, Mr Speaker, you had suggested that the committee sits with the committee on legal affairs -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That one was rejected.

MS KABAALE: And that one failed. I am raising a procedural matter, whether another committee will adopt such sittings yet, you ruled that Members should bring – (Interruption)

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we go to Rule 186, it reads, “The Clerk shall be the Clerk to every committee and may delegate his or her duties to a Deputy Clerk or any Clerk Assistant.” We are being watched by the whole country. We make laws and we take ourselves as holy and disciplined people. If the chairperson and vice-chairperson chased away the clerk and they were aware of this law, we should not continue with any matter.

So, is it in order for this august House, the Ninth Parliament, to continue discussing something that is illegal? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, are you volunteering to rule on the point of order? (Laughter) Let me do it then I clear the way for you.

I have been going through this and I am sure you know what, personally, I have been through in this whole discussion. The proper way to do this - and that includes the hon. Member for Kumi County if he still wants me to continue calling him “hon. Member”. Honourable members, the way I think we would solve this problem is to deal with the issue of the last meeting of the committee. 

In that committee, I have the hon. Member for Dokolo County; hon. Nambooze from the Democratic Party; hon. Roland Mugume from the Forum for Democratic Change; and I have independent Members on this other side. The contestation that came was because the last meeting was not handled properly. In other words, these people have spent time. The minutes are okay and the Members agree that the minutes are okay. Can we give them the opportunity under my directive - hon. Members, first wait. Let me finish. I can finish then you can comment because I am not yet directing.

There was a point raised to me informally, that this petition should actually have been sent to the Committee on Presidential Affairs because that is the committee under which this particular sector falls. But a lot of work has gone into this; we cannot just throw this away as if nothing has happened. Money has been spent by this House on gathering these facts that constitute the proceedings of the committee and all those things on which there is no disagreement. For the 16 meetings, there is no disagreement. For the field reports and the 16 meetings there is no disagreement even from hon. Nambooze and hon. Mugume who attended these meetings. 

I do not think they have issues with those meetings that they attended. Do you? Maybe I can hear from the hon. Member for Rukungiri, if he has any issue with the 16 meetings. I am just asking: Do you have any issue? I have seen your signature; you have signed for all the 16 meetings. You attended all of them. You attended the field trips. Do you have any problem with those processes, up to the 16 meetings?

MR MUGUME: No, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes. There is no contest for the 16 meetings and we cannot wash away that record. We have spent money on it; the country has spent money on that. So, let us be realistic here. The problem is with how it was concluded. The material is there and everything else is there but how was it concluded? That is where hon. Nambooze and hon. Mugume have issues. And that is where hon. Santa Alum and the Independent members have some issues. So, what I am suggesting is a properly constituted meeting of this committee with all the Members and all other Members who want to be in attendance, if they like, just to process this – because I am told the clerk even had a draft report arising from this.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I want to thank you for the patience and transparency in which you have handled this matter. However, I would like to say that the opportunity you want to give us today is the very one you gave to us yesterday, but which was wasted. When I came to complain about this matter, I recall informing you that the chairperson and the vice-chairperson of that committee had taken the matter personal.

In the circumstances, it would be very difficult for the same people to chair a fruitful meeting to come up with a true report. Even yesterday, from the evidence being brought in by hon. Kiyingi, it is now clear that these people authored another fake report and brought it here.

I want to state that for some time, we moved very well in this committee and had very successful investigations under the chairpersonship of hon. Florence Kintu. But on this one, Mr Speaker, I feel that this committee cannot proceed with business unassisted. So, it is my humble prayer that – (Interruption)

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank hon. Betty Nambooze for giving way. When she was making her submission, I also looked at an issue where the vice- chairperson of the committee in question has tabled a petition against some of his Members. To me, this means there is some form of conflict of interest that will put the whole thing in jeopardy –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the petition is against non-members of the committee.

MS WINNIE KIIZA: But hon. Betty Nambooze is a Member of the committee and is listed in that petition. I think you can now see that there is conflict of interest because he was praying that their presence here – if that petition is handled – it will substantively affect their participation in the matters of the House. This means that even Members like hon. Betty Nambooze might not be allowed to continue sitting in here, according to the petition.

In the circumstances, I would like to humbly request that possibly the chairperson and her vice honourably step aside. We will acknowledge the fact that the committee did a great job – yes, Members signed the minutes and there are no questions about those minutes, but we have an issue with the last bit, which is said to have been handled mischievously. So, can we have these two people disqualify themselves, honourably, so that the rest of the Members can continue with the work?

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I would like to suggest that a select committee is appointed to take over this work and to treat the minutes that we produced in the other meetings as a true record of what transpired in the committee. And if they need us, we can be called in as witnesses. Otherwise, it will be very difficult for the Committee of Public Service and Local Governments to continue with this work. I so pray, Mr Speaker.

MR LATIF SSEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As representatives of the areas in this city, we are under severe pain. For the last two years, indeed, there has been a lot of tension in the city. When the petition was presented to this House by the Lord Mayor, as representatives of areas in the city, we thought Parliament would come in to find solutions to the various issues raised in that petition in regard to the city.

The suggestion that was presented by hon. Nankabirwa from Kyankwanzi is the best. I am saying this because under the circumstances where the chairperson and the vice-chairperson of the committee are now suspects, in as far as their dealings are concerned, I do not think by telling other Members to team together – when, actually, what happened yesterday was almost about exchanging blows in that meeting – will save the situation. 

I believe that for us to solve these issues of Kampala City Council Authority once and for all, we need to set up a select committee. That committee will not begin from nothing; it will make use of these minutes before they write recommendations. I am saying this because the gist of the matter in regard to what we are debating, are the recommendations. 
So, why not leave them to study the report and come up with valid recommendations that will help us solve the problems of Kampala. But sitting together – hon. Florence Kintu and her vice-chairperson have done a disservice to this country and so are not worthy to continue being leaders of that committee or even just to handle this case.  After all, Kampala is no longer a local government unit.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think at any one time in history, a decision must be made and judgment is left history.
In honour of this House, a petition was tabled for consideration because there was a problem to be solved. A committee of this House was assigned a task, which was to examine the petition but there emerged some shortcomings, which are in reference to that meeting of 15th May.

Mr Speaker, you are a lawyer and you have operated in court. When you have a quorum, you can make a judgment based on the majority. One does not have to get unanimity for all judgments that are made in court.

Besides that, even in this very House, there are divisions. For example, we do not vote on unanimity all the time. Consensus is good but very often, we divide and the majority carries the day. 

Mr Speaker, I have listened, I have accessed the contributions that have been made on this Floor and I have understood your position. You have bent backwards, you have looked upstairs and both sides and I think in what you have said in this House, there is an answer, there is a decision, there is a judgement and that judgement will keep you upright in your position as Speaker.

Mr Speaker, you said that the minutes record the majority of the decisions that are made and can be related to the minutes of the meeting. I think a decision can be made in this House and it will be respected by history that what the report talks about is acceptable to this country, and we can follow it as Members of Parliament. 

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When we started this debate about Kampala, you asked three questions: One, whether there was a problem in Kampala and we agreed that there is a problem. Two, you asked us whether Parliament can do something about this problem and we all agreed that Parliament can do something. The issue was, what decision do we take to solve the problem?

We have been here and this is now, I think, the third day we are talking about these issues and not really moving. Out there, people are watching, money has been spent on compiling what was called a report and at the end of the day, we are seeing that it is not a report but money is being spent and it is spent even now where we are today.

Mr Speaker, you are proposing that we have the minutes sent back to the Committee on Public Service and Local Governments but I have a different view as stated by my colleague from Kampala. One, we have already seen counter accusations within the committee and in our Rules of Procedure, decisions are mostly taken based on consensus and I do not see consensus in this committee.

Two, the matters, which we are handling, are very pertinent to the people of Kampala and to the people of Uganda and when you look at what happened where committee Members chase away clerks, lock themselves inside a room and come out with a document, the issue of integrity comes up.

So, referring the minutes back to this committee becomes a problem to me as a Member of Parliament for the people of Kampala. My proposal is very clear. Rule 178 provides for a select committee. These are matters that are urgent and that we need to handle. They are matters that we need to handle because if we do not handle them and we prorogue Parliament, by 1st July, Kampala will not move because when you look at the law, Kampala is supposed to move. Under the Kampala Capital City Authority Act Section 52, Kampala City Council Authority must sit and pass a budget. If the authority does not meet by that time, Kampala activities will not move.

When you look at the Act, the committees of Kampala Capital City Authority must sit to consider reports, which will make the authority work. So, I would propose that basing on Rule 178 of our Rules of Procedure, you constitute a select committee to handle this matter, even if it means spending more money. We must spend the money to solve the problems of Kampala.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, let me just understand. Are you saying the select committee should start from scratch?

MR SSIMBWA: No, Mr Speaker. As a House, we have agreed and the Members of the committee also agree that the minutes from meeting one to meeting 15 were held, and investigations and interactions were made and the findings are within the meetings of that committee. So, this select committee, under stipulated terms of reference, should use these minutes to come out with a report that shall be tabled on the Floor of Parliament for consideration. 

I, therefore, want to move a motion without notice, under our Rules of Procedures, that a select committee of this Parliament be constituted to consider the minutes of the Committee on Public Service and Local Governments on the petition presented by the Lord Mayor and Councillors from Kampala Capital City Authority and come out with a report, which will be debated by this Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, a motion has been moved that a select committee be constituted. Is that motion seconded? It is seconded by the hon. Member for Kyankwanzi District, the hon. Member for Buhweju, hon. Member for Busiro, hon. Member for Kapchorwa. Okay, the motion is seconded. So, the motion is for the establishment of a select committee to deal with the minutes and draw some conclusions on what this House should do.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, I stand up to make a different proposal altogether. That motion is there but can I make another proposal? We have not decided on the motion yet. Mr –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you debating the motion now?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I am not debating the motion. I am trying to make another proposal.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, in debating the motion, you want to make an alternative proposal?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: No, I want to make a different proposal altogether. It is not to do with the motion. Mr Speaker, we are all looking for solutions -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us have some order, we are going somewhere now.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Opportunity should be given to everybody to speak. Everybody must be allowed to speak his mind. Emotion does not help. 

Mr Speaker, I have followed this argument and I also followed your advice very closely, that up to Min. 15 – (Interjections) No, some people are bound to confuse, but if you have a mind of confusion, then you are confused yourself. (Laughter) Now, we all agree that up to Min. 15 or 16, there is no problem; the only problem is with the last minute. (Interjections) No, I am making a proposal and there is no need for order. (Laughter) So, Mr Speaker, I am saying that if Members can allow me to say what I want to say – [Hon. Members: “Order”] But order for what, really? Okay, I will also raise a point of order to you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order. Yes, let me have hon. Amoding and then I will come to hon. Kyooma.

8.36
MS MONICA AMODING (NRM, Youth (National)): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to make my voice audible in the motion that has been moved by my honourable colleague here. I have been waiting for an opportunity to put on record some of my thoughts about this discussion. Coming from what hon. Ssimbwa talked about, yesterday, you clearly spelt out three things: Is there a problem in KCCA? And we re-affirmed that, indeed, there is a very big problem. And many Members of Parliament have been sitting here patiently, waiting for the opportunity to debate this matter, make a decision and put this issue to rest. I am one of those who have been waiting for this report together with the minority report. 

Unfortunately, as we listened to the two sides, it looks like there were many issues that the eye had not seen. And so, it is with much pain that I stand to support the proposal that we put in place a select committee, mainly because there are issues of integrity that have been raised, which I did not expect from honourable members who we sit with.

Sometimes, we sit here, thinking we are all on the same page – (Laughter) – but unfortunately, I cannot be party to a report, which was arrived at within such unclear circumstances. I thought this was good work done by a good committee, which actually had issues right from the beginning, but I see that the conclusion of the discussion did not turn out well. 

And so, usually, from other committee, when a committee has conducted its work, there is a meeting held for approval of the committee proceedings’ minutes. This did not happen and I have been painfully hearing from my other colleagues who were complaining about this process. And certainly, I cannot be party to such kind of indiscipline. And so, whereas the select committee will be doing its work, my only concern is time because we urgently need to discuss this report and find a fundamental solution to KCCA issues.

However, I also think that there are issues of indiscipline that need to be taken to the rules committee. We cannot tolerate such behaviour because this saga has put Parliament in disrepute. I support the motion that has been moved but also suggest that the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline should also take action and bring to book our colleagues. If, indeed, they engaged in this kind of indiscipline, it is unfortunate to say the least.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, I remember I sat down because of the point of order – (Interjection) – I did not complete what I wanted to say. There was a point of order – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, let us have some order. Let us hear from hon. Kyooma.

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker, the guidance I am seeking is not meant to water down the motion that has been moved, but rather to put the record straight. When this debate started, you had two positions: first, you said the meeting, which was convened on 15th should be properly re-convened. To me, I considered that a ruling. Then later, after debating, you again said that you think the meeting should be properly re-convened. In this case, you were prompting a debate and yet on record you have made a ruling. 

We appreciate that there was a problem with that meeting, which was held on 15th and when you ruled that it should be re-convened, I thought this time, all parties would meet. The clerk would be there and all procedures would be observed so that at the end of the day, we would reach a harmonious position. So, I would like to find out whether your statement amounted to a ruling on this matter or otherwise. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, for the record, I have not yet made any ruling on this matter. Let us have hon. Rwamirama.

8.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Mr Speaker, we are dealing with a matter, which needs recommendations from a timely and informed position. I listened to the report by the Clerk and I thank her for that. All the minutes and everything else were okay until the last meeting. 

Mr Speaker, your proposal has two advantages and I ask Members to support it. One, hon. Bakireke, who was part of this committee and the group with dissenting voices, know all the interviews of the people who attended. So, they will not start from somewhere else. And, therefore, if we allow them to convene this meeting, their input will give us a true picture. In case of dissent, Rule 194 will apply and a minority report will be produced. (Interjections) Please, listen. 

The second one is that we are in the evening hours of our financial year. Kampala City Council Authority is stifled; business is not running and they need a budget. It is against that background that I request Members to support your proposal and we move with it. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to be allowed to move another motion.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when there is a motion on the Floor, the only thing you can do to a motion is to amend it. 

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, I was pre-empted. I wanted to propose an amendment to the motion that instead of a select committee, we put it back to the old local government committee.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is that amendment supported? Hon. Member for Makindye East, I am asking whether the motion to amend is seconded. If there is somebody to second it, let that person rise to second it. There is an amendment motion. Can I put the question, please? I am asking if the motion moved by hon. Rwamirama has seconders. The motion is seconded by hon. Sabila, hon. Kabajo, and the Minister of State for Gender. 

So, the motion is properly seconded. There is a motion before the House. The original motion is that a select committee be created to review the minutes and come out with recommendations to the House. There is an amendment proposed that instead of taking it to a select committee, it should go back to the committee that handled it. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, I would like to support the second motion for the following reasons: If you make a select committee, it amounts to a vote of no confidence on the existing committee. That means you have no confidence in the existing committee. So, what happens to them? Are they going to continue working after this?

Secondly, I personally feel there is no problem with this committee, except that we now need to choose two or three honest people to sit on the committee. (Laughter) Let me make my proposal. Let these two or three people sit on the committee as observers to see who of the two sides is making impossible proposals. 

Otherwise, you have a chance of making a vote of no confidence on the existing committee and there is a procedure of doing that. We should not overlook this committee just because of a few things done by the committee chair. Let the committee sit but with two or three people selected to sit in that committee and watch for who is making impossible proposals.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to resolve this matter. The question that I am going to put first is whether a select committee of this House will be appointed to review the minutes and come up with recommendations to the House. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am accordingly nominating the following Members: Hon. Wilberforce Yaguma, Member of Parliament for Kashari; hon. Member for Butambala, hon. Mariam Nalubega; the hon. Arinaitwe Kajara, Member of Parliament for Workers; hon. Florence Ibi, Member for Kaberamaido District; hon. Joshua Anywarach, Member for Padyere; hon. Felix Okot-Ogong, Member for Dokolo County - that makes six and we need seven. In absentia, hon. Baba Diri, Member of Parliament for Koboko District. We will draw the terms of reference. 

I do not think we are going by size of the House, regions and things like that. Seven is a good number. We can trust these Members. We can have – but you see, there are also regional issues - hon. Member for Luweero District, hon. Brenda Nabukenya; and from the Persons with Disability, hon. William Nokrach. Is that okay – [Hon. Members: “Hon. Baba Diri”] Hon. Baba Diri is Woman Member of Parliament for Koboko District, not for People with Disability. Would this be okay? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The procedural point I am raising is according to Rule 178. This confusion has come about because some of our rules were not followed. If I may read Rule 175 and Rule 179 - (Interjections) If you want to suspend, you will suspend; no problem. That should also be done within our rules. Rule 178 reads, “The House may, at any time, upon a motion made after notice given, appoint a select committee to be nominated by the Business Committee, for the consideration of such matters as the House may refer to the committee and to report on any such matter to the House.” 

Mr Speaker- 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Order. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member -
 
MR ODONGA OTTO: No, but this is a point of order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will raise it.

MR ODONGA OTTO: No, I want to stop her from doing what she is doing. 

MS KABAKUMBA: Rule 179(1) says, “Every select committee appointed under Rule 178 shall comprise at least five members who shall be designated by party whips on the basis of proportional party representation in the House, taking into consideration interests of the Independent Members in the House.” And there are sub-rules (2) and (3). 

So, Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for us, as a House, and through you, to constitute this committee the way we are moving?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the point raised by the hon. Member for Bujenje County - but we have a situation in our hands that the people going to be nominated to constitute this committee must start their work and this House should know them. This House is going to be prorogued today so, the implication of that is that if it is okay with the Members we will proceed and prorogue the House then you constitute the committee as per Rule 179 and proceed with it. So, is that okay? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, let us comply with Rule 179. There is going to be appointed a select committee. Let the whips submit to the Speaker, names of the people who should come and they should be according to proportional party representation, taking into account the interests of Independents. So, that matter is decided and this committee will report - because if this Parliament is prorogued, the possibility is that it will be called back on the 6th of next month, which I have not confirmed; confirmation will come through the usual channels, to enable the committee proceed to do this. 

We give the committee a period of 21 days to report to the House on the consideration of the minutes and getting back to the House so that we can finish this issue. This matter should be resolved before July. That is my proposal. Let us handle it that way. That will be the best way to handle it in the circumstances.

Honourable members, we have item No.5, which was – hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, we have not adjourned the House. Hon. Ochola, we have not adjourned the House. This House is going to be prorogued today. There are issues with departments; there are issues with local governments; there are issues with security people and there are issues everywhere in the country that are pegged on this motion of Item No. 5. 

Honourable members, I would seek your indulgence that we deal with this matter of the supplementary to facilitate the processes of Government. After all, we have proceeded very harmoniously.

MR SSEGGONA: Guidance, Mr Speaker. There is the doctrine of consensus objection and there are some of us who have honest feelings that there are certain processes we cannot participate in. Guide me on whether we have no right to move even when we are protesting against this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this particular issue involves all sectors of Government. So, in trying to punish one of them, you end up punishing all of them. That is it. Let us look at it this way: we should not throw the baby with the bathwater. There are things here that are going to facilitate the operations of Government, including the operations of this House. I am now speaking as the Vice-Chairperson of the Parliamentary Commission. You need to understand the fact that there are issues that involve all sectors, including this Parliament. Forget about State House and all these other things you are talking about.

Therefore, I would like to seek your indulgence, honourable members, that we do not throw away the baby with the bathwater. We need to handle this matter. That is my prayer to you, hon. Sseggona, in regard to what you asked me to guide you on.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much, but I am not in a position to waive my consensus objection. Kindly, permit me to keep my dignity by walking away from a process I do not believe in. I am just begging you – and you know I have the greatest respect for that Chair and your personality. I am contentiously objecting to the process –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which process are you talking about?

MR SSEGGONA: I mean the process under item Number five. I am objecting to it contentiously and not participating in it in any way. I am praying, Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to record a vote against it?

MR SSEGGONA: Kindly, take me in good faith that I am not participating by voting in any way. That is why I am absenting myself from that process.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us move on to item 5.

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

Vote 002: State House

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 128,596,017,000 under Vote 002 for State House, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2012/13.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 004: Ministry of Defence 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 43 billion under Vote 004 for Ministry of Defence, be provide for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2012/13.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 006: Ministry of Foreign Affairs

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 3,680,306,000 under Vote 006 for Ministry of Foreign Affairs, be provide for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2012/13.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 013: Ministry of Education and Sports

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 8,726,000,000 under Vote 013 for Ministry of Education and Sports, be provide for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2012/13.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 014: Ministry of Health

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 5,389,000,000 under Vote 014 for Ministry of Health, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2012/13.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 015: Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 3,500,000,000 under Vote 015 for Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, be provide for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2012/13.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 116: National Medical Stores

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,088,000,000 under Vote 116 for National Medical Stores, be provide for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2012/13.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 119: Uganda Registration Services Bureau

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,325,932,000 under Vote 119 for Uganda Registrations Bureau, be provide for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2012/13.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 120:  National Citizenship and Immigration

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 3,975,107,000 under Vote 120 for National Citizenship and Immigration, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2012/13.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 133: Directorate of Public Prosecutions

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,080,000,000 under Vote 133, Directorate of Public Prosecution, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2012/13. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 144: Uganda Police Force.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 22,700,000,000 under Vote 144, Uganda Police Force, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2012/13. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 145: Uganda Prisons Service

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 13,120,000,000 under Vote 145, Uganda Prisons Service, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial ear 2012/13. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 159: External Security Organisation

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,872,000,000 under Vote 159, External Security Organisation, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2012/13. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 202: Uganda Mission in London

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 430,000,000 under Vote 202, Uganda Mission in London, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2012/13. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 203: Uganda Mission in Ottawa

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 170,000,000 under Vote 203, Uganda Mission in Ottawa, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2012/13. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 208: Uganda Mission in Abuja

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 275,544,000 under Vote 208, Uganda Mission in Abuja, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2012/13. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 212: Uganda Mission in Beijing

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 287,290,000 under Vote 212, Uganda Mission Beijing, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2012/13. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 219: Uganda Mission in Brussels

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 343,426,000 under Vote 219, Uganda Mission in Brussels, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2012/13. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 228: Uganda Mission in Canberra

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 59,000,000 under Vote 228, Uganda Mission in Canberra, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2012/13. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 230: Uganda Mission in Abu Dhabi

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 5,864,000 under Vote 230 Uganda Mission Abu Dhabi be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2012/13. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 231: Uganda Mission in Bujumbura

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 55,367,000 under Vote 231, Uganda Mission in Bujumbura, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2012/13. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 232: Uganda Consulate in China, Guangzhou

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 558,816,000 under Vote 232, Uganda Consulate in China, Guangzhou, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2012/13. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 544: Nakasongola District

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 33,139,000 under Vote 544, Nakasongola District, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2012/13. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 546: Ntungamo District

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 36,208,000 under Vote 546, Ntungamo District, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2012/13. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Votes 500-776: Local Government PHC Wages

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 43 billion under Vote 500-776, Local Governments PHC Wages, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2012/13.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Supplementary Development Expenditure 2012/2013: Schedule 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 9,616,773,000 under Vote 002: State House be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for the financial year 2012/13.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 006: Ministry of Foreign Affairs

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 63,694,000 under Vote 006: Ministry of Foreign Affairs, be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for the financial year 2012/13.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 010: Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 13,007,198,000 under Vote 010: Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for the financial year 2012/13.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 011: Ministry of Local Government

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 9,595,000,000 under Vote 011: Ministry of Local Government be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for the financial year 2012/13.
 (Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 012: Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,500,000,000 under Vote 012: Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for the financial year 2012/13. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 018: Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,000,000,000 under Vote 018: Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for the financial year 2012/13.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 107: Uganda AIDS Commission

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 32,672,000 under Vote 107: Uganda AIDS Commission be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for the financial year 2012/13.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 113: Uganda National Roads Authority 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 175,000,000,000 under Vote 113: Uganda National Roads Authority be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for the financial year 2012/13. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 133: Directorate of Public Prosecutions  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 420,000,000 under Vote 133: Directorate of Public Prosecutions be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for the financial year 2012/13.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 144: Uganda Police Force
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 4,230,000,000 under Vote 144: Uganda Police Force be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for the financial year 2012/13. 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Supplementary Statutory Expenditure Financial Year 2012/2013

Vote 104: Parliamentary Commission

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,900,000,000 under Vote 104: Parliamentary Commission be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2012/13. 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 130: Treasury Operations 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 45,634,997,000 under Vote 130: Treasury Operations be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2012/13. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 131: Office of the Auditor-General 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,138,666,000 under Vote 131: Office of the Auditor-General be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2012/13. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

9.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed and the Deputy Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY
9.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has approved the Supplementary Schedule No.1 of 2012/13 without amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

9.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much for sitting this long and for achieving what we have achieved today. 

9.36
PROCLAMATION 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: “WHEREAS Clause 3 of Article 95 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides that the Speaker may, after consultation with the President, prorogue Parliament by proclamation; 

AND WHEREAS the necessary consultations with His Excellency the President have been carried out and it has been agreed that Parliament be prorogued; 
NOW, THEREFORE, in the exercise of the powers conferred on the Speaker by Clause 3 of Article 95 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, it is proclaimed that Parliament shall stand prorogued with effect from the 23rd day of May, 2013. 

The pending business in the House or its committees is saved. Given under my hand and seal at Parliament House, Kampala this 23rd day of May, 2013.” (Applause) 

(The House rose at 9.37 p.m. and adjourned sine die.) 
