Tuesday, 21 May 2013

Parliament met at 2.14 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Good afternoon, honourable members. I welcome you to this sitting which is a bonus sitting because by now we should have been in recess preparing for the third session of this House; but we were not able to prorogue Parliament last week and the circumstances are well known to the Members. So, the more we sit here at this moment, the more we reduce the time for recess before we start the next session of Parliament. It is therefore in our interest that we should do the business that we can and finish it to pave way for prorogation of Parliament so that we can prepare for the opening of the third session of this Parliament by the delivery of the State of the Nation Address, which is likely to be around the 6th of next month.

The Clerk to Parliament wrote to honourable members to fill and return gratuity forms indicating the period for which they would like to be paid their gratuity. So far a few of you have responded. Please, ensure that you fill the form and return it to the Office of the Clerk before the end of this month. 

Honourable members, you are also aware that the financial year is coming to an end. Members, who have not declared to the accounts section the medical insurance they subscribe to, must do so before the end of this month. Please give these two matters the urgency they deserve. Thank you.

MR SEBULIBA-MUTUMBA: I am seeking guidance from you, Mr Speaker. Regarding the gratuity, what happens if I am not interested? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then you do not. This arose from pressure from Members who wanted to have theirs. It is based on individual interest.

MR SEBULIBA-MUTUMBA: So, as long as I can recoup it at the end of the term.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That would be the appropriate time to deal with that matter.

MR OGWANG: Like my colleague has just asked, what about us? Does it accrue interest at the end of the term?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes it does. Honourable members, you will recall that the Commission took a decision to keep the gratuity due to Members which is normally paid monthly so that at the end of the term it is available to you. But some Members complained and the Clerk designed a form that Members who would like to withdraw their gratuity can fill the forms and indicate those details I have just read. If you are not interested in having it now, you will get it at the end of the term which is something I am going to do. I will not fill that form; I will leave that matter there. They say let sleeping dogs lie. Why are you going to disturb that one?

2.23
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national interest. We are all aware that Makerere University has been restructuring and rearranging its former faculties into colleges and schools.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, why don’t we allow you time to do that when we have the front bench people? Right now it is going to be difficult. (Mr Fungaroo rose_) Honourable member, I did not have any previous interaction with you so you cannot come at this stage.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE DELEGATION FROM THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TO THE ACP-EU JOINT PARLIAMENTARY ASSEMBLY MEETINGS WHICH WERE HELD IN BRUSSELS, BELGIUM IN APRIL 2013 

2.24
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, the report of the delegation from The Parliament of Uganda that travelled to attend ACP-EU joint parliamentary assembly meetings which were held in Brussels, Belgium, in April 2013. 

The delegation was led by the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker and he was accompanied by hon. Bwambale Bihande, hon. Chemutai Phyllis and hon. Oleru Huda. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that report.We will find time when we can discuss some matters arising from that report. Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UA67 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND (AFDB) OF THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP FOR FINANCING THE SUPPORT TO HIGHER EDUCATION, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY PROJECT (HEST)

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We adjourned with the understanding that today we would start at 2.00p.m. but we are surprised that apparently Government is on leave. May we know what is happening to the Cabinet? They are really delaying the busy schedule of Parliament. Can we have an explanation as to what is going on on the Government side?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, it is your matter now. Your motion is on. Please proceed to the dispatch box and present your motion.

2.26
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Mr Speaker, I appreciate the urgency for this Parliament to pass that loan. I had anticipated the Chairperson of the National Economy Committee -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The chairperson is here. You have not moved the motion. You have to move the motion so that the chairperson can speak and report on your motion. Proceed and move your motion.

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to move the motion that Parliament authorises Government to borrow US$67 million from the African Development Bank for the financing and support the higher education, science and technology project. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Hon. Minister, would you like to speak to your motion?  

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Mr Speaker, this loan is being procured by the Government of Uganda in light of enhancing science education in our public universities including Makerere, Kyambogo, Busitema, Gulu universities and Mbarara University of Science and Technology, together with Muni University.   

The support will also extend to the two degree awarding institutions: Uganda Management Institute and Makerere University Business School.

The loan will also go a long way in enhancing the teaching of sciences with a view of having students with skills for competencies. This will help so much in reducing unemployment in Uganda.

The loan has been at the procurement stage for some time now. So, I would like to request Members to unanimously debate and pass it. The deadline for this loan to expire is tomorrow.

The Committee on Education debated matters to do with this loan. In light to its preparations, the Committee on Social Services had earlier been briefed on how this loan is going to be distributed amongst the universities I have just highlighted.

Mr Speaker, it is common knowledge that we are all very interested in continuing to be the hub of education in the East African region. One of the reasons this loan is being procured is to improve the image of learning and teaching together with the standards of science teaching in our universities. I beg to submit. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, too. Honourable members, this loan request was submitted to our Committee on National Economy and I have information that the committee is ready to report on it.

2.30
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Grace Byarugaba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg make a report on behalf of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow 67 million Units of Account, which is approximately Shs $115.38, from the African Development Fund of the African Development Bank Group for financing the support to higher education, science and technology project.

The request was presented to this House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and accordingly referred to the Committee on National Economy for consideration in line with Rule 156 (2) (b) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The committee considered and scrutinised the request and now begs to report.

Mr Speaker, the committee, as part of its methodology, held a number of meetings with officials from ministries of finance and that of education and sports. It studied and made reference to a number of documents that are listed on page 1 of the report.

Background

The minister has given the background to this project. In the circumstances, I would like to, with your permission, Mr Speaker, implore Members to read it as I proceed to the next page.

On page 3, the report indicates that the committee realised and confirmed that the project is linked to the country’s strategy. I beg not to read all that detail. Mr Speaker, allow me to go straight to page 4 on the objectives of the project.

The objective of the project is to improve equitable access, quality and relevance of skill training and research, leading to job creation and self-employment. The strategic outcomes of the project are two: One is the increased access to higher education, science and technology and information communication technology for the delivery of higher education, science and training.

Two, is about improved quality and relevance in the targeted public universities and tertiary degree awarding institutions leading to stronger links to the productive sector.

Under 5, we have the project description and components. The last paragraph under that says that the project will target universities namely: Makerere, Kyambogo, Mbarara, Gulu, Busitema, Muni universities and two degree awarding institutions, which are Makerere University Business School and the Uganda Management Institute.

The project consists of four components: The first component is about improving and expanding science education in six public universities and two degree awarding institutions. The loan contribution to this component is 60.85 million Units of Account, which is equivalent to $94.27 million. This component will mainly be used for the rehabilitation and expansion of the science learning facilities in the six universities and the two degree awarding institutions. There are, however, other areas which relate to this component as indicated on page 5. 

Component two of this project is about building capacity in public institutions. The loan contribution to this component is 6.5 million Units of Account, which is the equivalent to $ 10.08 million. This component will support postgraduate training and specialised skills of science education for our current staff in the targeted institutions. It will also focus on training of staff, and support to the Ministry of Education and National Council for Higher Education for tertiary education and graduate studies.

Mr Speaker, under component three, we have improving quality and relevancy of HEST in public institutions. The loan contribution to this component is 5.15 million Units of Account, which is equivalent to USD $ 7.98 million. This component will strengthen applied research and innovation in science and technology innovations and improvement of relevance of HEST and will support the following activities, which include, among others, support the initiation of at least five new STI programmes; support the establishment of relevant networks and partnerships with the productive sector, especially in the industries sector and other worldwide institutions of excellence in their fields. On page 7 we continue with the areas that this component will support.

I will straight away go to component four and this is project management and coordination and the loan contribution to this component is 1.19 million Units of Account, which is equivalent to USD $ 3.05 million. This component will finance the formulation of strategic plans with proposal for eight year work plans and STI development plan in each of the targeted institutions and project management and coordination, audit, as well as monitoring and evaluation.

Mr Speaker, I will go straightway to page 8. Under No.6 is project cost and financing arrangements. There is a table that details that area and I ask Members to look at it as I move to page 9. We also have a table on source of funds and categories of expenditure well laid out.

Under number seven we have loan terms and conditions. They are very clear and I will not read them but Members can look at them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson, you need to state the terms of the loan. Read those ones.

MS BYARUGABA: Mr Speaker, under No.7, loan terms and conditions, the ADF financing has the following terms. The loan amount is 67 million Units of Account. The loan period is 50 years; the grace period is ten years, and commitment fee is 0.5 percent per annum of the undisbursed portion of the loan accruing 120 days from signature. The service charge is 0.75 percent per annum on the disbursed and outstanding amounts of the loan. 

I beg the Members to look at the loan conditions as I go to number eight; implementation arrangements. Here the Ministry of Education and Sports will implement the project and the day to day activities of the project will be handled by the Education Planning and Policy Analysis Department in collaboration with the Directorate of Higher Technical and Vocational Education and Training both for the Ministry of Education and Sports.

Mr Speaker, allow me to go to the observations and recommendations made by the committee on page 11. 

The committee observed that Government of Uganda funding for higher education has been averaging 10 percent to 12 percent of the education budget over the last five years against requests of at least 20 per cent. Funding of public universities and other higher learning institutions largely depends on government subvention, which in most cases is inadequate. This may lead to the targeted institutions not being able to raise their counterpart contribution of four percent to the project on time. 

On this, the committee recommends that Government should scale up its efforts in fulfilling its commitment of making the financing and affordability of higher education a top agenda of the government. In order to encourage research and innovation, the government should increase funding towards science teaching in secondary schools as well as through construction of science laboratories and provision of requisite equipment and consumables like chemicals and reagents. Lack of such infrastructure has affected the teaching and learning of science in the country, which are the basis for research, innovation and development.

The committee further observed that the quality of higher education and training is particularly crucial for economies that want to move up the value chain beyond simple production processes and products. In particular, today’s globalising economy requires countries to nurture pools of educated workers who are able to perform complex tasks and adapt rapidly to their changing environment as the evolving needs of the economy.

On this, the committee recommends that Government urgently explores and supports the sectoral approach type of training in collaboration with the private sector. This will change the current approach to skills development through prioritising the current labour force to support production in the short to medium term.

If Uganda is to compete favourably, the current education systems should be assessed to ensure there is more hands-on as opposed to theory. Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that 75 percent should be made practical and at least 25 percent theory, learning from international best practices.

The extent of science and technology innovation staff training in the project targeted institutions and also in vocational institutions needs to be taken into consideration as well because of the importance of vocational and continuous on-the-job training, which is often neglected for ensuring a constant upgrading of workers’ skills.

Mr Speaker, the committee further observed that the final impact of the project on government’s higher education spending will be felt mainly in terms of additional resources for maintenance of renovated facilities and repairs and replacement of science and technology innovation equipment.

The committee further observed that the targeted institutions may not sustainably maintain the training facilities that will be expanded, even after taking into consideration the non-tax revenue that is being spent on development related expenditures that would have been freed as a result of this project in the targeted institutions.

On this, the committee recommends that Government should scale up its commitment to increased higher education funding if the project benefits are to be sustained beyond the project’s lifespan by ensuring that the recurrent costs due to the project are timely absorbed into the national budget.

The Ministry of Education and Sports’ budget to higher education will have to be increased beyond the current approximated 10 percent to 12 percent and allocate at least 0.1 percent for maintenance. The targeted institutions should be encouraged by the Ministry of Education and Sports to use business production centres to generate alternative sources of finance to augment Government of Uganda funding on maintenance.

Mr Speaker under number four, the committee further observed that skills to embrace ICT access, affordability and more so ability to use are still salient features hindering effective research and adoption of ICTs in the Central Government, local governments and Ugandan businesses. There is also limited broadband connectivity in the project targeted institutions leading to weak and costly internet services for e-learning -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You need to summarise.
 
MS BYARUGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will now summarise. 

The committee recommends that the targeted institutions in this project should tailor their existing ICT-infrastructure and software development related courses to match the growing needs of business enterprises. This would eventually attract more firms to Uganda and ensure that Uganda-based firms are not overly reliant on foreign firms for Business Process Outsourcing.

Mr Speaker, I will straight away go to page 14, under observation 5. The committee observed weak retention of trained STI staff in higher education institutions and in ministries, department and agencies due to unfavourable remuneration. And on this, the committee recommends that government and the project targeted institutions re-prioritise regular review of engagement conditions for staff in higher education institutions, especially in STI institutions. 

The committee further recommends that the efforts undertaken by scientists and innovators should be recognised through an award system.

Mr Speaker, the committee also observed that research and innovation networks that will be established as a result of this project may face sustainability challenges. And, therefore, the committee recommends that Government ensures that strong linkages with industry and other world class institutions are developed as they will be required to generate research and innovation sponsorships. 

Under No. 7, the committee observed that this was a complex programme with several players: the Ministry of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development, Ministry of Education and Sports, several universities, and degree awarding institutions all at different financial management capacity levels. 

In addition, the committee observed that during the appraisal of this project by the financiers, the financial management capacities of Makerere University, Mbarara University and Kyambogo University were assessed as adequate but with areas which needed further improvements. 

Major weakness in Mbarara and Kyambogo universities was the manual capture of accounting transitions. Makerere and Kyambogo universities had their 2010/11 audit reports qualified by the Auditor-General while Mbarara University had an unqualified opinion.

The committee recommends that Government ensures dedicated strong coordination among all the several players in this project through the Uganda National Council of Science and Technology. 

The committee further observed that this project will support an estimated 475 one-year scholarships, with each target institution receiving approximately 59 scholarships as a poverty reduction dimension of the project. And on this, the committee recommends that the scholarship select committee in the universities should ensure transparency so that scholarships are awarded to gifted poor scholars to participate in strategic areas of STI at undergraduate or postgraduate, taking into consideration gender and national equity disparities. 

Mr Speaker, the committee observed that there is a high dependency on donor STI research funding by many research institutions in the country. The committee noted that the externally funded research was restrictive and was driven by donor objectives that did not address the research needs and priorities of the country. Therefore, the committee strongly recommends to Government that the legal and institutional framework for STI should be streamlined by establishing the requisite science and technology and innovation ministry. 

The committee noted that this project will contribute to the government’s goal of improving higher education to provide adequate quality human resources for development by increasing the percentage of those enrolled in STI programme at university level. 

This project will help produce skills that fit the labour market by enhancing networks for research, creating strong linkages between the training institutions and the employment sectors so as to encourage higher education institutions tailor their programmes to actual labour market needs. 

The project supports Government’s efforts to resolve a key development challenge of inadequacy and irrelevancy of higher level skills produced by the higher education sectors particularly in science and technology.

The committee, therefore, supports and recommends to this House to approve the request by Government to borrow 67 million Units of Account from the African Development Fund of the African Development Bank Group for financing the support to Higher Education, Science and Technology Project. I beg to Move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, very much, Madam Chairperson. Hon. Members –

MS BYARUGABA: But, Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the relevant documents that the committee used as it came up with this report. I also wish to lay the minutes of the Committee on the National Economy held on 29th April. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.

MS BYARUGABA: Mr Speaker, I also wish to lay on Table the proposal for ADF loan of 67 million Units of Account to support Higher Education, Science and Technology Project. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS BYARUGABA: Mr Speaker, I also wish to lay on Table the aid memoir of the Post Primary Education and Training Expansion and Improvement Project Midterm Review Mission. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS BYARUGABA: Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on Table the loan agreement signed between the Republic of Uganda and the African Development Fund for the financing of the support for Higher Education, Science and Technology Project for 67 million Units of Account. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS BYARUGABA: Lastly, Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the African Development Fund Legal Service Department Public Sector Operations Mission Negotiated Draft. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you. Please lay also the text of the report on Table. Please mention it.

MS BYARUGABA: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table a copy of the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow 67 million Units of Account from the African Development Fund of the African Development Bank Group for financing the support to Higher Education, Science and Technology Project. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you very much, committee chairperson. Honourable members, this is one of those things that are clear but require some intervention from Members. We will be having a fairly limited discussion on this, so that we can make the process move forward. We have two other loan requests. If your statement is going to be on general loan matters and not specific to this particular loan, then we could see how to space because we have three loan requests. If your matter is general, you could come in on the next loan. 

For now, let me inform the House that in the VIP gallery we have the Lord Mayor of Kampala Capital City Authority, accompanied by his deputy and councillors. Please join me in welcoming them. I also inform the House that on the technical bench behind me, I have the Executive Director of the KCCA, Madam Jennifer Musisi and some of her technical people. (Applause) I am not sure whether there was not enough space in the VIP gallery but I see that – (Laughter) - I hope it is not exemplifying the situation that exists at the KCCA because all of them should have fitted in that place. These are the precincts of Parliament.

Honourable members, in the Distinguished Gallery, we also have the Members of the Standing Committee on Social Affairs from the Burundi National Assembly - (Applause) - they are studying about the different special interest groups in the Parliament of Uganda as a precursor to the next Burundi general election scheduled for 2015. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) I have the names here but they are fairly difficult for me; nevertheless I will try to pronounce them: I have hon. Owezie Ibrahim, hon. Inamahoro Esperance, hon. NiyungekoIldegonde, hon. Arakaza Christine, hon. Simbakira Etienne, hon. Ndikumana Constantine, hon. Nsavyimana Herman, hon. Niyonyunguruza Methode. (Applause) Please, join me in welcoming them. They are also accompanied by staff of AWEPA in Burundi. 

Honourable members, can we agree on a time frame on this before we start this discussion – fifteen minutes and each Member has two minutes. That makes 30 minutes. Okay, no wasting of time, I will start with the Member who has been standing for a long time, Kawempe South. 

2.57
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee and I support the loan. But if you look at page 6, they say training will constitute 80 percent scholarships for STI teaching and research staff and 24 for institutional management staff. 

We are borrowing this money, but our national research systems are wanting. I would pray that when we get another loan, we put more emphasis on research itself. We are generating a lot of information but what we need now is to make it more active; to create real knowledge which can be applied. So, when a loan comes, we should put emphasis on research and doing research on those issues that are paramount to our country. Look at the example of china, India, Mexico and Brazil. In East Africa it is only a few countries that are coming out like Kenya. But Uganda is ranking badly in those countries that carry out national research systems. 

You talked about remuneration, that is okay, but we must emphasise that whatever is researched on must be carried forward. We already have a problem with NAADS. Honourable members have already heard about what is happening in NAADS; much as it is a new agriculture extension programme, it is being bashed left right and centre. We are educating our people right from primary, but when you look at the new programme which has come in, it is not delivering and they are bashing it. 

A new one has come in ATASH; what has informed it and where are the gaps of NAADS. These are some of the things which are self-defeating. If we are investing a lot of money to create a group of scientists who are innovative, then we should also give time for certain programmes also to mature without political interference. 

3.00
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have seen a lot of loans and when it comes to the impact of these loans, there are a lot of issues that emerge especially when it comes to value for money accounting. 

My worry at this time is the governance of these high institutions of learning; like the mess we see in Kyambogo. I do not know what the policy was, but Kyambogo used to be a vibrant technical institution providing skilled Ugandans and this was messed up when it was turned into a university. Now we are producing half-baked Ugandans. In fact, now most of them are always on strike. And when it comes to planning for this money – (Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, this is a very important institution in the Government of Uganda and in building confidence of citizens. The honourable member on the floor has made a statement which so far has not been substantiated that Kyambogo University is now producing half-baked graduates. This House is on a national live programme and this undermines the integrity of the institution and indeed of the graduates of that university. So, is he in order to make that kind of statement?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, Kyambogo University is a creature of an Act of this House. The documents, degrees and diplomas it issues are authorised by this Parliament. In the absence of any clear evidence to that effect, I would like you to withdraw that statement and apologise to the House. 

MR RUHUNDA: Mr Speaker, I withdraw the statement; Kyambogo University is producing less product graduates and that is why the creation of employ – (Laughter) - we are talking about creation of employment in this country; people who can fix the economy, those with skills that can produce wealth. But we see that these universities produce more of job seekers than job creators; that is the crisis. 

I think this loan is aimed at solving this kind of problem. So, my concern is about the governance of Kyambogo University. How can we allocate money to this magnitude to structures that cannot govern themselves appropriately? Until that is dealt with, we cannot push huge resources into institutions of this nature.

3.04
MS CHRISTINE ABIA (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a problem with the project management and coordination amount. We are talking about Shs 6 billion and as far as I am concerned, the universities are a hub of knowledge. The expertise we are looking for is found in these universities. This goes to create strategic plans and things of that nature; project coordination and then management. In my opinion, we should not even be allocating for this because the people who need these monies are capable of developing strategic plans. 

Therefore, what should inform the costing of these loans should be that strategic plans developed and costed and a request is made in that effect. Unfortunately, in this case it is not. And therefore my suggestion is that we should significantly reduce the cost from $3 million to about $500,000 to cater for everything administrative. Otherwise, you are just wasting resources to be eaten on travel. 

And, Mr Speaker, on matters of the terms and conditions, by the time I will be 86 years, the country will still be servicing this loan. Why should we be indebted perpetually? One of the reasons why debt levels are increasing in this country is that we are borrowing monies for a very long period of time. 

And the cumulative interest, when you talk of 0.1 percent, it is not little money given the amount that we are borrowing. Therefore, Madam Minister, I think you need to revisit the loans you are asking us to borrow on your behalf. The time period and the interest need to be well regulated and negotiated. 

Lastly, every year, we are borrowing for education and yet we keep investing significant portions of our GDP into our education sector without impact. As we speak, we are wondering, which sub sector of our education is providing quality education – (Member timed out_) 

3.06
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. While moving the motion to borrow, the Minister of Education indicated to Parliament that this is a very urgent loan and that in fact if it is not approved today, it will expire tomorrow. Following what hon. Bako has just stated, there is a tendency of Parliament to be stampeded especially when it comes to borrowing. I am aware that in the past we have had several motions to borrow but Government also has a very bad habit of not spending after borrowing, to the extent that we lose a lot of money in commitment fees; we are charged penalties for non-utilisation of loans after borrowing them. 

A case in point is the African Development Bank loan that we took for improving schools of excellence. Ngora High School happened to benefit from that loan but because of delayed implementation, the activities that were supposed to be undertaken had to be reviewed downwards. They had to downscale the number of structures to be constructed. So, while we consider this loan we want to put Government to notice that it is very unfortunate that when we have borrowed money, there is non-utilisation and we end up losing more money.

I am also concerned about the measurability of the indicators. Many of the activities that are stated in the various components are not easy to measure. And when the activities are not easy to measure, it becomes difficult to critically monitor the loan performance. 

It has been stated that it is for six public universities and two other degree awarding institutions- (Member timed out_)

3.08
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I salute the minister and I thank the chairperson of the committee for this motion. I would like you to refer to page 12, item No. 3, the financial impact of the project. This is where the problem is. The intended impact of these monies will be on renovation of equipment. If we need innovations, we should not focus on machines. Machines do not do innovations. It is people who do innovations. There is a common mistake in this country where we neglect the human resource, which we already have. 

I would like, therefore, to suggest that we must include the professors and lecturers whom we already have to motivate them; not to build their capacity. Capacity building for professors is already finished. Can you build the capacity, for example, of our professor, with due respect, Prof. Kabwegyere, or you motivate him? You motivate him by increasing his salary and improving his welfare but not build his capacity. His capacity is already built. So, Professors of Makerere University and all the other universities need their salaries increased and their welfare improved. 

And we need to retain the professors we have. We should not make them to go out. We should also attract those good resources of Uganda who have migrated to come back here. That means that if you need innovations, you should motivate the human resource. In this loan, therefore, we should include the aspect of motivation through salary increments for professors and lecturers of universities. 

Lastly, in the interest of time, I would like to say this. The Government of the Republic of Uganda must have a mechanism to track progress: progress in terms of equipment. Yes, the equipment we have can be maintained but we have some equipment, for example, of the hydraform machines which were brought here –(Member timed out_)

3.11
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Every other day we talk about the need to keep growing our economy but our economy cannot grow without human capital development and not necessarily in theory, but through science and innovation and research which this loan is seeking for. Therefore, I rise to suppose the loan.

However, I have three issues I would like to raise briefly: One, as we approve these loans, it is important that we assess the performance of the previous loans and the report be attached because some loans have not delivered the desired output.

Secondly, these universities we are sending money to collect a lot of money in terms of fees they charge students but at no time have we heard that these universities have been able to reach a reasonable mile of sustaining themselves without any form of support. Why I say this is that we have got many private universities which run a business model and they have been able to break even and make profit. But these NTR collections in terms of fees from these public universities are always wasted; they are never properly accounted for and they are never disclosed fully. So, the minister should take interest in this matter –(Member timed out_)

3.14
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara):  I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have a scientific background and I am up to support the motion. I will give some few comments. 

In science, we have a belief that any university that is scientific and does not do research is an academically dead university. For that matter, I support this loan so that we can renovate and equip the laboratories in these institutions. The hon. Member for Obongi County, now I am talking as a former lecturer of a university of science and technology – So, I believe in that. 

I have seen training of 80 lecturers to be retained. Mr Speaker, I am very happy that honourable members from Burundi are here. I was in Zimbabwe and I met a very wonderful computer wizard who has not returned to Burundi. He is in Zimbabwe earning some money. Those boys should be coming back to the East African region. If we could train these lecturers and retain them in these institutions, this country will enjoy the scientific innovations here. The problem is we are teaching and donating brains to other countries just because we cannot retain them.

Hon. Minister for Education, you are always in cabinet and I am very happy there are senior members of cabinet in front of me. Can you sit down and hide yourselves in your cabinet offices here and see how we retain these people? Why do we keep donating? I heard a very bad statement from one of us here who said that if teachers cannot be given money, they should go and ride boda bodas. Can you stop that talk! It is very dangerous. 

I support the loan. I support training and retaining of these scientists in these institutions so that we can produce more people who are more skilled –(Member timed out_)

3.16
MS SYLIVIA SSINABULYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to support the motion because this loan request is very timely. For many years, universities have been faced with inadequate funding from Government. While they have been always making perennial requests to Government to increase on the funding to help them improve on infrastructure, equipment and ICT, nothing has been forthcoming. While on our oversight visits to these universities, we were always told of the inadequate infrastructure, lack of lecture rooms, technical workshops, to mention but a few. It is on the basis of that that I support this loan.

However, if this request had come in earlier, I would not have supported borrowing money for capacity building, for example, for the Ministry of Education and Sports, National Council for Higher Education – I would not have supported borrowing this money to give people scholarships. Those are issues that we can finance using our internally generated revenue and taxes as a country. The loan request is good and I urge Members to support it. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have listened to the debate and have not come across any divergent opinions towards the recommendations of the committee on the subject that this loan request be approved. In the circumstances, I now put the question that Parliament authorises Government to borrow Units of Account 67 million from the African Development Fund of the African Development Bank Group for financing the support to the Higher Education, Science and Technology Project. I now put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW USD 12 MILLION FROM THE ARAB BANK FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN AFRICA (BADEA) AND ANOTHER USD 15 MILLION FROM THE ORGANISATION OF PETROLEUM EXPORTING COUNTRIES (OPEC) FUND FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT (OFID) FOR FINANCING THE UPGRADING OF THE MASAKA-BUKAKATA ROAD PROJECT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that we already received the report after a motion was moved. We only deferred the debate. We will use the same principles of two minutes to debate this issue. Can we have some debate? 

3.20
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to oppose the motion to borrow money not because that road is not in a bad state, but because we are tired of being fooled. We were told that Government was increasing taxes on fuel to stop us from paying road license fees and that this would further help to build a Road Fund; the excess levies on fuel would go direct to the Road Fund account. However, to date, while we still pay colossal sums of money because of the abolition of the Road License Tax, there is money in the Road Fund account. Instead the money being collected is being used to maintain the lavish expenditure and lifestyle at State House. So, if the Road Fund is not working, bring back the Road License Tax. For every litre of fuel one buys about Shs 900 is an additional levy we accepted to pay about four or five years ago, but to be channeled to the Road Fund account.

Mr Speaker, can someone tell us why the Road Fund is not being operationalised in Uganda? This is important because there is so much money that people are paying in taxes. Today, we have collected trillions of shillings as additional levy on fuel, but we don’t know where the money is going. I have ever chaired a meeting where technocrats from the responsible ministry were even lamenting to Parliament to help them operationalise the Road Fund.

Mr Speaker, as a preliminary objection, can we be told why the Road Fund in Uganda is not yet operationalised yet people are paying additional levies for every litre of fuel they buy? We are not going to borrow money when the taxes –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, please clear this matter before we move on with the debate. 

3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Privatisation) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the honourable member for raising the issue of Road Fund and levies. It is not news that the law that established the collection of additional levy on fuel so as to finance the Road Fund is already in place. But we have told Parliament before that the law concerning the Road Fund especially on the collection of additional levy has never been operationalised. The reason is that there was a conflict between these laws. There is the law on the Road Fund, but when you look at the Uganda Revenue Authority Act, you find a section that provides that all taxes must be collected by Uganda Revenue Authority.

We have told Parliament before that Government is still trying to harmonise these two laws. However, as the harmonisation is still in process, Government collects all taxes through Uganda Revenue Authority. The collections are deposited on the Consolidated Fund Account from which we base to budget for money to open new and maintain old roads. And where we cannot get sufficient money to do all road works, we have to borrow to supplement the Government revenue effort.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to point out that I am on record for having raised a question for oral answer to the Minister of Finance in respect of the same matter. That time the minister was on the Floor of this House trying to peddle a different argument to defeat a question for oral answer.

I have addressed my mind to Article 153 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which is to the effect that money shall not be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund except where it is authorised by Parliament or where it has been purposely created by an Act of Parliament.

The guidance I am seeking is whether it is proper for the minister, while on the Floor of Parliament, to mislead the House that the reasons they have not operationalized the Road Fund is due to the conflicting laws yet apparently there is no such a conflict between the Road Fund Act and the Constitution?

THE SPEAKER: That was a matter raised to the Chair, but the competence to respond to that matter should be on the other side. The question is, is there any conflict when in his opinion there is actually no conflict in the law?

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, the hon. Member from Jinja is talking about conflict with the Constitution. What we are talking about is, there are two laws, which authorise collection of taxes. One of them is the Uganda Revenue Act and the other one is the Road Fund. The Road Fund came much later than the Uganda Revenue Act and the latter provides that all taxes shall be collected by the Uganda Revenue Authority. The Road Fund Act that came much later provided for part of the revenue, which is a levy on all fuel, to be collected under that establishment.

First, there has never been an institutional mechanism for the Road Fund to collect this tax but also, the Uganda Revenue law provides that this money is collected and is put on the Consolidated Fund. This money is removed from the Consolidated Fund when we appropriate by the Appropriations Act so it is not true that we remove this money illegally. Money from the Consolidated Fund is budgeted by this Parliament and appropriated by this Parliament. The road sector, therefore, is budgeted for and benefits from these funds that are collected.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, on this particular issue of Uganda Revenue Authority and the Road Fund, can we substantially refer it to a committee? Can we refer that issue of URA not being the one collecting, and the Road Fund is not established because it cannot collect - Can we have that matter resolved by a parliamentary committee?

3.29
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga West County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As far as operationalisation of the Road Fund is concerned, it started a long time ago in 2010. Cabinet made a Cabinet Memorandum instructing Ministry of Finance to streamline all these things. First and foremost, they have to make regulations, which regulations can operationalise the Road Fund and two, they have to suggest an amendment of Section 14 of the URA Act so that URA can directly remit this money to the Road Fund account. However, finance has been using delaying tactics. At this moment in time, finance should make a commitment to bring that amendment and regulation before Parliament before the passing of the forthcoming Budget estimates.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think that is specific. Are you bringing the law tomorrow or something?

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, the process for amending a law is very clear. It starts with technical people and approval-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, that one we know. What we do not know is when you are bringing this one.

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, as I said before, we are trying to harmonise these two laws and the timeframe he is talking about, say two weeks or so, is not possible but we can say that within the next two or three months we should be able to make this-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Learned Attorney-General, these are matters that are going to bog down our debate. Can you guide us on these issues, please? Because to draft a law to amend one section of a law - I happen to be a draftsperson and it does not take three years.

3.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, you rightly pointed out that the process of enacting laws in this Parliament is common knowledge. I have a feeling that the sector minister, as the responsible minister knowing the complexity of the subject matter and knowing what is involved in bringing that legislation to Parliament - (Interruption)

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Speaker, after passing the Road Fund Act, 2008 and the Attorney-General was in Government and even on the Front Bench, and knowing that he has to operationalise that Act - It was passed by an Act of this Parliament. Is he in order now to confuse this Parliament and Uganda that it needs time since 2008? With an intention of ensuring proper road maintenance in this country, how can he continue confusing this country? Is he in order, therefore, to continue confusing this House and where there is even a Cabinet Memorandum already instructing Ministry of Finance and I have it here and after many consultations with URA and they had agreed? And I would like to lay this-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the Attorney-General was just being an Attorney-General. Hon. Minister, we need a definite statement from you as to when this amendment Bill will be brought to the House, please.

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, I did say before this House that we have to follow certain procedure in arriving at amending this law and in my considered opinion, considering that this House is about to be prorogued, considering that we shall come back and start maybe the Budget process - That is why I said, maybe three months from now would be adequate time for us to have this Act amended and harmonised!

MS BAKO: Mr Speaker, I think the Front Bench and most specifically the Cabinet ministers are taking this House for granted. These are ministers, with all technical requirements in their office but one of the reasons they fail to deliver is that they are not doing their political oversight and they are interested in undermining the functionality of Parliament -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you already ruling on your order?

MS BAKO: No, thank you. Mr Speaker, these gentlemen and ladies want to undermine this institution by always delaying. Imagine a scenario where we passed that in 2008 and today is 2013 and they do not have anything to say and he is still dilly dallying that we should accord him a clumsy three months to bring that piece of legislation here! Is he therefore in order to undermine your ruling and the institution of Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, the publication of a Bill does not require this Parliament to be sitting. The Bill can be published even when Parliament is not sitting. That does not require Parliament. We are giving you 21 days from now –(Applause)– so that we can resolve this matter, whichever way.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, in the circumstance, now that you have ordered and given the minister 21 days, and being the Chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurance, I withdraw my earlier reservations to the loan. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let me have Mityana.

3.37
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Other factors being constant, I support the motion of allowing Government to borrow to finance the upgrading of the Masaka-Bukakata Road Project. But, I would also like to put it clear to the minister that they are very many other pending projects, especially around this region - the Mukono-Katosi Road has taken a long period of time; we have read about it from different budgets and this has never come to be done.

Mr Speaker, in the last Parliament, this House passed a loan for Government to borrow, under CAIIP programme; we opened up very many roads and most of them being murram roads, have been washed off. The road equipment that was promised to the districts – unlike other districts, which I hope are better than mine, in my district, apart from a very weak grader and one tipper – I do not know whether that is what Parliament approved as a road unit, but that is what is actually happening in my district. These cannot actually do a road. So we opened up these roads but we cannot maintain them. 

Mr Speaker, another issue is about compensation –(Member timed out_)

3.39
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this loan request. Whoever has ever used this road, from Masaka to Bukakata and then to Kalangala, could have seen a lot of potential on this road. There is a lot of palm production by BIDCO in Kalangala; there is coffee, timber and fish. So from that side, when you are connecting to Bukakata, we see a lot of business booming. There are very many tourists who travel to Kalangala and there are several hotels coming up. So by upgrading this road, I think we shall be doing justice to the country.

Mr Speaker, like other colleagues have complained, we have approved many loans here but utilisation has tended to be a challenge. On Thursday, I was travelling to Iganga but we took two hours at the bridge at the Owen Falls Dam. This was because we have only one bridge, yet in 2009 we approved a loan for the second bridge. What is happening? Why can’t we effect whatever is decided in this Parliament? 

So, Mr Speaker, as I support this loan request, I want to appeal to Government that after the loan has been approved, let us ensure that it is put to effect instead of us merely passing them and then implementation becomes a challenge. Thank you.

3.41
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the loan proposal. However, I still want to re-emphasise my earlier concerns about when the Ministry of Finance in collaboration with the Ministry of Works, will come up with one consolidated or grand proposal to procure loans for all roads. From the information you have, the Minister of Works claims that he knows the resource requirements for us to have good roads. So it will unfair for us to continue procuring loans for other places when others are not catered for. I would, therefore, want to hear from the Minister of Works or Minister of Finance as to when we are getting this loan proposal so that we are assured of all the roads being covered.

Mr Speaker, you remember that sometime back I complained about the kind of lies which you advised me to call “unfulfilled pledges”. Those “unfulfilled pledges” are hurting many of us and I am very sure – either deliberately or you just strayed into Pallisa-Tirinyi Road, you must have experienced what kind of situation our people find themselves in. I want to know when we shall have a proposal to borrow money to repair Tirinyi-Pallisa, Pallisa-Kumi, Pallisa-Kamonkoli roads so that our potential will also be boosted. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will now have Masaka, Ntungamo and Buikwe.

3.42
MS FREDA KASE-MUBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support, wholeheartedly, the loan to reconstruct Masaka-Bukakata Road. The President has been promising to reconstruct this road for a very long time and I think the people of Masaka were even losing faith in his promises. So, we are very pleased that we have finally come to this point, where we are borrowing money to do the road.

Mr Speaker, the importance of this road to trade is well established; this is a highway leading from Kalangala to Masaka and all the way to Mbarara and to Kampala. So this is a very important road, both to trade as well as for tourism. We have been starting to lose money from tourism because of this bad road. So I hope that when the road is done, surely the tourism to Kalangala will increase.

And so, I would like to urge all the Members of Parliament to support this loan because it is well justified. Thank you.

3.45
MR YONA MUSINGUZI (NRM, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion to borrow money to facilitate the construction of that road. But, since I joined this Parliament, we have not been taking even two months without borrowing money. We have borrowed money for Bujagali, for road networks and the ministers have always come here and we have never turned them down. But today, I want the minister to assure me that my grandchildren and my great ancestors that will follow me – I do not know whether ancestors can follow me –(Laughter) - will not suffer the consequences. He has never come here to assure us that he has paid back the loan we borrowed in 1989. He has never come here to assure me that he has paid back the loan he borrowed in 1998. At what stage does Government pay back the money we have borrowed? We need to know that because I do not want to leave here after mortgaging this country; I will not be party to anyone who would want to mortgage this country. (Laughter)

So I support the loan because we need good infrastructure but I want to know at what stage government pays back. We always come here for borrowing requests; when are you bringing a request to pay back. I am a money lender; when you borrow money, you have got to pay back.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have a new source of funding. The hon. Member for Ntungamo has money that you can borrow for your road works so that you stop going to ADB.

3.47
MR BAKER SSALI (NRM, Buikwe County West, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would not support this loan, but because I cherish development in Uganda, I will support it. 

I thank the committee for the recommendation in 9(1) on the three roads: Kyetume – Katosi, Lugazi – Buikwe – Kiyindi and Musita– Manayengo. We the people of Buikwe and Kiyindi badly need Lugazi – Buikwe Road.  But I have a problem with this recommendation; Kyetume – Katosi road was partially done and it has been in the budget for the last six years. All that was done on this road went down the drain, meaning that we lost the money which did the initial work. 

Mr Speaker, I request Government to finish what they started. In light of that, let me talk about Kawolo Hospital – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this is a specific motion, please. 

3.49
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will support this motion –(Applause)– but on condition. I shared a note with my colleague for Masaka District about the fact that three years ago, Government commenced civil works on Kampala-Masaka Highway extending Masaka – Mbarara Highway and Masaka – Mutukula Highway. 

In the wisdom of the Ministry of Works, Kampala – Masaka Highway stops around the main roundabout as you approach Nyendo. So, a stretch of about one kilometre was left out. When they started works on Masaka – Mutukula, again they skipped. So in their wisdom, if you want to go to Mutukula, you must use a chopper from Nyendo and reach the road to Mutukula and do not go through the main town. I have written a note to the ministry of works to confirm whether this particular loan includes that patch and he has written back saying, “No”. 

I would like the minister to educate this House on the wisdom of leaving out that stretch. In fact, if you want to go to Kalangala, you again have to use that same route. Where is Masaka – Kalangala Road going to start from? Are you going to start somewhere in space? 

Mr Speaker, I find it ridiculous that they even have a reason, which –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Since you are the last speaker on this, you can have one more minute.

MR MPUUGA: Thank you Mr Speaker, for your indulgence. I find it very critical. I imagine a tourist going to Kalangala through Entebbe and coming back through Masaka and they would like to spend a night in Masaka town. They drive on a very smooth road from the islands and plunge into a graveyard for a town –(Interruption)

MS MUBANDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable member, for giving way. I would like to inform the Member that I also have been pointing out to the minister that the road to Kalangala flows into this very section of the road that hon. Mpuuga is talking about, and that this section is terribly bad. It brings down all the work that has been done on the other sections of the road. I have been pointing out exactly what the honourable member is talking about and I have been given the impression that the minister was listening and that this section will be taken care of while working on Masaka – Bukakata Road. 

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, I think the point has been hammered home. The people of Masaka will see it as an insult to commence civil works on this road while leaving the main road to their cherished town. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, you have very specific responses – I think it is only one. Please respond and we take a decision on this matter. 

3.54
THE MINISTER OF WORKS (Mr Ibrahim Byandala): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank my colleagues for the comments they have made. 

One Member talked about a road we are opening up and the weak graders. Mr Speaker, when these graders were bought and brought here, we made it sure that these graders are for light grading; they are not for opening up new roads; they are not for uprooting tree stumps or breaking houses. If you want to open up roads, we have equipment at a regional level. You apply to my permanent secretary and your case will be looked into and you will be worked on. 

The old bridge at Jinja; someone was there for hours and they were not moving. It is because we were doing maintenance works there which is necessary. And for the new bridge, we have already started the procurement process. And as I speak now, we are seeking for a no-objection from our development partners JAICA on the recommended contractor for this job. 

Some honourable member talked about the Tirinyi – Pallisa – Kumi Road. I am very happy to report to you, Mr Speaker, that the Ministry of Finance and I are already in discussion with the Islamic Development Bank on the upgrading of Tirinyi – Pallisa – Kumi Road. So very soon we will come here asking for some more money - 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, hon. Minister, for giving way. I would like to seek clarification on whether the loan request you have brought here in the name of a road and which has been well supported will remain unchanged in the sense of removing some projects, the projects which have convinced Members to approve the loan, and replacing them with others. For example, the issue of the BADEA loan for construction of 21 bridges in West Nile including Kia Kia Bridge. Kia Kia Bridge disappeared from the list of bridges and up to now it has not been built. So, we know that you can bring very convincing projects here, Members approve the loan and later on you change. Guarantee us here that you will not shift this loan from Masaka to another place. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, please conclude.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, I thank my brother the hon. Member from Obongi. These loans can move in parallel, two or more at the same time. So, yours is still going on but we can also have this one. We do not have to wait to finish this one before we go to another.

Hon. Mpuuga and the hon. Woman Member of Parliament for Masaka District talked about the one-and-a-half kilometres from Nyendo through Masaka town. I totally agree with them but it is not going to be tackled under this. What I can say is that, I am going to have serious discussions with the people of Masaka Municipality because this is a DUCA Road (District Urban and Community Access Road). I am going to have serious discussions with them and see how we can get money either to - (Mr Mpuuga rose_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you finish that statement, hon. Minister. 

MR BYANDALA: Yes, the matter is known to me. I have sent it to my technical people and we are quantifying it to see what we can do to ensure that there is a smooth road from Kampala even through the Masaka Municipal Council.

The hon. Member talked about the –(Interruption)

MR MPUUGA: I have listened to the hon. Minister submitting that this one-and-a- half kilometre stretch is a DUCA Road - whatever that means. I would like the minister to inform this House: if you left Kampala heading for Mutukula, where do you pass? Immediately you reach Total Highway, it ceases to be a highway and it becomes a DUCA road?

Mr Speaker, the reason why I am raising this is that this particular stretch raises questions about the wisdom of the Minister for Works. This is the highway to Mutukula; out of Masaka from Kampala, there is no other route. Why this particular stretch is skipped, I have not gotten your answer, hon. Minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The hon. Minister may only be aware of Kampala City; now you have information about how you go to Mutukula. (Laughter)

MR BYANDALA: No. Mr Speaker, first of all, classification of our roads is not tagged to where you are going. We have criteria we use to have to classify roads under either national or the DUCA. But we have a bypass. If you want to go to Mutukula, you can take a road not through the town but connect to go to Mutukula. So you do not have to pass through the municipality and we are trying – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let not the responses divert us from what we are discussing. The motion is for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow USD 12 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA) and another USD 15 million from the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) Fund for International Development (OFID) for financing the upgrading of the Masaka-Bukakata Road Project. That is the motion we are debating and I think we have debated it sufficiently. I will now put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking guidance from the Minister for Works. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister does not give guidance. That is why I am here.

MR SSEWUNGU: Sorry about that. Mr Speaker, the guidance I am seeking from you is that in Uganda we have new districts and most of the new districts - let me take the example of Kalungu. We almost have no tarmac road, apart from the one coming from Mbarara, going through the district to Kampala and Nyendo. And when you go to districts like the ones in Karamoja, you will find that there is barely a tarmac road. When the hon. Member from Pallisa raised this matter, the minister said, “You are in the pipeline and we are going to give you something dealing with a tarmac road.”

The guidance I am seeking from you, Mr Speaker, is that what procedure do we follow to tender in our requests so that we are also considered for loans? For example, for Kalungu District, the President has been promising us a tarmac road for the last 26 years but there is nothing. So, what procedure do you follow? Otherwise, we might come out losing everything in this era of loans. Thank you, Mr Speaker.                                  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that point was raised as a matter of guidance which is normally given through the Chair. However, the results of the presentation had nothing to do with guidance from the Chair; they had to do with clarification from the minister. The message was not properly packaged. So, it falls for that reason. But the minister should take steps to answer those questions.

DR EPETAIT:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg your indulgence. I had no intention to interrupt the Order Paper. I appreciate that we have a number of issues to handle. Last week, I raised a matter concerning the expulsion of students from Usuk SS. Those students are candidates for HSC. I also observed that next week all the schools are re-opening but the fate of these students is not known. At that time, the hon. Minister for Education was not in the House. Today when we started she had delayed and appreciating that she may have a busy schedule, may I seek your indulgence that we get a reassurance about the fate of these four students lest she may get taken up again with other official duties. The students in question-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, you presented that issue to the House last week. Hon. Minister, this matter was brought to the House and the person who was holding the position of Leader of Government Business promised to inform you. If you are informed, please take just one minute to respond to that.

4.05
THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Mr Speaker, I got the information about what the hon. Member raised that day, through the hon. Kamanda Bataringaya who is the Minister of State for Primary and Secondary Education. The action we took in the ministry was to refer the matter to the technical bureaucrats in that department, and we are waiting for a full report about the incident. Thank you -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Member, what do you expect to get beyond that for now? I think now you handle that one administratively with the minister and follow up so that the students can be given fair treatment. 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, Parliament is about to prorogue. So, I am afraid; next week students are getting back to school but with parents being desperate because they don’t know whether the children will be allowed or not. May I get an assurance from the minister?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable minister, please respond.

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Mr Speaker, the best I can say is that we shall take a decision on the basis of information that we will have got from the school. Otherwise, every education institution has an independent disciplinary committee that handles matters of discipline, but upon which the minister does not have power to interfere with. That said and done, I want to state that I have the powers to intervene though on the basis of facts and reports, which I am still waiting for.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us get to the next item on the Order Paper.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW USD 9.75 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK FOR FINANCING THE CONSOLIDATION AND SCALING UP OF MILLENNIUM VILLAGES PROJECT (MVP) IN UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, a motion on this report was moved in the last sitting of Parliament. I also recall that the report of the responsible committee was presented on this loan request. In its report to Parliament, the committee recommended the loan’s approval. Do we have any debates on this matter?

4.09
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion on the Floor of the House. The justification for this support is: I happened to pass through Isingiro in Ruhiira village. The villages there are so attractive and modern. Every Ugandan should be living in such - My support is based on the hope that when we get this loan, all the villages in Uganda will be scaled up to those levels.

However, my worry is about the amount of money being borrowed. This amount is so small and might not allow Government to scale up every village in every district. This might create political problems from those who will have missed out on the benefits of that project. Therefore, my appeal is, if the loan amount can be raised up, it will help Government to cover a bigger part of Uganda and not just few districts. The loan is so good for Ugandans.

4.10
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I stand to support this loan request. My contribution will be in relation to page 7, paragraph 9.3, which talks about the promotion of universal access, retention and quality education. 

Mr Speaker, this component is to deal with the improvement of the quality of primary education for all children. But I have a suggestion that this component also takes care of the early childhood development. Why do we just look at only primary education? I think there is need for us to emphasize early childhood development. If we don’t do this, we won’t have meaningful primary education.

On page 14, the committee rightly recommends that Government introduces school feeding programmes –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, is what you are talking about part of the millennium villages report?

MS MUTYABULE: Yes, Mr Speaker. They are related.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, continue.

MS MUTYABULE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I was saying, the report talks about the introduction of school feeding programmes. I want to very much support this – (Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you for supporting the loan. However, I have a few issues to ask you to make some clarifications on: One, where are these villages? How many of them are there? What is the basis of distributing these millennium villages as far as the country is concerned? Can you give the details from the data you have? Thank you.

MS MUTYABULE: Mr Speaker, all the honourable member is asking for is in the report. I implore him to read it so that he can know where the villages are. (Applause)

I want to buy the recommendation on the feeding programme. If this programme has worked very well in those selected villages, then there is no reason it should not be scaled up throughout Uganda. I am just praying very hard that this programme comes to Namutumba District as well. I am really fed up with the bad news of poor performance of schools in that district. I think – (Member timed out_)

4.14
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. The idea of millennium villages has been here for some time. And I would like to know from the minister, what achievements can be talked about? What developments have been realised, which the people from Koboko can see to appreciate the fact that money has been properly invested?

Secondly, if we proceed at the bunch of only five districts in 10 years, when will the programme reach Koboko? I think the number of districts being selected is so small. We need to do something because we have to see the project spread to all parts of Uganda.

None of the villages in West Nile has been put on this list. When will the people of West Nile learn about these millennium development goals? Mr Speaker – (Interruption)

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, honourable member for giving way. I want to give information to the Member about the visibility and projects she is talking about. If she read the report, she would have got these examples. Anyway, let me bear witness that this project has constructed schools and health centres, which are visible.

Mr Speaker, our committee visited these villages in Ruhiira in Isingiro District. Some of the committee Members who visited these villages are here. Hon. Nambooze visited and she was happy. She saw the village so Members should not be worried, the projects are there and they can be seen. I thank you.

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you for that information. My concern is, when will it spread to other districts? When will Koboko benefit if we go at this speed? I will support the loan on condition that in the next 10 years, Koboko will also be included. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.17
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a question. Kapchorwa District was among those, which were to benefit in these millennium villages but recently when the districts were read, I did not hear about Kapchorwa. I would like to know why it was not included among these recent districts, which benefited? Thank you.

4.18
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka County, Luuka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When I rose up one day in this House, I remember telling you that I am one of the MPs who have suffered a lot in this House. Ever since I joined this House, whenever we are borrowing, we always borrow to work on projects in the western and northern parts of the country but we rarely borrow to work on projects, which are in Busoga region. I only want to know; what is the criteria used –(Interruption)

MS BOONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The report I have before me says the districts that are in this project coverage include Gomba, Oyam, Bukedea, Nakaseke and Amuria. From the geography I know, these districts are not in the west. Is the hon. Member in order, therefore, to confuse this House and say that all the projects or loans that we get are always going to the west? Even today we have just approved a loan to do with a road in Masaka and I did not know that Masaka is also in the west. Is he in order therefore to confuse this august House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Member for Luuka said his understanding and experience is that all those projects were going to western Uganda in the past and he was saying that if now it is going to change - that is his opinion; all he needs is information. I cannot rule him out of order because he just seemed not to know that these things are spread out. So, can somebody give him information? He needs information but not from Obongi.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, comrade for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that, I have the report and on page 4 there is the “Millennium Village project coverage”. The money being borrowed here, according to the statement, will be for implementing the millennium villages in Isingiro and then undertaking background assessment in the districts of Gomba, Oyam, and Bukedea. So your worries are correct because what is going to be done with all this money is just background assessment in other districts. Do you borrow all this money for background assessment only in other districts?

MR BAGOOLE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. As I was seriously listening to the submissions of honourable members, I realised that when your ruling goes on like that I think my suffering will come to an end with time. I would like to request that next time they are trying to look for areas where such projects are supposed to go, Luuka should also be considered. Thank you very much.

4.22
MS RUTH LEMATIA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Mr Speaker, I am too tall for this thing. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have not read the report but I have listened to what people are presenting and I have realised that they have put a model millennium village in Isingiro, which is very good so that at the end we have something to show. 

I only have a humble request that Maracha, being the least developed, should have been used for setting up such a thing, which will earn us credit. That is what I am bringing your attention to, Mr Speaker. Maracha should be considered for such things. Perhaps when we are through with this one, could you kindly put Maracha on the next list? Thank you very much.

4.23
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support this loan but I want to understand that this project is an approach. It is a methodology, which we are supposed to use in order to get people out of poverty and since it has been implemented in Isingiro District, I have just understood that it is one village or parish or something like that. 

My question now is, since it is a methodology or approach, to what extent has Isingiro District adapted this approach in their planning and budget style? Because the way this project is planned, it is telling us to change our style of planning and budgeting and focus on the rural area or grassroots so that peoples’ lives can change for the better.

That is where my problem is. Ministry of Local Government or whoever is spearheading this, to what extent do we adapt this in our daily planning and budgeting? I would not really think it is a matter of money or getting loans but to what extent is each district, for example, carrying out that approach? I believe that with the money the district local governments are getting, we can have, in each district, a type of village or role model to this extent. We do not even need to get a loan from an external agency. We just need to change our mind set. So to what extent are the ministries of Agriculture, Fisheries and Local Government trying to inculcate all these methodologies into the planning processes of this country? I thank you.

4.25
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the loan simply because when you look at the project component, you find that these are very good components that can go a long way to help our people.

Mr Speaker, on page 6 component one, you see that one of the components is to reduce post-harvest losses. You will agree with me that this is one of the issues that our farmers have been suffering from. The farmers normally grow their crops, harvest them but have no stores to store the harvest. Hence they cannot even wait for the right time to sell their produce, that is, when the prices have stabilised. So I find this loan very important in helping the farmers.

Secondly, on the issue of storage, this is one of the problems that the farmers have also been facing. If only this loan could revive the cooperatives, I would appeal to this honourable House to support this loan.

Then on page 10, Mr Speaker, in Table 1, there is item No.9 about contingency. I am not very comfortable with the minister when he says that contingency is about 10 percent. What is contingency? What is that you want to do and you do not know by now and you are giving it up to 10 percent? This is the only bit where I do not agree with the minister because in the modern way of budgeting and doing things, you have to outline all the activities that you want to do at your fingertips so that you tell us that, “On this one, we have to perform activities A, B, C” rather than allocating 10 percent to “contingency”. This –(Member timed out_)

4.28
MS ANNE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the loan. However, I have one observation to make – that is in connection with the school feeding programme. Mr Speaker, you are aware that Government’s policy on school feeding is that parents should feed their children. But now here, it is Government borrowing a loan whose component is school feeding programme. This shows that Government has recognised the importance of feeding our children at school and I would say that if this is the case, they should go ahead to borrow that loan. Has Government changed its policy? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I will now have Igara, then Rwampara. Honourable members, we are closing this now, please. There are still very many things to discuss; please, Members, bear with me.

4.29
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the loan request to scale up the Millennium Village Project in Uganda. I have had the opportunity to visit Isingiro District together with other Members of the Public Service and Local Government Committee and the Committee on National Economy. I stand here to confirm that what I saw is a good testimony of a project that is really moving a community from one level to another.

Mr Speaker, Isingiro has characteristically been a dry area with a very low access to clean and safe water. But if you go there now, the communities are really appreciating the water project as part of the Millennium Villages Project. Isingiro had the same problem that we have in Bushenyi of the Banana Bacterial Wilt and we have been amazed at the way they got the technical assistance from the project, and they have been able to manually fight the disease. And as we speak today, Isingiro is actually the food basket of Mbarara and beyond in terms of supply of bananas. The road network was very poor but because of the partnership with the local government, the area has been opened up and the farmers are benefiting. They have been organised into farmer group and marketing groups and to me, this is certainly worthwhile and value-for-money project. 

Yes, I know that I would also love to have it in my constituency but I think the effort here within this loan request is to scale up (refine) the methodology so that at an opportune time later, the ministry can take it up as a national initiative –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your time is up. I will now have Rwampara.

4.32
MR VICENT MUJUNI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion to approve the loan for the Millennium Villages Project. 
Mr Speaker, Ruhira village in Nyakitunda is a neighbour to Rwampara, the sub county of Mwizi. Actually those of us who are neighbours to Isingiro have problems because it has become a model and the spirit of the project was to build a model from where others can copy. And I want to suggest to all of you, Members, that whoever gets time, visit Ruhira and you will know that change is possible. It may not be by you or by someone else but change is possible. (Laughter) Yes, you can change the livelihood of individuals and households. So change is possible.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I have issues and these were specifically raised by the Uganda Debt Network. When you look at the project, they only tell us that the project is visible. But there is nothing to mention on what the targets and achievements were. I think the government should now carry out a comprehensive research on what the targets and achievements were such that in phase II, we can see how to effectively implement this project. If you looked at most of these programmes we have had like the NAADS, UPE, the Ruhira Millennium Project is doing exactly that but you cannot know why our Government is failing to register success. Why don’t we have NAADS copy the Ruhira model instead of failing here and there?

Finally, Mr Speaker, this one goes to the minister: Can the minister tell me where we are going as a country because under the UPIC initiative, our debt burden had reduced from 102 percent in 1992 to almost 12 percent in 2007. Now we are standing at $5.7 billion and by 2007 it had risen to 26 percent –(Member timed out_)

4.34
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. If you take a careful look at the paper presented, you will see that it is intended to scale up something that has already been tested. And Ruhira is a pointer that if you want to transform an economy from peasantry, the approach you need to have is holistic – which is proposed here. You need to look at the production but for relevance of the sector that I head, they have a water component which aims at harvesting rain water from the corrugated iron sheet-roofed houses and put it in the tank so that women and children are saved from fetching water from distances away. Similarly, we have almost 38 percent of our children stunted. This programme aims at feeding our children at school. I will plead with Members to support this proposal and support the chairperson by passing this loan so that it can be scaled up –(Interruption) 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: I really thank the Professor – a former UPC mobiliser – for his articulate – (Laughter)– presentation. But the clarification I am seeking is: Now that you have a sample of those villages in Isingiro, why don’t you roll out to other districts? Now this loan is feasible in seven other districts and building more in Isingiro District - this is where we feel cheated. A started road cannot turn out to be the main course of food. So at least they have something to see, but roll out to other villages. 

The other component of building new houses in Isingiro – cant it be pushed into other districts to allow people from other regions not drive across Uganda to go and see that? 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, hon. Otto. Models are shaped to provide direction. In fact, you spend a lot more on building a model than when you replicate. You want to make it a success so that once the model is a success, then you can reduce the costs. 

If you are water harvesting, and you go to a setting where there are no iron roofs, you must also consider what to do before you can do water harvesting. There are a number of things that you need to identify before you can replicate. Replication is cheaper than the first case. So don’t say, “just multiply this” before you understand all the details that the model represents. 

MS ABIA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable minister. The clarification I wish to get from the minister is, he has talked about feeding our school children because of the unfortunate statistics he gave about stunted children in this country. 

Honourable minister, you are aware that the funding your Government gives to the agricultural sector cannot enable our farmers produce adequate food in a sustainable manner. Therefore, attaining both food and nutrition security at the household level is a difficult thing for our parent. 

Now, you are devising a methodology to borrow to feed our stunted children; is it going to be perennial borrowing so that every child in this country is fed on borrowed dollars?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I know that hon. Christine Abia has a very able research assistant who is a roommate –(Interruption)

MS ABIA: Mr Speaker, I am a Member of Parliament who went to school. The minister has just raised an issue that I am not aware of. Who is that roommate that you are talking about, who is my research assistant? As far as I know, my room is not accessible to the minister. Is he therefore in order to suggest and insinuate that I have a competent research assistant in a room that I do not know of – (Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when they talk about “roommates” my understanding of a roommate is a person you share a room with. And in most cases, if you are talking about schools and such places, it also refers to a place where you sleep. That means you have somebody you sleep with in the same room –(Laughter)– now to ask the Speaker to rule on a matter of who you share a room with or whether you share a room with anybody at all would be difficult for the Chair. (Laughter)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, I thank you for your wise ruling. But let me be very clear to hon. Otto. If you read the paper presented, you will notice on page 9 that this support is not confined to Ruhira because Ruhira is like a success story which needs to be emulated. And when it is emulated, it is not emulated in Ruhira; it is done elsewhere and the places are mentioned: Gomba, Nakaseke, Bukedea, Amuria, Oyam districts – all these are mentioned in the paper. 

Furthermore, hon. Otto is fond of referring to me as former UPC. I do not know whether to be former DP would be any superior – he was a dynamic youth winger for the Democratic Party, but he is now a Member of FDC. So change is a constant; there are always changes. 

Mr Speaker, I would urge Members of this House to support the request by Government to borrow $9.75 million from the Islamic Development Bank for financing the consolidation and scaling up of Millennium Village Project in Uganda. It will be a step in the right direction for socio- economic transformation of our economy. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion before the House is for Parliament to authorise Government to borrow $9.75 million from the Islamic Development Bank for financing the consolidation and scaling up of the Millennium Villages Project in Uganda. I put the question.  

(Question put and agreed to.)
(Motion adopted)

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE PETITION BY THE LORD MAYOR OF KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY, MAYORS OF DIVISION URBAN COUNCILS AND AUTHORITY COUNCILLORS SEEKING FOR THE INTERVENTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PROBE INTO MATTERS PERTAINING TO THE MISMANAGEMENT OF KCCA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are aware that this report was presented last week to this august House. I can see from the stamp a petition was presented to the Speaker’s Office, which was not copied to the Deputy Speaker. But the Speaker forwarded this petition to the Office of the Deputy Speaker today, and I want to read the petition so that we all know what has happened. 
It is dated 21 May 2013, but it was received in the Speaker’s Office on the 20th May. I do not know whether there was a stamping problem. It reads: 

“Petition querying the authenticity of the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on KCCA 

Pursuant to Rule 193(3) of our Rules of Procedure, I wish to challenge the authenticity of the report presented to Parliament on the 16 May 2013 on the following grounds:

1. 	The report tells a lie about itself that it was adopted by a committee sitting held on 12 May 2013, which was a Sunday and so no such business could have been conducted on such a day.

2. 	Minutes attached to the report are for only three sittings of the committee, that is, 24th, 28th and 29th January 2013 yet the report makes reference to over nine sittings and field visits. This is a clear violation of rule 218.

3. 	No formal notice was issued for any meeting to draft and adopt the report, contrary to rule 196 of our Rules of Procedure. 

4. 	The chairperson and vice-chairperson have appeared in the media and have disclosed that two of them drafted the report in the absence of other members and the clerk to the committee.

5. 	On 17 May 2013, the clerk to the committee confessed to me in the presence of hon. Santa Alum that no such meeting has ever been held to draft or adopt the said report.

6. 	In today’s committee sitting, I have witnessed members signing two sets of attendance registers, which points to falsification/fabrication of minutes. 

Upon this background, I seek your intervention into the issues raised in this petition and cause appropriate investigations regarding the authenticity and credibility of the report before it is debated by the august House. 

Yours faithfully, 
Hon. Betty Nambooze, Mukono Municipality.”

Honourable members, I think this would not be the first time I am addressing this issue. The day that this report was presented, I received two notes; one was signed by the Opposition Chief Whip saying, “Hon. Betty Nambooze says the committee meeting to discuss the petition never took place. She objects to its presentation to the House. Allow us to consult further on the matter.” This note was from hon. Winifred Kiiza and I received it when I was seated here.

At the same time, when I was sitting here on the 16th, I received this letter signed by hon. Betty Nambooze on this issue. It was addressed to the Rt Hon. Speaker and I ruled on how this matter could be handled. Those proceedings of the 16th notwithstanding, I now have another petition which is raising issues on the authenticity of the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. 

Honourable members, the rules that we set in this House are for purposes of facilitating Parliament to make decisions that are legitimate and that provide a way forward. These matters are not for us who sit in Parliament; they are for the people we represent in this House. 

Secondly, we cannot use the rules to bar something that is actually happening. On the presentation of the report, honourable members, you were here and you heard that there is chaos in KCCA. This particular petition was actually presented by the Lord Mayor himself with some councillors stating that there are some big problems in KCCA. This petition was brought to this House and read. Upon it being brought by the Lord Mayor, it was brought here and hon. Nambooze was the one who presented the petition to this House. 

The petition was forwarded to the committee, as is standard practice, to act on behalf of the House, to go ask questions, interact with the petitioners and make recommendations as to what Parliament can do. This is because the petition was not to the committee but to Parliament. It is Parliament to make the final decisions. 

The committee has met and they have made recommendations, which have been brought here. What we get from what the committee has presented is that there are two things, which we need to take cognisance of. One, that there are problems in KCCA. Two, that this Parliament should do something about it. The third leg about what Parliament should do about it is what is debatable. Not so? But that there is a problem in KCCA, almost everybody has agreed, and Parliament should do something about it; that is why the petition was brought here.

In my opinion, therefore, we should not cite rules in this way to try and do away with issues that are at hand. This petition was brought to me and I want to be transparent about how I handle it. The chairperson of the committee is here and the members are also here. The report is signed by 10 members out of 17. Quorum of the House is one-third. So, 10 is more than the one-third required for a report to be brought before Parliament. 

There are issues of details of its being on the 12th, not tabling all the minutes of the meetings of the committee, not giving a formal notice to the members for a meeting that was called, that the chairperson and vice-chairperson appeared in the media and said they drafted the report. In my opinion, who drafts the report is immaterial. The question is: who approved the report? – (Interjections) - Yes! I have been a chairperson; there are instances where it is almost impossible for the technical people to keep pace with the proceedings of the committee. All those are now issues - that they said they are the ones who drafted the report. Well, they might have said that. The recording is there; “On the 17th, the clerk confessed to me in the presence of hon. Santa Alum that no such a meeting has ever been held to draft or adopt the said report.” 

I am going to call the chairperson of this committee to answer some of these things because I am not going to hold another private discussion in some other place when the members are here and the matter is before the House. Madam Chairperson, - (Interjections) - Honourable members, please, allow me. I am going to make a decision on this. You are not the chairperson. Let the chairperson speak to these allegations and then I take a decision here transparently.

4.59
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (Ms Florence Kintu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to answer to the allegations made by hon. Betty Nambooze Bakireke, a member of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. 

In the first place, this report was duly signed by 10 members who are here. If there is any member who denies his or her signature on this report, he or she should stand up to say so. (Applause)  

Secondly, on the allegation that the meeting did not take place, I want to say that the meeting took place on Wednesday, 15 May 2013 in the office of the chairperson of the committee- (Interjections) - Yes, it is not strange! Honourable members, you are aware that Members of this Parliament at times have run from one room to the other looking for space to hold meetings. That is why the meeting was held in room E405, and the meeting was duly attended.

On the date that appears on the report, I would like to say that the final typing of the report was done on 12 May 2013 and there is no law that prohibits that. Whereas it is also a habit, Mr Speaker, that Members of Parliament are also allowed to go for retreats and do some work over the weekend, I would like to say that while we did not do for a retreat, the document was typed on that day and confirmed on the 15th May this year. Therefore, the allegation that this report is fake is null and void. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to also thank you for the transparent manner in which you are handling this matter. 

One thing that is interesting, and which I have learnt from my 12 years’ experience in this House, is that for the first time we have received a report that is much thicker than the minutes of the proceedings of that committee. The minutes are 15 pages. I have a copy of those minutes and I took time to read through all of them, word by word. You will realise that the report is just 23 pages.

Also, the chairperson of the committee has just told the House that they held a meeting on 15th May to consider the report, but that the typing had been done on 12th May. So, the fact is that they did the typing of the report before it was considered. Mr Speaker, with this kind of procedure, I think there is need for us to transparently and diligently deal with this matter.

I already said that I took time to read through all the minutes. I can report that there are three meetings whose minutes were tabled in Parliament on 16th May when the report was presented, but for all those three meetings the minutes only talk about submissions. These submissions were made by the Lord Mayor and the former Minister for Kampala, hon. Muruli Mukasa. Nowhere in these minutes do you find a discussion or a position of the committee that, for example, following such submissions, this is our position –(Interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I restrained myself, having attended the various meetings of the committee, to listen to the honourable member holding the Floor referring to only one set of the minutes of the committee meetings and yet we have the full set of all the submissions. 

In our report it is also clear that we pointed out, under methodology, the various offices and officers who appeared before the committee to give their submissions. Is it, therefore, in order for the honourable member to stand before the august House and state that the committee only received submissions from two people when our report is very clear about the whole range of witnesses whose submissions were received?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the rules are clear, that you have to lay copies of the minutes of the committee meetings on the Table. On 16th May, some minutes were laid, that is true, but the honourable member is saying that after these minutes were laid before the House, he took trouble to read through the copies of those minutes and got to realise that they only talked about three meetings. That is what is on the record of Parliament as accepted by the Speaker. 

So, if there were three sets of minutes but there were other sets that had not been laid before the House, I would not be able to rule the Member out of order. (Applause) This is because those are the minutes we have on record. If there were other minutes that were not laid before the House on that day, the committee should have said so. 

MS FLORENCE KINTU: Mr Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the honourable member complete his submission.

DR EPETAIT: I want to thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. For the record, on 16th May the House painstakingly demanded for minutes after the presentation of the report. What I saw being laid were some documents in a folder. The minutes that were laid were for 24th, 28th and 29th January 2013. That is the record we have in this House.

That said, it amazes me how a meeting to consider a report would take place on 15th when the report had been written on 12th. Mr Speaker, we need to investigate this matter further and if need be, there must be a certain – We cannot now meaningfully debate this issue; it is agreeable to all of us that there is a problem in KCCA but we cannot proceed this way.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. We have all chaired committees and we know that a committee report is an output of the committee work. Its authenticity can only be doubted and challenged by its authors. We are aware that complainant had a very clear interest because she tabled a petition on behalf of the petitioners. Her interests were also very clear throughout the proceedings.

Mr Speaker, is it therefore procedurally right for people to use technicalities, well aware that perhaps the report is not in their interest, to stifle debate? I think reason should prevail. Mr Speaker, I seek procedure –(Interjections)– It is not about how much people shout. (Interruptions)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Rule 193(3) – (Interjections) – You know, that is the advantage of being a lawyer, not these ministers who are just picked. Rule 193(3) reads thus: “In case of a compliant as to the authenticity of the report, the Speaker shall halt the debate on the report…” - the word used here is “shall” - “…and refer the matter to the Clerk for investigation who shall report back to the Speaker before the next sitting of the House.”

Mr Speaker, there is a formal complaint as to the authenticity of the report and the honourable chairperson of the committee has admitted that they had a meeting on Sunday in the office of the committee chairperson. These are parts of admissions as to the content of the complaint. So, the point of order I am raising –(Ms Kintu rose_) These are some of the disadvantages of UPE.

The point of order I am raising is: is it in order for the honourable Minister, Frank Tumwebaze, to rise on the Floor of this House without quoting any rules and start challenging the formal complaints tabled by hon. Nambooze, who has even brought CDs before this House in order for us to listen to the conversation of these Members? Is it in order for the minister?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I made this ruling on this subject of authenticity on the 16th and I thought it was clear. When the complaint was raised on the 16th on the authenticity of the report, this same rule that is being read by the honourable Member for Aruu was read and I made a ruling on it. 

My ruling was, and still is, on the question of authenticity, that there is a report and that report has been signed. If the signatures were not enough, it would not even be a question of authenticity. That would not be the issue. The issue would be that the report is incompetent to be presented to the House, but the matter being raised is the issue of authenticity.

Ten people have signed the report; 10 honourable Members of Parliament out of 17 Members. The quorum of this House is one-third; 10 out of 17 is way beyond one-third. Now, if a Member whose signature appears on the last page and has several initials on the various pages of the report should come and say, “I did not sign; my signature was forged”, then that would bring the credibility of that report into issue. That is what would bring the credibility of the report into issue. That is what you talk about concerning authenticity.

If a Member who has not signed up to the report and the original intention of the Member was that she wanted to present a minority opinion on the report- If a Member who has not signed up to the report and who was not there when they were signing the report challenges the authenticity of the report, I am just wondering about the locus; you did not read the report, you did not sign it, so how do you say the report is not authentic?

Honourable members, let us be serious. I am now asking, of the 10 people who signed the report, anybody who said they did not put their signature on this report or that this report that was presented is not the report they signed should stand up and I am going to call by name. Let me finish this process and then we take procedure. Let me just confirm the text of the report. Honourable members, what I want to establish –(Interjections)- Honourable members, please, listen to the Speaker. You will raise the procedural point. Let me finish what I am saying.

I am asking hon. Florence Kintu of Kalungu District if she signed this report.  

MS FLORENCE KINTU: Mr Speaker, I signed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am asking hon. Raphael Magyezi, whose signature appears here, if he signed the report. Let us have some order. We said we are going to be transparent, let us be transparent.

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, I signed the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am doing this for purposes of the record. Honourable members, the people who will read the official record of these proceedings should understand what is happening. Hon. Alum Santa Ogwang, Oyam District.

MS ALUM: Mr Speaker, I signed the report alone, with the chairperson.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mabel Bakeine.

MS BAKEINE: Mr Speaker, I signed the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ignatius Besisira, Buyaga East.   Hon. Kiyingi Kenneth Bbosa. 

MR KIYINGI: Mr Speaker, I signed the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Joseph Matte, Bughendera County.   Hon. John Bosco Mubito.

MR MUBITO: Mr Speaker, I signed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Florence Mutyabule, Namutumba District.

MS MUTYABULE: Mr Speaker, I signed the report and I own the signature.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Carol Nanyondo Birungi, Kalangala District. Honourable members, these are serious matters and we should go through this process. Is the hon. Carol Nanyondo Birungi in the precincts of Parliament? Did she sign the report?

There are three members who are absent whose signatures appear on this report, hon. Besisira Ignatius, hon. Matte Joseph and the honourable Member for Kalangala District but they signed. So, the people who have confirmed are seven. Seven is still a third of the Members who signed the report. 

Honourable members, let me just conclude what I am saying. We will deal with this; do not worry. I am here for the whole House. Okay? So, two members from the left side of the House have signed, one independent, one UPC while the other members are from the NRM, the ruling party. Am I correct?

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, those who signed from the other side are actually three because hon. Matte is also an independent Member of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am talking about the ones who are in the House right now. What this shows is that these people own up to this report and the processes that led to the drafting of this report – (Interjections) - Please just have the basic decency of listening to the Speaker. This is what you call transparency. I am going to give you the opportunity to speak, just let me complete and then you have the Floor. So, this report, for all intents and purposes, is a report of a parliamentary committee of this House. Let us now hear your procedural point.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the transparency which you are adopting in handling this matter. However, I just looked up the definition of the word “authenticity” in the dictionary and all dictionaries we surfed online seem not to limit the definition of the word “authentic” to signatures. In fact, the exact definition is “undisputed credibility”. So, if you have sorted out the issue of signatures, there are still other aspects, which may challenge the credibility of this report. One of them is in line with rule 208, minutes of the proceedings of the committee. 

The Speaker was courteous enough to ask the chairperson if there were any minutes she had not tabled - (Interruption)

MS KINTU: Mr Speaker, the minutes of all meetings that the committee had with KCCA on the mismanagement of its affairs are available. (Interjections) I beg to lay on the Table all the minutes of the meetings. (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: I am still on the Floor. I have not yet finished.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of order. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order under rule 78 of our Rules of Procedure. I invite you to read it with me: “(1) The Speaker or the Chairperson of a Committee shall be responsible for the observance of the rules or order in the House or Committee. 
(2) The decision of the Speaker or Chairperson upon any point shall not be open to appeal and shall not be reviewed by the House, except upon a substantive motion made after notice.” 

Mr Speaker, you have made a ruling on this matter, not only today but even on Thursday because I was in this House. Is it in order, therefore, for hon. Odonga Otto to rise and challenge the Speaker’s ruling, clearly without conforming to rule 78?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have said, as I said on the 16th when this matter first came up, that the only way I can say the report is not genuine is if somebody alleges that a signature was forged or that they did not participate in the process that led to the formulation of this report. That is the only way I would be able to ascertain that the report is not authentic or even entertain a complaint that the report is not authentic. But if the report is owned by the people who authored it, on what basis do I now say that the report is not legitimate? 

The judgement is up to the Speaker and not up to the Members. I am only being courteous to the House. I could have made the decision in my office as to whether the report is authentic or not. I am just being transparent. Is this report fake? [Hon. Members: “No.”]- It is not. 

I have ruled on this and any ruling to the contrary would be setting a dangerous precedent that a member who did not participate in the debate or in the formulation of the report can come and even challenge it. That would not be a good precedent and I do not think that was why this rule was made. 

However, there are issues other than the authenticity of the report. There is the issue – (Interjections) - The dates are immaterial because most reports that I have seen only bear the month and the year. That one applies to almost all the reports I have seen. I do not think that a specific date is important.
However, there is a material point of the minutes. 

The issue that the honourable member is raising, that there are other minutes, which were not brought to the attention of the House –(Interjections)- Honourable member for – wherever you come from – please, have some manners. (Laughter) I do not want to cite his names lest his constituents should have problems understanding what he was doing when I said what I said. (Laughter) So, I am just trying to be courteous in not calling your name but that should not be a licence to be discourteous to the Speaker because I have the option of naming you. We are just trying to see how to bring this process to a conclusion.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Basing on the point of order raised by the Prime Minister, I am aware of the rules and I did not in any way intend or want to be seen to  challenge the Speaker’s ruling without following the rules, without which I would not be speaking here anyway. 

Mr Speaker, I still seek your indulgence. Unfortunately, as a whole Parliament we seem to be washing dirty linen in public. People have come to us to seek for remedy and all these technicalities are trying to be cleaned in their presence. Our rules foresaw this situation and say that when anyone complains, let the Clerk do the work. Now that we have decided to do it from here, let me ask for guidance as per rule 208, which I beg to read: 
“The minutes of the proceedings of a committee shall be brought up...” - “shall” is mandatory; I think the chairperson would want to know that – “...and laid on the Table of the House together with the report of the committee...” I have just seen the chairperson rising on a point of order and throwing some papers towards the Clerk, scandalising the decorum of the House as if we did not have orientation in the Rules of Procedure. 

Mr Speaker, the guidance I seek from you is: are these minutes admissible in the manner and fashion in which they have been laid, bearing in mind rule 208 of our Rules of Procedure? If the rules cannot work, then let me carry the Mace and go out. We have to follow the rules. Is it in order for a Member to throw reports? Is she in order to behave like she is burying a witchdoctor in a hurry? (Laughter) 

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance with respect to rule 208, which has been quoted by the honourable member. The honourable member has only read halfway that rule. It says, “The minutes of the proceedings of a committee shall be brought up and laid on the Table of the House, together with the report of the committee, by the chairperson, or deputy chairperson or any Member of the committee nominated by the committee, when reporting to the House”.

My understanding is that we are still reporting to this House (Laughter) Yes! 

Mr Speaker, you are the one to help us interpret the rules properly. The rule said the minutes shall be laid; it does not say anywhere that the minutes shall be laid as a bunch. We have laid some minutes and now, we are completing the process. Aren’t we in order to take that process?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there must be something in KCCA that is not right. (Laughter) For sure, there must be something in KCCA that is not right if even after your committee has come up with a report you do not want to debate the issues raised.  

Honourable members, this report was presented but we have not debated. We have just received the presentation from the chairperson of the committee. As I said earlier, and I am not going back on that, there is no issue as to whether this report is authentic or not. What is in issue here is the attendance issue, which we need to handle. 

In the circumstances and given the fact that we have not debated this at all, in order to pave way so that Members can have more criticism and look at better details as to whether the report is based on an authentic meeting conducted by the committee, I think we need to have everything in our hands. We need to have everything in our hands, including those minutes that have just been brought now, so that we can go back and look at them and see if the number of days captures all these things that have been outlined. In that spirit, therefore, I ask the chairperson to formally lay those minutes so that issues about them can be debated by the House. 

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, as you have rightly said, there is something wrong in KCCA. It was because of the mob justice style that we are where we are now. Members of Parliament sat here and because they wanted to please some authority they passed a law which they are now castigating –(Interjections)– According to rule - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, unless you withdraw those remarks, you will not continue. 

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, what happened here in 2010 –(Interjections)– Mr Speaker, if I have no right to speak in this Parliament –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the point is that you made a remark that is disrespectful to the House you are part of. I am asking you to withdraw those remarks and proceed with your statement. 

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, it is very difficult for me to withdraw an opinion I hold about some people; that is the opinion I hold about this mob –(Interjections)– when I – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, then I rule you out of order. You are completely out of order. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Honourable members, lend me your ears. Mr Speaker, I am standing here in my capacity as one of the Members representing Kampala in Parliament, which means I am a very important stakeholder. 

The point I want to make is that I listened to and I have read the report which was presented, but judging from the trouble we took to make sure that the concerns of Members of Parliament in running Kampala are heard by the committee, I have not seen any signal of realisation of what we presented. So, the report cut us off and we feel offended by this report.

MS EKWAU IBI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I attentively heard the submission by the chairperson of the committee accepting that the final meeting that drafted the report took place in her office. So, on top of the authenticity that you mentioned, I suggest that a chance be given to the dissenting voices who are saying they were not involved. I have – (Interjections)– Mr Speaker, I beg to be protected. I have personally –(Interruption)

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you my sister, the honourable Member for Kaberamaido. The information I would like to give you is about the conduct of the meeting, especially the venue where the meeting was held. 

Rule 192(2) says, “Meetings of the Committee shall be held at such times and places as may be determined by the Chairperson of the Committee or in his or her absence, by the Deputy Chairper­son, in consultation with the Speaker.” I believe the venue should not be a stumbling block but the authenticity of the report.

MS EKWAU IBI: Thank you very much, hon. Nyakikongoro, for the information that has turned out not to be so useful because it has not brought out what I was going to elaborate. 

Mr Speaker, I brought this up because she mentioned that, “with the consent or in consultation with the Office of the Speaker.” If I went by that, I am not sure whether that was done. However, that is not my point of contention. My point of contention is on the question where there are controversial issues. 

The issue of Kampala has touched almost all of us and we feel very passionate and patriotic about this city. I have visited hon. Kintu’s office a number of times. Honestly speaking, it is an office that is shared and you cannot tell me that on top of the occupants and the assistants who sit in that office, you can hold a committee meeting in that office. It is out of this, Mr Speaker, that I pray that the dissenting voices be heard. We can commit a full day to debating this and then we find a final solution that would be agreeable. 

Even by the date that is being given, 15th May, most of the committees had already made the final analysis of the MTEF. So, the question was not about office space. As I sit down, I request that the other voices be heard. I thank you very much.

MS ROSE NAMAYANJA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rule 194(2) provides that, “The Member dissenting from the opinion of the majority of the Committee shall be given time to present the minority report at the time of the consideration of the Committee report.”  Where a Member does not provide a minority report, is it procedurally prudent for the House to assume that somebody was not in consonance with the majority report? 

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, the honourable member who brought the preliminary objections raised a number of issues, which we have ably responded to. The last one was that she never received the notice, but hon. Nambooze on Friday 10th informed the leadership of the committee that she was proceeding on a trip to Mozambique from Sunday 12th to Friday, 17th. It was not possible for the committee on Monday and Tuesday to give her notice. The honourable member was too far for us. 

Mr Speaker, since we have cleared these preliminary objections –(interruption) 

MR MUGUME: Mr Speaker, I am a member of this committee. I want to tell my vice-chairperson, whom I respect on this committee, as I am respecting the advice we got from the Speaker, that there is a problem. I therefore think it is high time as a committee that we went back - I am a member of the committee –(Interjections)- Hon. Magyezi, whenever we have a committee meeting, you call me. I was not called this time. I do not know whether you had that meeting or not. Is it in order now for hon. Magyezi, the vice-chairperson of the committee, to lie to this august House that we were informed when actually we were not?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the honourable vice-chairperson of the committee said that they were not able to give hon. Nambooze any notice because she was far away. I do not remember any other statement he made which would lead to the conclusion that you have made. He did not say he sent you notice; he was talking in relation to hon. Nambooze. Unless it can be confirmed otherwise that she was not, but I am aware because even the letter I got from her on 16th May was indicating that she had just come back and she was at the airport. That is the letter I received. Please, conclude. I read it here. Please, let him conclude.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you for your wise ruling, Mr Speaker. In the gallery and in this House, we have people who have been eagerly waiting for discussions on this report. The country is waiting. We have had enough discussion on these preliminary issues, which are not the substance of the report. Mr Speaker, is it not time for us to go to the substance of the report rather than deliberate on these preliminaries? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is my decision on the way forward: We will give the committee the opportunity to harmonise their position, not in general meeting, and allow the honourable member who has a dissenting opinion to be heard. This is because apparently, she has not been heard in the committee. That should be done at the committee level. (Applause)

Therefore, I now order as follows: the general debate on all these matters of KCCA – because the report has been in circulation for a long time – will resume at 2 O’clock tomorrow. At 9 O’clock, the chairperson of the committee should convene a meeting of the entire committee to go through all these issues but also give the honourable member with a dissenting opinion time to prepare a brief that she will present to the House. 

This arises from the fact that we have not even debated the main report of the committee. So, this will give us the opportunity to debate both aspects of the matter. However, this can only be done when we give the hon. Betty Nambooze the opportunity to respond or present the issues that she considers divergent from the opinion of the committee. Even if it is not in writing or a formal minority report, we will allow hon. Nambooze time to present her opinion orally to the House at 2 O’clock when we resume tomorrow. That is my order on the way forward. Thank you. Let us go to next item.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE BUILDING CONTROL BILL, 2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this Bill did not present us with difficulties. We had gone up to clause 7 on the next Bill, that is, item No. 9. In the circumstances, I want to suggest that we move on to item No. 9 and see if we can move on with clause 8 before we decide on how to adjourn. So, let us move to item No. 9.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PUBLIC ORDER MANAGEMENT BILL, 2011

THE DEPUTY CHIARPERSON: Honourable members, we made some progress on this Bill. I remember we stopped at clause 7 and the issue we were discussing was if a special time could be allotted for town hall meetings or meetings in enclosed places, if the time allotted could go beyond the 7.00 p.m. we had agreed on. That was an amendment proposed by hon. Wafula Oguttu and that is where we stopped.

The discussion was that for meetings such as town hall meetings, - for those of you who understand the concept of town hall meetings - they should not be restricted to the 7.00 a.m., 7.00 p.m. timeframe. There should be time allowed for such meetings to go on as far as 10.00 p.m. Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, have I summarised the matter properly? Please put it on record that I have summarised it properly. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Yes, Mr Chairman. To the best on my knowledge, I can recall that that is the true position.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you for putting that on record. Do you recall that we had not taken a decision on clauses 4 and 5 as they appear in the Bill? So, can we take a decision on the issue of town hall meetings? Should I put a question to this matter? 

The amendment was in terms of creating an exception to clause 7 (2) (b) to the effect that: “The provisions of clause 7 (2) (b) notwithstanding, town hall meetings could be held at times not restricted by this particular clause.” That is what he was talking about in summary. 

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Chairman, I agree with the proposal you have made because that is what was on table. The Deputy Attorney-General went on to explain in detail that as long as the purpose for holding such public meetings is not a matter of public interest, this limitation is not necessary; for example, the Leader of the Opposition was talking about a meeting of accountants in the evening. So, we do not think that amendment is necessary.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I must disclose from the beginning, again, that I am a member of this committee. However, this is a new position. My fear is that when you take it back to the purpose, then that will bring in issues of constitutionality because there must not be purposes that are restricted while others are. That is where we are going to have a problem.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What about the issue of exceptions?

MR SSEGGONA: Ordinarily, the exception would be fairly understood if there is good faith. Why you see a lot of anxiety in this debate is because one, the faith. Two, somebody just asked me on the streets because I was trying to propagate this view: do you want to tell me that past 7 O’clock, the Police cannot provide security if notified when that is the whole purpose of notification? So, I am a bit reluctant to even take the exception. 

As a member of the committee, I do not want to engage in the depth of the debate. I was only raising a constitutional matter that is likely to arise if we treat “purpose” as opposed to handling it wholesomely. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the issue was, there is a timeframe proposed in (b) – “the proposed date and time of the public meeting, which shall be between 7.00 a.m. and 7.00 p.m.” Hon. Oguttu’s proposal was to exclude town hall meetings or meetings of this nature from the application of the 7.00 a.m. to 7.00 p.m. rule. In other words, they would not be restricted by this.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, the trouble is that we will even go deeper to define a town hall meeting; for example, if you go to Sheraton Gardens, is that a town hall meeting? I have given an example before of where I had a meeting of DP mobilisers in a hotel in the gardens just to discuss the Marriage and Divorce Bill and the OC of the nearest police post was very quick to place us under arrest. So, you may have to incur the reproach of defining a town hall meeting in that case. However, of necessity, we may have to abandon the “purpose” element. 

Also, how do you define “public interests” because the more words you bring in, the more you need to define? When you talk about meetings of public interest, you will have to define “public interest”. From there, you will have to define a town hall meeting.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, can I put the question to the proposed amendment by hon. Wafula Oguttu?

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I would like to appeal to the honourable minister not to restrict it to the example that the Leader of Opposition gave at that time, which was a meeting of professional bodies because after all, that is an exception as per the Bill in section 6. However, there may arise a situation where you may, honourable minister, want to meet say your campaign agents outside this time of 7.00 a.m. to 7.00 p.m. but you would prefer to meet them in a hall. 

Mr Chairman, such a meeting, in my opinion - Let us have a give and take and be realistic; these meetings take place. If it is a meeting that is within a hall, that is what we are praying for, that let us not have very stringent limitations. Somebody should be allowed to have consultations or a meeting in a town hall. I do not see any big problem.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for your consideration on this issue. I want to thank hon. Sseggona for bringing us a serious point. I think the point he is bringing is diverting us from the prime consideration. Our point is that all factors are constant and there is only one variant, and it is called time. In other words, by its nature, the meeting is a public meeting and we have already defined “public meeting”; so, we are not going to define what “town hall meeting” is. What we are saying is that it is a public meeting. Two, you sought for permission or you gave notice, and three, you are supposed to stop at 7.00 p.m. 

I recall very well when the Rt Hon. Prime Minister moved that amendment that we stop at 7.00 p.m. But we are saying despite the fact that it is a public meeting and it is supposed to stop at 7.00 p.m., the nature of the place or the environment is a town where your audience are just coming back from work probably by 7.00 p.m. Now, the meeting may start at 6.30 p.m. or at 7.00 p.m., should it be stopped at 7.00 p.m.? By their nature and location, town hall meetings actually start even at 7.00 p.m. That is why we are saying we should bring ourselves within the exclusion clause or at least an exception for town hall meetings. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I will take the Member for Kampala Central. Member for Obongi, you will speak; you have been speaking the whole day.

MR NSEREKO: Mr Chairman, I would like to invite my fellow honourable members to look at the times in which we are living and the times for which we are legislating. The world is well above modernity and the issues of 7.00 a.m. to 7.00 p.m. were envisaged in the past era-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, that one is already passed. We are talking about the issue of if town hall meetings can be excluded.

MR NSEREKO: I am coming to that, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Then move quickly.

MR NSEREKO: Mr Chairman, I am not seeking recommittal at this moment but, of course, looking at the purpose, and to re-echo what the hon. Sseggona stated, the purpose will invite interpretation constitutionally. It should never be restrictive because none of us can judge the purpose; it is only resultant after the matters. Therefore, let us look and reconsider what we are trying to legislate for the people and we know that this holds us accountable to the future and for our own actions. Inevitably, in the future it will come back to all of us, so let us legislate wisely. I will propose later, Mr Chairman.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to request my senior brother, the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs, to reflect on the purpose of regulating.  What is the problem we are curing by bringing this law and particularly, what are our fears when we hold a meeting at night or in a town hall? 

Our issue is security. What has changed here are two things; a meeting, which is held in the open has changed to a house or hall. So, it is open and inside the house. Another thing, which has changed, is daylight. I think when you talk about 7.00 a.m. to 7.00 p.m., there is daylight. At night, the fear is that maybe, there will be darkness and, therefore, the risks of security may be higher and uncontrollable. Is that your reasoning, my senior brother?

If this is the reasoning from the security perspective, then we need to take cognisance of the fact that in the house people feel a bit more secure and security can be provided even for 24 hours, including at night. So, for me, the issue of time for night meetings should be left. I support the proposal by hon. Wafula Oguttu that we omit the restriction on time, but improve the security by providing the police.

MR BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want the minister to know that we are not saying that we do not inform the Police. We are talking about a meeting indoors, for example if somebody is launching a book or even a political party like mine is launching something and we want the population after work, say at 6.00 p.m. or 7.00 p.m., to watch on TVs and we want to launch it indoors, say in a hotel or country hall or somewhere, as long as it is indoors. This is why we are saying that we should not legislate - You know, this legislation is coming for us politicians-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, you have made your point.

MR BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA: As long as Members have understood my point. Please, let us leave it open. 

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. All I wanted to ask, for convergence’s sake and for us to move forward, is for the minister to concede so that we have consensus on this issue, which does not necessarily need any more arguments. We do not want to exclude certain publics who may not have time to meet and can only do so in the evening in a town hall. All arguments have been given, Mr Chairman, and we would not like to be tagged into bringing more arguments, including invoking rules on quorum, and so on. But if we converge and the minister concedes on this one, then we can move ahead. Thank you.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I am very happy because hon. Anywarach put this in proper perspective. He said that most of the factors you are talking about are the same, the variant is the place – it is a public meeting, notice has been given and all the requirements are supposed to be complied with in the Bill, but the meeting only happens to be in a town hall or more or less a similar place. Now, I was waiting for his justification. This is a public meeting, it is being regulated, the Police are on site and every detail is in place and all he is saying is that it is in a town hall. 

To me, I think the Minister of Internal Affairs should come in here because whoever contributed on this issue of time was emphasising daylight - ability for those concerned to be able to transact the affairs during daylight and the regulation becomes smooth. The moment you stretch it into the night, I do not know how you would want to contain the security situation. This is a public meeting and you want to extend it and its regulation during the night; that is the challenge. I have not heard good justification from those proposing this amendment. Thank you.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, I gave justification. Just like hon. Ruth Nankabirwa the other time stated, you need audience for a public meeting. By the nature of a town setup, audience will be realised, basically, from 6.00 p.m. to 7.00 p.m. Imagine a city or a town council and you have called for a meeting, most people are working class and so they will be leaving office in the evening. What will be the use of starting a meeting at 7.00 p.m. and being stopped immediately? So, we were looking at a city setup, including municipalities, councils and town boards. Thank you.

MRS GALIWANGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I come from an urban area, much as I represent the whole district. Whenever meetings are called in town, people come during the day. There could be a single one who might want to come at other times but the majority will arrive up to 6.00 p.m. So, we should not go that far because I know there can be trouble caused by some people when it is dark.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to state this in good faith. I have been living in Mbarara town since 1984. I am a man born in the village but reared in town and so, I will talk as somebody who is experienced in town matters. 

As town dwellers, we normally have our meetings at night. I do not know what is happening. Why do you want to cut us out? Honourable minister, what are you doing now? Mr Chairman, the reason we agreed to put this law in place is because we did not want people to burn roads, and that is what the President is always talking about. Do you want to follow us even up to our homes? Honourable Prime Minister, please, concede. Thank you. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, I have been consulting on my side and we think the proposed exception is reasonable. (Applause) Obviously, as he said, when we eventually come back to clause 2, after covering the rest of the Bill, it will be necessary for us to interpret “town hall” so that there is no misunderstanding of what it is. Therefore, we would like to concede and take that amendment. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you. Honourable members, I now put the question to the amendment proposed by the Member for Bukooli Central to exclude town hall meetings from the application of the 7.00 a.m. to 7.00 p.m. regulation.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There was an outstanding issue on sub-clauses (4) and (5). Is there any amendment? 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The committee proposes an amendment to sub-clause (4) of clause 7 to insert immediately after the word “and”, but before the word “fails”, the words “without any reasonable excuse”. It would now read as follows: “An organiser or his or her agent who holds a public meeting and without any reasonable excuse fails to comply with the conditions under this Act commits an offence...”

The justification is: to allow parameters where there is a valid reason for non-notification or where the assembly is spontaneous.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment from the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is there any proposal on sub clause (5)? 

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. On sub-clause (5), I would like to remove the words “prima facie”. The committee had an amendment but they have not read it. It would read thus: “A document certified by the Inspector-General of Police…” – with the committee amendment it would read, “authorised officer” – “…specifying the terms, date and manner of service of a notice under this section shall be admissible as prima facie evidence in any court proceedings.” 

I would like the words “prima facie” deleted. Mr Chairman, unlike you, I am not a lawyer but in law, prima facie means that you can be indicted on the face of that particular evidence brought by the Inspector-General, in this circumstance. We have the Evidence Act - how evidence is brought to court. We have the Constitution, which deals with the question of presumed innocence. So, I would pray that everybody comes before court with their evidence and they are evaluated on the basis of the evidence they bring, rather than giving the Inspector-General of Police or an authorised officer who has brought this to be prima facie. 

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Chairman, can I ask the Attorney-General to help me in this very legal and technical area?

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, before the Attorney-General comes in, actually, any document can be presented as evidence, except where it is prohibited. So, the whole sub clause is redundant. 

MR FUNGAROO: Mr Chairman, I follow on from the proposal made by my sister, hon. Amongi. Here, clause 5 presupposes that the person who is likely to be in the wrong, and therefore evidence is furnished against them, is the organiser of the meeting. What if the person in the wrong this time is the police officer, who even after the organiser having followed the procedure and given notice, the police officer goes ahead to deny the organiser the opportunity to hold a meeting with the protection of the Police? So, a case can also be brought against the Police. I would like consideration to be made in such a case, how punishment can also be given to the person in authority.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, please look at the clause we are discussing; it is about notice. I do not know about that case you are presenting. This is about the notice that is certified and served and will be according to this prima facie evidence. This is the notice and nothing else. So, let us not bring in too many things in one thing, which is clear. 

The objection is that all documents are admissible before court. That is what hon. Sseggona is saying. In his submission, he is saying the whole clause is redundant because any document is admissible once presented before court. That is where your opinion was sought, learned Attorney-General. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, certainly, as you can see and as Members have submitted, any material evidence is admissible in a court of law and this is governed by the Evidence Act. However, I would like to stand over this clause so that consultations can take place before we get back to it. I want to move together with my colleagues.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, the issue we have not resolved is clause 7(5).

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Chairman, I will go ahead with proposed amendments by hon. Amongi on sub clause (5).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: To take away, “as prima facie”? 

MR JAMES BABA: Yes, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: “...should be admissible as evidence in any court proceedings.” 

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I have a stronger objection than I earlier did. The Inspector-General of Police is coming in as a witness because he is presenting evidence. Why are you placing him on a higher landscape than other people bringing evidence? That is a constitutional matter now. I have said, and my colleagues across agree, that every document is evidence except if it is excluded by law. So, you do not need this. You do not even need to mention the Inspector-General of Police as a special witness. 

MR NSEREKO: I would like to add that what renders this clause redundant is that admissibility of evidence is a preserve of court and those that have to present the evidence and attach it. So, this renders this permanently redundant as any evidence anyone wants to present may be attached. 

MR JAMES BABA: In view of this, Mr Chairman, I request that we stand over this clause and we come to it later. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, clause stood over. That means the whole of clause 7 is stood over, particularly sub clause (5). 

Clause 8

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes an amendment to clause 8(1)(c). The proposed amendment is to delete sub clause (c). The justification is that the sub clause is ambiguous and has the potential for broad and arbitrary application. So, we are removing (c), which says, “for any other reasonable cause”.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Chairman, our proposal is actually broader. We want to delete the whole of clause 8. I want to move a formal amendment to delete the entire clause 8. The justification is that when you critically look at this clause by clause, I start with sub clause (1), “Powers of authorised officer. Subject to the direction of the Inspector-General of Police...” - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We are on clause 8.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Ok, clause 8(1) says, “Upon receipt of a notice under section 7, where it is not possible to hold the proposed public meeting, for the reason that – 

(a)notice of another public meeting...” Sub clause (b) introduces unsuitability, which is subjective. 

Also, when you go to sub clause (3), for all intents and purposes, even if I quote the Prime Minister and the Attorney-General, they have been preaching since this Bill started that the Police do not have powers to prohibit. When you read the court judgement, the lead judge, Justice Byamugisha, said that to prohibit is to forbid. Now, in sub clause (3), they are using the word “disallow”; to disallow, prohibit and forbid all mean the same. To this extent, this whole clause is unconstitutional. 

Mr Chairman, when we move to Article 92, it becomes even worse. I think even this Parliament should be stopped from making that kind of law to alter the judgement of a court. That is why the whole of this clause 8, to this extent, should be deleted. However, because we are sensitive to the fact that we are trying to make a law, we tried to move an amendment. 

We realised that a situation can occur where the Police, on the one hand, is convinced that you cannot go ahead with your rally yet they cannot prohibit you. That is why we are proposing the following:

“(1) An officer to whom notice has been given...” - this time we have been consistent with “authorised officer” - “...and has reasonable grounds to believe that the proposed meeting should not take place at the given date, time and venue, may apply to the chief magistrate in whose jurisdiction the meeting is scheduled to take place for an order restraining the organiser from conducting the public meeting.” 

“(2) The chief magistrate shall hear the parties as soon as is practically possible, but in any case not later than 48 hours from the date of application.”

We move this amendment so as to create room - You cannot legislate now in this Parliament because our hands are tied. You cannot give powers to the Police to prohibit; not at all. The Constitutional Court is clear on that. That is why we are saying that if the Police have reasonable grounds to believe that they can stop me, they should go to the chief magistrate and get a court order.

Chairperson, I am hesitant to add that for clause 8 as it stands, and even based on Article 92, this Parliament cannot go ahead to make that law. That is why we are being very humble and appealing to whoever is interested that we move this way. I thank you very much. 

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Chairman, I have listened very carefully to hon. Muwanga Kivumbi. He quotes the lead judge of the Constitutional Court in the Muwanga Kivumbi case on the issue of the powers of the Police. I have the entire judgement here and I am going to lay it on the Table. 

The judge who made the lead opinion clearly states that the lead counsel who represented Muwanga Kivumbi submitted that the petitioner had no quarrel with the whole of Section 2 of the Police Act. Their complaint, according to counsel, was against subsection (2) of the Police Act, which clearly gave powers to the IGP to prohibit. Therefore, Mr Chairman, the counsel pointed out that the Police can put restrictions as is provided for under section 32(1)(b) which reads, “Any officer in charge of police may issue orders for the purpose of- (b) directing the conduct of assemblies and processions on public roads or streets or at places of public resort and the route by which and the times at which any procession may pass.”

This was the opinion of the lead judge in the case of Constitutional Court No.9 of 2005, which I am going to lay on the Table. Therefore, this particular element in clause 8 gives the Police powers under the Police Act to give this direction. This relates particularly to a situation were people convening a demonstration or assembly want to go to a place where a notice has already been given. The Police can tell you, “No, there are already other people there; find an alternative place.” 

The Police can also guide you under clause 8(1)(b) to say, “The venue you have submitted is unsuitable in order for us to control traffic. It will interfere with other lawful business of other public users.” This is what essentially is contained in this clause 8. It is not going to contravene Article 92 of the Constitution, which the Constitutional Court had already ruled out.

We are exercising this regulatory role, which is provided for under the Police Act. So, Mr Chairman, the proposal by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi to have this clause deleted does not stand merit. This is because Section 32(1)(b) was saved and it is still relevant and we want to apply it here in this clause. 

Furthermore, I will go along with the proposal by the chairman of the committee to delete clause 8(1) (c) - “for any other reasonable cause” - because that is very discretionary. We can go along with the deletion of (c) but for the rest, I wish to submit that we retain the clause as it is because it was saved when this case came before the Constitutional Court. I thank you.

May I, Mr Chairman, lay this on the Table. This is Constitutional Petition No.9 of 2005 in which, clearly, the lead judge mentioned that Section 32(1)(b) was saved under the Police Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Whose judgement is that one? 

MR JAMES BABA: This was the judgement of Justice L.E.M. Mukasa Kikonyogo, Deputy Chief Justice. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let the records capture the judgement of the court.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. If I could be of help on this because, again, his amendment did not come before the committee. The interpretation of the Constitution is different from that of an ordinary Act of Parliament. When interpreting the Constitution, you give it a purposive and broad interpretation. Article 92 is a restriction - (Interruption)

MR OGWANG: Mr Chairman, I am aware that hon. Sseggona is a member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. He even went ahead to sign the committee report. Is it procedurally right for hon. Sseggona to continue debating issues related to the committee report, which he signed? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, you heard the Member raising the matter, saying that the amendment was not brought to the committee and so the committee did not have opportunity to discuss it. Therefore, it is coming to the House for the first time. That is what he has said. 

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, you reserve the discretion to take a decision on whether or not hon. Sseggona should contribute. However, as a matter of fact, this matter came up in the committee and the committee took a decision that came up in the report. But without prejudice, Mr Chairman, to making a ruling, we did consider these issues in the committee and we came up with this report. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Did you consider the amendment of hon. Kivumbi?

MR SSEGGONA LUBEGA: Mr Chairman, you made the correct ruling. The amendment by hon. Kivumbi has only come this evening. This is a law we are making for ourselves and other generations and I am trying to find a position that would be acceptable to all of us. With your permission, I will continue.

The import of Article 92 is that you actually look at the gist of the judgement. The gist of the judgement is that one cannot make a prohibition. Now, we are trying to find to balance the two equations. The first is that you want to continue holding a public meeting, but on the other hand there is the public interest of the Police - regulating and therefore preserving law and order, and preserving the mandate of the Police, which stems from the Constitution.

In that case, do not allow the Police to disallow but make provisions so that where the Police have genuine and legitimate concerns, - whereas the law does not allow me, this person is already going astray – let us strike a balance and go to court. This is because at the end of the day, it is court that will be a neutral person; they will listen to both parties and then make a decision. It is the court to enforce and interpret the law, including this Constitution.

What does the minister fear about going to court? Why would Government always wait to be dragged to court and cannot drag to court those that it considers errant?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I think we have not captured the gist of this provision. This provision is not saying that the Police will prohibit. What this provision is saying is that this place has been booked by another group, so identify another place. That is not prohibition. It is just power to regulate, which was saved under Section 31 (1).

When it comes to clause 8 (1) (b), hon. Muwanga Kivumbi seems to be just stopping immediately after the word “unsuitable”, which should not be the case. The venue is considered unsuitable for the purposes of crowd and traffic control or because it will interfere with other lawful businesses. This is simply to inform those persons holding the meeting or demonstrating that they are doing so in somebody’s business premises, or that there is a crowd or traffic that needs to be regulated, so they should look for another place. That is not prohibition.

Even the judgement that has been laid on the Table says that what is not allowed is prohibition; regulation is allowed, in clear terms.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Attorney-General. Mr Chairman, we are not making a law simply to write a text book. According to John Austin, law is law only it if has sanctions. I would like to assist my brother, the Attorney-General, and also seek clarification from him. 

What happens if the police officer, for the reasons given in here, considers the venue or the timing unsuitable while the organiser considers it suitable? We would be at a loss. The two of us will have drawn, as some people say. At the end of the day, the police officer will tell me that they will not allow the meeting to take place there because the venue is just not suitable. Okay?

Under sub clause (3) it says, “Where the authorised officer notifies the organiser or his or her agent of a public meeting that it is not possible to hold the proposed public meeting on the date or venue proposed, the public meeting shall not be held on that date or at the venue proposed.” Now, that is a prohibition. It is on that basis that we are saying – (Interjection) - I am seeking clarification, honourable member; I do not have the Floor substantively. 

Mr Chairman, we are trying to do this here because we must not leave people at a stalemate. The police officer will tell me that it is not possible to hold the meeting but I will tell him, “No, I am the one holding it and I consider it possible.” The only person who can stand in the middle is court, which will interpret the law and show the evidence that actually, it is not possible. But when you leave it hanging the way it is here, this provision will cause more controversy because the police officer will not have any option.

MR RUHINDI: Let me first respond to what the hon. Medard Sseggona has said. What he has actually talked about is covered under (4). Why don’t you read your committee’s report? Your committee has made proposals and you are not making reference to them. Your committee report, together with the amendments proposed by the minister, takes care of that situation. 

Principally, you are saving the power of the Police to regulate. The authorised police officer will take a decision and any person aggrieved by that decision appeals to court. That is a proposal coming from your committee and the minister. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, it is coming to 7 O’clock yet there issues that are coming up. Are we prepared to discuss this a little more? Honourable members, we will not be able to finish. So, can you individually talk about the issues raised by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi in his amendments? Just have a chat.

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Chairman, in subsequent amendments under sub clauses (4) and (5), we will have provisions for appeal in case there is – (Interjections) - Are you bringing in the court to regulate? The function of regulation is with the Police. Even the organiser can go to court –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can you abandon your beds for tonight and sleep on this particular issue? (Laughter)

MR JAMES BABA: I will do so, Mr Chairman.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME 

6.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is for the resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report thereto. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Public Order Management Bill, 2011” and considered, extensively, clause 7 and clause 8 but no decisions were taken on them. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I think today we were able to accomplish a lot of work. It is true we have done quite substantive work but there are two issues that remain outstanding, that is on the business agenda items No. 7 and 9. I still feel that if we had gone to the Building Control Bill, we could have finished it because there is no controversy in that Bill. I am wondering how we are going to proceed because - Honourable members, I am about to change my mind looking at the clock because we can actually handle the Building Control Bill.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, ordinarily, we would not have a problem if we had quorum to proceed with it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, why I am saying this is because it will show on our record of performance how many Bills we have passed, and a Bill like the Building Control Bill is not controversial at all. We were here, we discussed it and we were moving very well and we almost finished it in one sitting. A Bill as difficult as the Public Order Management Bill will come in the way of everything that we have to do each time we call it for discussion. 

So, tomorrow, we have the issue of KCCA, the Public Order Management Bill and the Building Control Bill. I am suggesting that we do not handle any other business, including issues of national importance, so that we can - Honourable, I am now blind to reading so you might have to – Honourable members, I thought we were adjourning because we were tired and we wanted to go home?

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, we did not say we were tired, but thank you for permitting me. You know, the Prime Minister, being my son, always wants to ask me questions. 

I am rising on a matter of public importance that saw the Police seal off two newspapers and two radio stations yesterday, in a matter that was not explained. We saw an explanation from the Public Relations Office of the Police telling us that they had a search warrant. In my understanding of the law, no search warrant the world over, by any stretch of imagination, has ever allowed the closure of a radio station and closure of operations of a newspaper. 

The information we received in the New Vision today was that it was a search to retrieve a copy of a letter written by a member of this House, hon. David Sejjusa, otherwise known as Tinyefuza. I wonder how the search for such a letter would lead to the closure of two radio stations and two newspapers. The Managing Director of the Monitor specifically said when he rang Mr Mutabazi, the chairperson of the Broadcasting Council, he said that he was not aware of the operation. May we be informed by the Minister of Internal Affairs, who is in our midst? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please, make a response to this.

6.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, all I can say and inform the House is that I go by the decisions of the Police Force. They did follow the legal procedures, they wanted the Monitor Publications to give them a copy of that letter but they were unable to do so. They went to court to require them to produce that letter and they refused. They went back to court and got a warrant to search the place and all this was legally done under the law. So – (interruption)

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate the minister for his explanation but in the same vein, I would like him to explain the fact that while they might have got the search warrant, they locked out the workers of these businesses while collecting the evidence. I am questioning the admissibility of this evidence they are gathering in case the minister insists that they are moving lawfully.

MR OCHOLA: Mr Speaker, I seek further clarification from the minister. My understanding of a letter would, definitely, mean that the search warrant would allow them to look for the letter in the newspaper offices, but I do not know whether the radio stations can have letters because that is electronic media. What connection do the radio stations have with the letters, Mr Speaker? 

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Mr Speaker, I also want to seek clarification from the minister. First of all, I would like to know under what law the Police proceeded to get a search warrant because if it is something to do with communication, we have the Uganda Communications Act. If it is interception of communication, we have the Interception of Communications Act, which has stipulated procedures on how you can intercept communication. 

Section 41(2) of the UCC Act, for example, talks about the procedure under which you can suspend a communication company from communicating on air. In the Interception of Communications Act under section 86, there is also a procedure. When we interacted with UCC and also searched for the monitoring centre, which was supposed to be established under the Interception of Communications Act, it does not exist. So, we would like to know which laws the Police applied to close KFM, to suspend the work of the Daily Monitor and chase away workers.

Even if it was a search warrant, under the UCC Act Section 51(1) there are procedures that must be followed, and a search warrant must clearly state the reasons for its issue and the matter to be searched for. Did it include suspending workers? We would want to know.

DR LULUME BAYIGA: Mr Speaker, the minister said that he goes with what information the Police provide. The information from the Police is that they had a court order to search, but he has categorically not spoken about whether they had an order to close. If they did not have an order to close, as the Minister of Internal Affairs what action has he taken so far? Did the closure surprise you at all? If he cannot answer that, is he in charge of his ministry or are there certain orders he cannot intercept? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, suffice it to say that I was once a DJ on the radio – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is a DJ, for purposes of the record? (Laughter)

MR ANYWARACH: By custom and usage, it actually refers to a presenter on radio, but in real sense the abbreviation stands for disc jockey. I did work on the radio station of hon. Simon D’Ujanga – not Kabakumba –(Laughter)- and I know how important the media are, whether print or electronic.

What we call freedom of expression, which is embedded in media freedom, is a pillar of democracy. Surely, to say that a radio station like KFM and Dembe FM are scenes of crime, which crime is not defined, beats my understanding. If these radio stations are operating and the search warrant is meant to search the Monitor Publications Ltd. and they turn out to be scenes of crime, I think that is undermining media freedom. (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: The information I wish to give is that Gen. Sejjusa is a serving officer in the UPDF. If you want information that he authored and he is under your command as Government, he is the nearest person to give you that information. Is Gen. Sejjusa declared a fugitive so that we may start looking for him? 

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you for that information. That was the next thing I was coming to. Gen. Sejjusa is still alive and he is a member of the High Command of our army. He has fought successful wars and he is a Member of Parliament and a four-star General. Why should we cause panic? Actually, Government is now causing more panic to the innocent members of the public than the publication. The publication did not even incite violence; they were just giving us information. 

Honourable minister, the radio programmes that we all enjoy,  for example when I sit there and I am doing the mixing and they sing, “Dragon, tiki, tiki, ye ye ye”, you are also enjoying - (Laughter) – and all the information that we need. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the language of the House is English. (Laughter) I will have the honourable Member for Katikamu South.

DR EDWARD MAKUBUYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Given the explanation by the Minister of Internal Affairs and given the many clarifications sought by the honourable members, I seek your guidance on whether this House is not entitled to a comprehensive statement on the matter from the Minister. I wish to get your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if you are able to deal with those matters, please deal with them now. However, if not, I will order you to bring a full statement on the subject.

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Speaker, the brief I got before coming to the House this afternoon is that the Daily Monitor had published a letter from Gen. Sejjusa. The Police wanted to know the origin of that letter but they did not get it. The subject of that letter is of Police interest and the Monitor Publications could not avail it. The Police had to go to court to have an order for the Monitor Publications to produce that letter but when they failed to do that, the Police went back to court. Whether or not – (Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, clearly, the Minister of Internal Affairs may not be able to comprehensively handle that matter. It is my proposal that the Minister be given time to come up with a comprehensive response to issues – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Don’t you think that that judgement should have been left to the Speaker? (Laughter) That is exactly what I said; I told him that he should show cause as to why I should not make him come back with a comprehensive statement. If he can deal with the matters now, let him do so but if he cannot, he will need to bring a comprehensive statement. Don’t you think you are now ruling on my behalf?

DR EPETAIT: No, Mr Speaker. I am not ruling on your behalf but what the Minister – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that is in my assessment.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, by God’s Grace I am lawyer and I know how court orders are enforced. First, an order to search entitles you to do no more than searching. (Interjection) You see, honourable Mbabazi will have his day. 

Two, Mr Speaker, when you talk about conducting an exercise lawfully, then you tell us about lawfulness. By the minister standing here to avoid telling us:  one, about the lawfulness; two, about how the search warrant enlarged itself into an order for closure; and three, by telling us that the Police is still looking for that letter which can be obtained from the author and the addressee, Col Ronnie Barya, and not telling us about the lawfulness of the process we are asking for and about, is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, a person can only speak about something he or she knows. The minister is saying that the brief he got is what he is giving to the House. We cannot expect him to know more than he can know. The point is that he got a brief and that is the same brief he is outlining. So, do we expect him to say things he does not know? Please, that is what he has said, that was his brief. The best of the brief he got is what he is outlining.  

MR HUSSEIN KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think as Parliament, we would not have done our duty if we left the minister to go without an order from you to open these radio stations and allow the newspapers to proceed with their business. They are doing business, they cannot wait for ministers. You know ministers can be intentionally slow. So I beg you to order the minister to go and open the publications and the radio stations. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am the Speaker of the House; I am not the chief executive of this country. I do not control the Police or the military. All I control are my unruly members occasionally. (Laughter) So, please do not drag us into that direction because that would not be proper for me to start making statements of that nature. 

Honourable minister, please go, consult, prepare a statement and come and brief the House. This matter is urgent and serious; it touches on security and there is general unrest among people who think something is wrong. So we need you to come and communicate to the country that all is okay. If all is not okay, you can also come and tell us. Tomorrow we will be sitting at 2 O’clock, so we will find a moment tomorrow afternoon to deal with this. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 7.08 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 22 May 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 
