Tuesday, 14 May 2013

Parliament met at 2.20 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Good afternoon, honourable members. I welcome you to this sitting this afternoon. As you are aware, this is the Budget period and the Budget Act makes some dictates on time frames that must be followed for us to accomplish the Budget process within and according to the law.

We have reached a situation where some powers under the Budget Act have got to be invoked to deal with the situation that is now very apparent. Tomorrow would be the deadline under Section 6 of the revised edition of the laws of Uganda; considerations by the sessional committees and Budget Committee. Sub section (1) states, “The Speaker shall commit the indicative allocations to the Parliament Budget Committee and to each sessional committee of Parliament, that part of the preliminary indicative allocations that fall within its jurisdiction immediately after the submission of the preliminary estimates to Parliament by the President and the departments.

(2) Each sessional committee shall consider, discuss and review the indicative allocations committed to it under sub section (1) and submit its report to the Budget Committee of Parliament not later than the 25th day of April.

(3) The Budget Committee shall scrutinise the estimates and the reports of the sessional committees and submit its recommendations to the Speaker who shall send the recommendations to the President by the 15th day of May of every year.”

The rest of the sections do not apply. It is this particular sub section (3), which has become an issue now because tomorrow would be the 15th which is talked about in this sub section. It is, therefore, not practical for the Budget Committee to have its report ready for submission to the Speaker and for onward submission to the President by tomorrow. 

So, I exercise my powers under the revised edition of the laws Section 21 of the Budget Act, which states, “The Speaker may extend any period provided under this Act for a reasonable period.” I am accordingly extending the period from tomorrow 15th May to Friday 17th May when the Budget Committee shall do those things required under sub section (3) of Section 6 of the Budget Act. It is so extended.

I will also use the prerogative of the Speaker under Rule 24 of our rules to amend the Order Paper to allow a statement of personal explanation to be made. I got a request from one of our own, the honourable member for Toroma County who will make a statement at the appropriate time, and I am sure that comes immediately after my communication. Members, thank you very much.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

2.24
MR CYRUS AMODOI (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): Mr Speaker, the general public has, in the recent past, been perplexed over my arrest that took place on 30 March 2013. My constituents in Toroma County are particularly depressed over the media reports that took a duration of two weeks. As we speak, I have been accused of attempting to damage a bridge and conspiracy to commit a felony and the matter is before court in Pader.

In light of our Rules of Procedure and specifically Rule 64 of sub judice, I would not delve into the matter. Currently, I am out on bail but as I carry the yoke on me now, I would like to caution all my honourable colleagues and the general public to be aware of the wide racket of conmen in the country, lest you suffer my fate. 

I would like to appeal to my constituents of Toroma County to remain calm and I thank all honourable colleagues for the support rendered to me during this trying time but I believe the truth will set me free.

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. For God and My Country!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Amodoi. As you know, our rules do not allow statements of personal explanation to be debated, so that matter ends there. We certainly are with you and stand with you. Let the courts make their decision; we will not debate the matter.

2.25
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Justine Kasule Lumumba): Mr Speaker, I know the rule and I am not standing up to debate the issues he has raised. I just want to add to his voice and say that everyday conmen and conwomen in Kampala are changing tactics. I want to re-echo his voice and tell colleagues that we have to be extra careful, especially as leaders in this country. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, you are aware that there are people with schemes that could lead you to bankruptcy or even legal problems and challenges with the law; so, you should stand duly warned. Take careful assessment of transactions and discussions that you hold with various people in this country as they could lead you in trouble. Thank you very much.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE PETITION ON THE LAPSING OF PART II OF THE AMNESTY ACT, 2000

2.29
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Milton Muwuma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, the committee report was presented and, Mr Speaker, as per your ruling, you asked the Members to go and read the report since it was very detailed and informative, and then come back and be ready for debate. So, we are waiting for your next course of action, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, do you have copies of the report? (Interjections) That report, hon. Member for Arua District, was duly received by Members in this House and it is a very comprehensive thesis of the issues at hand. However, I received a request from mostly Members of Parliament from Northern Uganda who currently have a commitment in their region that we defer this debate to tomorrow to allow them be part of it. If Members are agreeable, we will defer this debate to tomorrow so that we have all the Members take part in it. 

MRS LUMUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support that proposal but I also want to inform the House that the Minister of Internal Affairs is still on his way to here. So, it is as well that we defer the matter to tomorrow.

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. All of us are supposed to be in the House but we seem to be just joking. Why is the minister not in the House and yet, he knew that we were supposed to have a debate today? The Government side should take this House seriously so that Ugandans get value for the money they pay us.

MRS LUMUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the shadow minister	 for information for raising that issue. The minister is supposed to be here and he is also aware of that. But circumstances beyond his control have prevented his being here now.

However, before people point a finger at others, they should be mindful of the four fingers pointing back at them. When I look at the Opposition side, which is facilitated by the Parliamentary Commission – on which they sit, represented by the Leader of the Opposition and a commissioner – we also do not have the shadow minister of internal affairs present in the House. So, if we are to blame anybody, we should blame both sides. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, to the best of the Speaker’s knowledge, the Shadow Minister for Internal Affairs, hon. Kyanjo, is sick. So, his absence in the House cannot be used to explain the absence of other people! (Laughter)

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am in agreement with your guidance that we consider this report tomorrow. Nevertheless, I want to emphasise that the beneficiaries of and stakeholders in this law are very anxious to hear our final position on it. So, I appeal to Members to take keen interest in this report so that we can dispose of it tomorrow in the interest of Ugandans. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, as I said at the beginning of the discussion of this particular item last week, the entire Amnesty Act is due to lapse on the 24th of this month. The situation that this would create would not be desirable. What the committee is proposing is some extension and some inclusion of some provisions that have produced results in this country in terms of giving the opportunity to people to abandon rebellion and come back. So, it is an important discussion that this House has to have in the presence of the minister and some decisions have got to be taken urgently, before the Act lapses. So, we take that seriously. Thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE BUILDING CONTROL BILL, 2012

2.35
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Mr Speaker –
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is already at committee stage and so, we are going to committee stage.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE BUILDING CONTROL BILL, 2012

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Samuel Ssemugaba):  Thank you, Mr Chairman. We have some amendments on Clause 1; we proposed that we redraft the clause as: 
“
(1)	This Act shall come into force on a date appointed by the minister by statutory instrument.
(2)	The minister shall, notwithstanding subsection (1), table the Building Code for approval by Parliament before the commencement of the Act.”

The justification is that we were fearful that this Act may be implemented without the Building Code because it was supposed to be in place and yet, it has not been produced. So, we wanted to enforce it and people with disability also had a case to put forward that they do not want this Act to be implemented before the code and other standards are put in place. That is the justification, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you. Under what law is the Building Code going to be made?

MR SSEMUGABA: The Building Code is mentioned within this Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is going to be created by this Act? 

MR SSEMUGABA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, how do you bring the Building Code before the Act is passed – before you have given powers to the minister to establish the code? 

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am seeking for clarification on that very note; if I may anticipate. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You are not allowed to.

MR KYAMADIDI: I say so, because it is in the very report where they say, “For avoidance of doubt, the minister shall establish the Building Code under this section not later than six months after the commencement of this Act”. This is clear that it is after the Act commences that we shall have a code and not before that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You have not given the minister the power to draft the code; how does he bring the code to Parliament before the authority is granted to him or her?

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, I withdraw that amendment having been clarified about the implication and how the code comes into existence. 

MR OGWANG: Mr Chairman, I am a regular Member of this House and yet, I do not have a copy of what we are discussing and even the Bill itself. And I think I am not the only one; we are many. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, you should be careful what you say in the House on the Hansard. You do not know whether you are accusing yourself or not. The Bill was issued long time ago; it was presented on 21 March 2012. The report was submitted to the House last week and distributed; I do not know what you are saying that you do not have a copy of the report. Honourable members, are there additional copies? Please, circulate more copies.
 
MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to seek clarification from the Attorney-General on whether this amendment would be legally okay to say that we are giving powers to the minister to determine when the Act should start. Normally, we give a period; may be in three months’ time, instead of tagging it to an individual to decide when the Act should commence. 

Mr Chairman, commencement is in 2.1; part one of the Bill provides for preliminary matters relating to commencement, interpretation of words and phrases used in the Bill. Then we go to commencement, Clause 1, “This Act shall come into force on a date appointed by the minister by statutory instrument”.

This is perfectly in order and the minister may have reasons for doing this. Normally, if you do not make provisions of this nature, an Act of Parliament comes into force upon publication in the gazette. And this is very important. When you look at the Acts of Parliament – if I may give you further education; a Bill becomes an Act of Parliament upon assent by the President and shall come into effect upon the day of publication in the gazette, unless the Bill itself provides for another arrangement like this one. 

So, more often than not, for instance, if there are some provisions which the minister thinks require a bit of time to put in place, he or she may put there a provision like this one to ensure that when those stages are completed, then they can issue a statutory instrument to bring the law into force. But this is perfectly in order and legal. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There being no further amendments on this clause, can we take a decision on it? I put the question that Clause 1 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, on Clause 2, we propose an amendment to insert just before the definition of “application” the definition of –
“
(i)‘Access’ means the possibility for any person to reach a place, manoeuvre within it; use a service, participate in activities provided in a public place with dignity, independence and safety on an equal basis with others.

(ii)‘Accessibility standards’ refers to a practical guide to create a barrier-free physical environment in Uganda –”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I am sure we all know where the committee is coming from on this; any discussions on the amendments proposed by the committee on the definition of “access” and “accessibility standards.” 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I do not know whether we had agreed earlier or we are doing so now, to depart from the way we have been handling these amendments at committee stage. To me, it has been an agreed convention that we do the Interpretation Clause at the end. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, we adopt it at the end but that does not mean that we do not agree on some of the phrases that we can define now so that when we come back, there might be terms that might need definition that have not been handled and we can bring them on. But if we can adopt some of those which are clear, we can proceed and adopt them. 

MS ASAMO: Mr Chairman, I want to make another amendment that “access means the possibility of any person including persons with disability to reach a place or manoeuvre.” Experience has shown that when you just put “Access”, people will put ramps which are not measurable. For example, in UPE schools, the standards indicate that they are supposed to have a ramp; but the ramps are not measured. So, I think we should include the issue of people with disability in the amendment.

And on the issue of “accessibility standards”, this “Refers to a practical guide to create a barrier-free physical environment for all persons, including persons with disabilities in Uganda”. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If you say, “all persons” and stop there, does that exclude persons with disabilities or you say so for emphasis? 

MS ASAMO: Mr Chairman, all our laws include everybody but there is always a “sorry” when it comes to practical matters. When you ask, “Why didn’t you cater for the disabled people”, they say, “We are really sorry, we never thought about it”. So, for emphasis, I beg that we put that in. 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. In support of what my honourable colleague has said, I want the chairman to define for us – or change the expression, “...to create a barrier-free physical environment....” There are some barriers which are part of the building arrangement for security purposes; like the gate, the wall and so on; these are necessary. So, how can you say there should be a barrier-free building environment? What about the element of fencing for security reasons?
 
MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. This is something we adopted from accessibility standards as provided and agreed upon by people with disabilities. We are very mindful of them and they have a document here: “Accessibility standards: a practical guide to create a barrier-free physical environment in Uganda.” These are terminologies our colleagues adopted and agreed upon. So, we do not want to divert from what has already been agreed upon by the people with disabilities.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Maybe, for the avoidance of doubt, it must be made clear that the barrier we are referring to is the unnecessary barrier that interferes with the movement of people with disabilities. This must be made very clear to them. And even for people with disabilities, there is need to have some measures for their safety; maybe a fence. But how do you design in such a way that it does the work of security and yet it does not interfere with their movement? 

This is what needs to be reflected clearly here otherwise, the concept of a barrier interfering with the people with disabilities is taken. 

MS ASAMO: Mr Chairman, when you talk of a “barrier-free environment”, it means that whether it is a security institution, people with disabilities have to access it. If you have put “blocked” somewhere, how can I manoeuvre with a wheelchair to reach a certain stage? I could give you the example of some airports; they are barrier-free in that you will have steps for some people while you will have some places that the people with disabilities will use and you will have special lifts for people with disabilities even if there are issues of security. I have been to airports and I will use that area alone when the other members are passing another side. 

So, it tells you that this is what we are advocating for: a barrier-free environment and that is the reason I am saying, let us qualify it to include people with disabilities so that we do not have it hanging. Thank you.

MR NOKRACH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just want to emphasise the issue of barriers. When we talk about barriers, we are talking about objects or situations that make it very difficult for a person with disability to move or perform any duty. So, we cannot consider a wall a barrier to a person with disability because even those who are not disabled cannot pass through a wall. This will be a very difficult situation because a wall has its own function to remain there as a barrier for anything that will affect people who stay inside the house.
 
So, in this particular reference, we are looking at a barrier as environmental factors that make it very difficult for people with disability to move around. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that clear? 

MR FUNGAROO: Mr Chairman, they were informing me.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: They were informing you? 

MR FUNGAROO: Yes. Thank you, Mr Chairman. I take the information in good faith. I really support the direction of the people with disabilities but I would also like to urge them that they should also know that there are some barriers, which are necessary and they should be designed. On the engineering side, it is possible to avoid inconveniences for people with disabilities. Maybe, that is why we have lifts. If they accept, we provide for lifts. 

So, here the words should include the element of people with disabilities so that the focus of the engineer or the designer is geared towards that. Thank you for the information. 

MS BAKO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to find out from my colleague whether the code will not take care of those details. If the minister brought a very good code that must be adhered to, I think the matters of access would then be simplified and detailed within the code.

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. On the accessibility standards, they are referring to a practical guide. The clarification I am seeking is, who will provide this practical guide and what will it entail? If, like the minister is saying, the practical guide will include guidelines on what the buildings should do on issues to do with people with disability, I think, Mr Chairman, it should not be included here in the law.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Mine is on 2(i). The definition of the word “access” is still a problem to me. I feel that the word “access”, when we talk about possibilities, you make things a bit ambiguous. I want us to amend it and say that, “Access means the ability, right or permission to approach, enter or use facilities in a public place with dignity, independence and safety on an equal basis with others.”  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is now a new definition being proposed. The chairman and the minister need to look at that. I will have the Minister of Defence first while you are consulting on the proposed amendment.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think what our colleagues representing people with disabilities have said make the matter clear. The issue here is to ensure that people with disabilities have convenient access. So, in Clause 2(ii) I would propose that we say, “’Accessibility standards’ refers to a practical guide to ensure that people with disabilities have convenient access.” I agree with the point that we must include specifically people with disabilities. To just say “barrier-free” will cause us practical problems on the ground, particularly, in the area of security.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We are now getting into a complicated situation. You proposed an amendment on Clause 2(i). Mr Chairman and the minister, can you deal with this? 

Meanwhile, I should have done this from the Speaker’s Chair. In the public gallery, this afternoon, we have students from Ohio State University found in Columbus, Ohio, United States of America. They have come to observe how the Parliament of Uganda operates. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

Also in the public gallery this afternoon, we have the district councillors of Serere District, represented by hon. Alice Alaso, hon. Stephen Ochola and hon. Elijah Okupa. The delegation of councillors is led by the District Speaker hon. Fredrick Gerald Okello and they are here for three days to benchmark with the Parliament of Uganda. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Yes, can we resolve this? 

MR BAKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. At times, when we are making laws, we have to be careful that we do not create more ambiguity for some people who are not around when they come to interpret the laws. So, when we are talking about “access” and you say, “…for any person to reach a place, manoeuvre within it…”- I would wish to be educated; what do you mean and why do you want to import these words, “manoeuvre within it”? What value is it adding? 

MR FUNGAROO: What has been provided for here is only access. How about the exit? Do you mean people who get in there cannot get out?

MS MUTYABULE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. My problem relates to what the defence minister came up with when he talked about “accessibility standards” referring to a practical guide to ensure that people with disabilities have easy access.

But supposing somebody got involved in an accident; isn’t such a person going to be catered for under this clause? (Interjections) No, because it is temporary. When you talk about disabilities as if you are talking about people who are permanently disabled – (Interruption)

MS ASAMO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. You know, disability is not a permanent state of affair. Anybody can get disabled. Some Members who have ever been involved in accidents can bear me witness; somehow, they are disabled and that includes the blind, the deaf and so on. The reason we advocate for accessibility to be availed is because that is a very important aspect as far as disabled people are concerned.

So, why don’t we widen the scope? We should not think about disability as a permanent state. This issue should concern all of us. Take the example of the ramp at the entrance of Parliament Building, how many people use it? Is it only used by the five us? Also look at the lifts; are they used only by us? We all use them.

It is for these reasons that I urge Members to give this matter a wide scope. Accessibility is not only for some group of people; we are all bound to use that access. That is why we just need to use the phrase “including people with disabilities.” It is because other people are also bound to use that access route.

Hon. Bako said that the code can bring the details, but I want to point out that it is important to include this in here as we wait for the details of the standards when the minister develops the regulations. Thank you.

MR SSEMUGABA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. On part (2), I concede to the amendment that reads “’accessibility standards’ refer to a practical guide to create a barrier-free physical environment in Uganda for all persons including PWDs.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay with all of you, honourable members?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, I now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: How about the first part?

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, I would like to beg that that first part remains as it is. Yes, some Member had suggested that we replace “possibility” with the word “ability” yet “accessibility” should be a “possibility” of getting to some place. I beg that this version is maintained.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I do not know whether you consulted a dictionary because when you look at the legal definition of the word “access” you will realise that it is the “ability, permission or right to approach, communicate, enter, pass to and from or view without interference.” So, I think the word “possibility” makes it ambiguous. We should make it very clear in order to have a good piece of legislation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What do you propose?

MR BAHATI: I propose that we adopt the definition of the word “access.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can you kindly restate it for the record? “Access” means?

MR BAHATI: “The ability, opportunity or right to approach, enter, pass to and fro or view without interference.”

MR MUTENDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I personally see nothing wrong with the definition as it is, save for replacing the word “possibility” with the word “ability.” There is nothing with manoeuvring when you are already within. The rest can remain the way they are.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The final proposal is that we replace the word “possibility” with the word “ability” and leave the rest unchanged. Is that okay?

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, you or the Attorney-General kindly give us some guidance of the meaning of these words “ability” and “right.”  Is there any difference - because I think the right to approach or enter is better than ability and possibility? A person has a right to access a place, enter or pass to and from rather than having only the ability to enter.

MR BAKABULINDI: Mr Chairman, as I agree with my colleague who has brought in a very good amendment as it appears in the dictionary, I am opposed to the suggestion by the chairman on the usage of the word “manoeuvre.” When you look up the meaning of that word, you realise that it is about accessing a place but using a lot of skills. But you will recall that we are talking about “accessing” without interference. In that case, you do not have to require me to have a lot of skills to manoeuvre to access. What is the import of the word “manoeuvre?” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You know, a person may enter but they find a corner that is not manoeuvrable by a wheel chair. I think that is the point. You could be in a wheel chair and you come across a squared room in which you may have to manoeuvre through to get to where you are going.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The word “manoeuvre” actually does not pave the way for people with disability. This word means that even when there is a difficulty, one has to go on. For example, this is respected bench of ours here, but you have to manoeuvre over it. And that is okay especially for people with disabilities because they have limitations in manoeuvring.

If we are making this law with the interest of protecting people with disabilities, then we have to delete the word “manoeuvre.” Like in Parliament, there is only one point of access, which is also the point of exit. I raised an issue on the exit point – you can make a very good law for access, but once you forget the fact that a person who has entered a premise must also exit or go out - why don’t you also, together with access, which means entry, put something to do with exit? The exit point must be taken care of.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, you realise that we have substantially one or two amendments on the Interpretation Clause. As I said earlier, we would have been safer to come to that at the end simply because if you consider the question put by hon. Bahati to me, as to whether we should say “ability” or “a right”, we would be safer to infer whether it is a right or it is simply ability, within the context of the Bill then we would actually define it as such. So, I would beg that we come to this after we have finished the other clauses of the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, we defer Clause 2.

(Clause 2, deferred.)

Clause 3 agreed to.

Clause 4

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, on Clause 4, we propose re-drafting of Clause 4(1) as, “A representative of workers nominated for appointment by the trade union. (j) A representative of Uganda Local Authorities Association of Uganda nominated for appointment by the Uganda Local Government Association. (k) A representative of Urban Authorities Association of Uganda nominated for appointment by the Association of Urban Authorities.”

The justification is to provide for the nomination of the members by their umbrella bodies and for clarity.

Mr Chairman, still on 4(3), we propose to re-phrase this clause as, “The members of the board shall be eminent persons of good repute and standing in society who are qualified and experienced or who possess specialised knowledge in matters relating to their respective fields. (4) To replace “the members” with “a member”. The justification is for clarity as legislation should be drafted in singular and not in plural.

I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we hear from the minister; if he agrees with these amendments then we move?

MR BYANDALA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I do not differ much from what my chairman is saying except for (1) regarding the workers. I would beg that we leave this to ministry because there are too many trade unions and it will make it very difficult for me to get from very many different trade unions. It would be easier for the sector ministry to organise that and they give me one name.

I have no objection to the other amendments by the chairman except that they are already catered for. Regarding local authorities, we have one organisation and the same applies to urban authorities. That is why we did not think it was necessary to be very elaborate.

The only addition, Mr Chairman, is to add another sub section below (l) as (m) to include two persons from the general public because we seem to have professionalised the whole board, leaving out the general public who could also come and make good contributions.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We are going to have to process them one by one so that we can move. Let us start with the first bit. There is the proposed amendment on Clause 4(1); those additions and also the one proposed by the minister.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I was looking at Clause 4 and especially at the composition of the people who they want to include on this board. On several occasions, we have constructed buildings without any public health specialist and we have had problems. Eventually, when people fall sick, you cannot give any excuses. I propose that when we go to (f) where they talk about engineers, architects, physical planners, surveyors and lawyers, we add a public health officer from the Ministry responsible for Health.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, you concede.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. On 4(1), I wanted to propose an introduction of 4(1)(n) to provide for a representative from Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) because when we were debating, everyone was emphasising the quality of construction materials and this is the body that is mandated to ascertain and confirm the quality of all products in the country. That is my submission, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, do you have a policy on the number of people on the board? Is it flexible or fixed?

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, this issue was discussed in Cabinet and as of now, we do not have a fixed number. The Ministry of Public Service was requested to make a study and report back to Cabinet so that we take a stand but as of now, there is no standard number.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Bureau of standards, any comment on that, honourable minister?

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, I do not think we need him because in the construction, we make tests and these tests are not necessarily related to particular materials. If we are dealing with concrete, we test the strength of the concrete and the same applies to the iron bars. All these are tested during the construction period and this is standard procedure.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Would you like to reconsider your -

MR MUWUMA: Mr Chairman, I am not comfortable with the minister’s response because we have had many building collapsing because we do not have people to ascertain and confirm the quality of the materials that we are using. That is the spirit within which I was moving to propose that we needed somebody on the board to take care of these concerns.

MR KIKUNGWE: Mr Chairman, I would like to guide on that particular issue. When you are constructing, the consultant will demand for certification of certain products and these certificates have undergone tests by Uganda National Bureau of Standards. So, I do not think it is necessary to have this person because the consultant who is undertaking this construction is provided with the necessary certification from the National Bureau of Standards.

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to support the minister because I do not know what value somebody from UNBS would add at that stage when they could not add that value at the level of the Uganda National Bureau of Standards – because that is where they are supposed to do their work from. So, at the stage of the building committee, I do not see what value that person can really add. I support the minister that that person is not necessary.

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think there is a vital skill we miss on building committees. In other countries, they take it seriously and they include a person who is skilled in fire fighting. Most of our buildings do not have even provisions for fire points. And I think that if we had fire fighters in the building committee, it would be very important.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, whereas hon. Oguttu might have a point, I do not think it is very easy to come by fire experts. However, usually, in buildings for provisions to do with fire, an engineer would suffice – we could have a mechanical engineer attending to all these. So, rather than congesting the board, I think we could live with the proposal that is already in the Bill for somebody from the engineering field to be involved. 

Mr Chairman, I wish to comment on the proposal put forward by the Minister of Works; he said that we should have two members chosen from the general public to be part of the board. Since I am a member of the committee, our understanding was that the moment you have elected representatives in the people coming from the local and the urban authorities, you would have catered for the interests of the general public. This is because these people will bring the views of the public. If we adopt the minister’s proposal, we will only be congesting the committee. I beg to submit. 

MR KAWUMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. When I was looking at Clause 4, the total current composition of members before the other proposals stands at 17 – the board for now has 17 members! Now with the new proposals of fire experts and others – let us look at Clause (4)(j) and (k), for example, it talks of representatives from local and urban authorities. In the same clause, we have representatives of people with disabilities and then from the relevant ministry of disability. It appears like there is a duplication – it may not necessarily be there but decision-making may be difficult when you have a board of over 25 people. The minister may want to reassure me on this. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is why I asked if you have a policy on the number.

MS BAKO ABIA: Mr Chairman, much as my brother was proposing that we have someone from the Uganda National Bureau of Standards, my view is that we should get one person from the Uganda Association of Architects. The reason we have a crisis in the building industry is because people deviate from the architectural designs. So, I implore the minister to look into that seriously. And the – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Have you looked at (f)?

MS BAKO ABIA: I do not have part (f) here because I do not have the original Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Oh, you do not have the Bill? It is there in the Bill.

MS BAKO ABIA: If it is there, then that is okay. The other issue regards the members from the general public. Mr Chairman, if you keenly looked at the boards that exist in this country, some members – if you happen to attend their meetings – are actually people who have outlived their usefulness, I would say. They sleep most of the time during meetings. I would rather that we put specifications on who becomes a board member. Now that we do not have a limit on the number of people sitting on a board, as soon as one loses an election, they are appointed to these boards. I think we should get serious and get competent people who will sit on these boards and work.

I am sorry to say this but I have monitored situations where board members sit, wait for their allowances and yet little work is done moreover by few people. I think we need to segment and standardise that. I suggest that the minister tells someone who is handling this matter in the Ministry of Public Service that a meaningful board of seven people is adequate. You do not need a bunch of 20 people who will just come and share allowances and call themselves board members. Thank you.

MR BAKABULINDI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have almost harmonised mine on the representative of workers. The minister had a problem, saying there are very many trade unions and he suggested that we could leave it to the minister. But I have convinced him that we have our national trade unions’ umbrellas and that is how we nominate Members of Parliament and various representatives on different boards. We call them “national trade unions’ umbrellas” not just “trade unions” and I think he has got the concept.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, what are you saying, for the record?

MR BAKABULINDI: I am amending the statement “appointment by the trade union” to read “appointment by the national trade unions’ umbrellas”. (Interjections) They understand it and yes, that has been the practice. Mr Chairman, why I am calling them “umbrellas” is because we have two national centres – COFTU and NOTU – and whenever we have only one provision on a board, we sit together and agree that since one took the position on one board last time, this time the other will take the current position.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, you do not want to import organisational conflicts into this whole thing. Supposing we have a disagreement between COFTU and NOTU - 

MR BAKABULINDI: It has never been there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Assuming it arises?

MR BAKABULINDI: Then the minister can come in.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, why don’t you give it to the minister right away then you can carry out your informal process and advise the minister?

MR BAKABULINDI: That is alright. I concede. (Ms Bako rose_)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is nobody holding the Floor, Madam. Let us hear from hon. Mutyabule.

MS MUTYABULE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to buy the idea from hon. Oguttu, of including a fire expert in the committee, but with a little modification. Instead of just talking about “fire”, we could say “risk management” expert because it will include all the risks to the building.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have read through the original Bill plus the amendment but I have not seen any provision for a representation of women there. Although the Constitution says that they should be one-third, we normally include it in our Bills. So, at least the board should be composed of a third of women. Without that, we women are not happy.

Then, secondly, these two people the minister is proposing to come from the public, where is he getting them from? I think we are increasing the number for nothing. Let us leave out those two. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The honourable member for Koboko has seen that there are no women on this board. 

MR BYANDALA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I also thank hon. Baba Diri. The practice is, when I write to these bodies, I ask them to send me two candidates: a male and a female of their own choice and in my office, I administratively ensure that there is gender representation, regional representation and religious representation. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, this is not a discretional matter; this is a constitutional matter. So, you do not impose your discretion on constitutional provisions; that is what the hon. Member is saying. There has to be specific provisions that a given percentage shall be reserved for female people. That is what the Member wants.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, he is a minister of the Republic of Uganda and he knows that there could be a woman engineer; the architect could be a woman; the physical planner could be a woman and the surveyor could be a woman. So, in his own wisdom, he will make sure that he provides for that – (Interjections) – I can also ask; why don’t you put the youth as well? They also need to be put here. So, it will cause some controversy. 

MR BAHATI: I want to inform hon. Bitekyerezo that this is not new; we have been providing for a quarter for women in all these roles and this should be no exception because we did it for the UCC. Providing for a third of the members is really okay and I support hon. Baba Diri on that issue. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can somebody help with the drafting; how do you make that provision for the inclusion of a percentage for women? 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, we shall put after (m) that, “At least one third of the members shall be women -”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: “At least one third of the members of the board shall be women” – is that okay, now? Okay, we are still on Clause (4)(1). 

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Mr Chairman, they can all be women. So, we should say, “The other gender”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, these are constitutional principles.

MS BAKO ABIA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Much as it is constitutional, my suggestion is that if we are going to have ten members on the board, let us have five women and five men because statistically in this country, women are now more than men. So, why don’t we go half way? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is something in legislation called “consistence”. We know the consistent language we have always used; we are not inventing a wheel right now. So, “at least a third” is a phraseology we have always used in legislation. 

MR KAWUMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think the issue of contention here is on “At least one third shall be women”, implying that that is the least. At most, they can all be women. I want to suggest that a third of the membership shall be of a different sex to cater for the – (Interruption)

DR MUTENDE: Mr Chairman, we are treading very delicate grounds when we begin using words like, “The other gender” and “the other sex”. We have what we call transgender and transsexual. We shall be putting ourselves in a very tricky situation. People change their sex everyday; that is known. How are we going to keep on providing for them; where will they fix? 

Let us be clear and say, as proposed by the minister, “at least one third of the members shall be women”? 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I support the proposal that at least a third should be women. But we must also know that the affirmative action programmes that we have put in place for years have worked and in some cases, women are no longer a minority group. So, I would like to suggest that we say, “At least and at most” –(Laughter)– “at least a third of the members and at most a third of the members”, so that we have a lower limit and an upper limit. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, it is not correct to state that women have ceased to be a marginalised and a minority group for the simple reason that every five years after the first ten, under Article 78 of the Constitution, there has been consistent reviews and motions have been moved here.  Every after five years before every election we move a motion here either to maintain the status-quo or to change from it. 

At an appropriate time, you can move a motion for may be an earlier review or a study to be done; and that is a different matter. But the position in Article 78 is still of an affirmative nature and the a third of women to be represented on these boards and commissions is still tenable. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, I am still a bit confused about the removal or omission of the youth. When you say that “at least a third should be women”, you are talking of women who have given birth – (Laughter) – we should say, “a third should be females”, so that we can cater for those who have not yet become women and I am talking as a doctor. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We use the language of the Constitution. 

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, on redrafting Clause 4(1)(j), it should be like this: “A representative of workers nominated for appointment by the national trade union centres -”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is it (j)?

MR SSEMUGABA: It is (i)
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Then why were you saying (j)

MR SSEMUGABA: I said (i): “A representative of workers nominated for appointment by the national trade union centres.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If that is accepted, I put the question to the particular amendment on Clause (4)(1)(i).

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEMUGABA: We also propose an addition of (m) to read, “Two persons from the general public,” as it was proposed by the minister.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No. on that one, the trend of the debate has not been - honourable minister, you want to maintain the two members of the public? 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, the lifespan of these boards is not long. We shall find out whether it is a real problem but as of now, I would request you colleagues to allow those two slots for those people who are not professionally mentioned here. There are some good people with very good ideas on this but they are not professionals. 

MR OCHOLA: Mr Chairman, I do not want to look like I am opposing the minister. I am a member of the committee and that is why I have been quiet. But the clarification I want to seek from the minister is that how are we going to have the election or nomination of these two members of the public? Are we going to nominate or elect? Which procedure are we going to use to get the two members who will represent the public?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I will put the question to the amendment proposed that two members of the public be included on this board. I will put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, the (m) having been removed, another amendment which I concede is, “at least a third of the members shall be female.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: “Women.” That is the language of the Constitution. 

MR SSEMUGABA: Okay, I agree.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment to the inclusion of at least one third of the membership of the board to be comprised of women. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are we finished with the amendment of Clause 4(4)? There was a proposed amendment. 

MR SSEMUGABA: Other amendments are not contested. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There was an amendment, remember, for Clause 4(4) to take out the “s”. I put the question to the amendment in Clause 4(4) to replace, for the word “members”, the word “member.”  That is for consistency in our interpretation of laws. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 4 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, in the public gallery, this afternoon, we have the Child Life Network, a Christian NGO working with children. The delegation of the children is led by the Project Manager, Lubale Ronald Hope and they are here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, on Clause 6, we would like to insert paragraph (4)(e) to read as follows: “Where a member ceases to be a member of the body which nominated him or her.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is clear: you lose your membership if you stop being a member. (Laughter) ­I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I seek to make an amendment on Clause 6(2). It talks about the time within which the minister has to appoint the board but it restricts itself to the first board. I want us to capture it here that the minister should be given time within which he/she must appoint successive boards. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That one now depends on the term of the board because the board that is appointed has a term. So, when the term lapses he appoints the next one. You do not have to put it anywhere else.

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairman, I am talking about this because we have very many statutory boards, which are not in place. The appointments have never taken place and the ministers do not bother because there is no particular express legal requirement that you must do it within a certain time. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Would that be a necessary addition, learned Attorney-General? A board has been appointed within the time required for the first board to be appointed, the board has a term; that term must come to an end. Do you need a law that says the minister shall appoint another board?

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairman, it is definitely implied that the minister shall appoint another board but within which time? Because it happens that the board expires and the minister can take a whole year without appointing another board and there is no limitation for him that you must appoint a board within this time. That is why I want us to -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Call him to a committee of the House for violating the law. I put the question on Clause 6, as amended, to stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, on Clause 9, functions of the board, we wish to amend as follows: Clause 9(b), to insert just after the phrase “persons with disabilities” in line three the words, “…as provided for in the accessibility standards.” The justification is to require enforcement of accessibility standards. 

Then to insert a new paragraph called 9(g) after (f) to read as follows: “To determine the fees to be charged by urban and district building committees for approval of plans, issue of building permits and occupation permits.” The justification is to empower the board to regulate the fees payable for approval to ensure that standard amounts are paid to various approving authorities countrywide. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There are two amendments. Let us start with the amendment in (b) where they are proposing that “as provided for in the accessibility standards.” 

MR RUHINDI: My view is that we leave it as it is because it is broader the way it is. Why do you have to restrict it to, “as provided for in the accessibility standards?” In any case, these will be part of the entire legal infrastructure to be administered by court. So, the way it is, is better and broader.
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Also, we have not made any provisions for accessibility standards; we have only defined it.  

MR SSEMUGABA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I concede to the amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, that means the next amendment is in the paragraph (g) after paragraph (f). There is a new paragraph being proposed. Are we agreeable to that so that I can put a question to it?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question that Clause 9 be amended to include a new paragraph (g). I now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, on Clause 10 (3), the committee proposes to replace the phrase “appointed by the minister for a purpose” with the phrase “nominated by the chairperson in writing.” The justification is that the minister’s appointment maybe hard to obtain owing to the usually busy schedules of ministers.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, when you read this Bill, you realise that the prerogative of appointing the chairman is with the minister. There are reasons why that duty was left in the hands of the responsible minister. It was done that way after considering many factors. In the circumstances, I propose that we leave that clause as it appears in the original Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Supposing the chairperson is bedridden and not in position to speak or write?

MR SSEMUGABA: In our wisdom, we thought that the chairperson can appoint somebody to chair. Maybe, we can say that the chairperson can nominate but the minister can appoint to help in his absence.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Chairman of the committee, would you like to reconsider your position?

MR SSEMUGABA: Okay, I concede for the good of the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 10 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, on Clause 21, the committee proposes a simple amendment and it is about replacing the phrase “to open and operate” in the head note, with the phrase “maintains bank account.” The principal Bill talks about the powers to open and operate bank account, but in the amendment we propose that it reads thus: “power to open and maintain bank account.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What is the justification?

MR SSEMUGABA: The justification is for consistency with the body of the clause, which requires the board to maintain an account.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I think you have heard those voices and so, it should be the other way round. It is the word “maintain” in sub clause (1), which should be replaced with the word “operate” for consistency purposes. Normally, you operate and not just maintain because you can even maintain a redundant account. To “operate” is more positive than “maintain.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are you now proposing an amendment?

MR RUHINDI: Yes, the amendment I am proposing is that the word “maintain” in sub clause (1) should be replaced with the word “operate” so that it is consistent with the one in the head note.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is the new amendment, in which case, I suppose that the first amendment has been withdrawn. Is that right, Chairman of the Committee?

MR SSEMUGABA: I think the Attorney-General has rectified the whole thing; they should match and so, I concede to the Attorney-General’s proposed amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. So, the only operating amendment is now in sub clause (1) of Clause 21, which is to replace the word “maintain” with the word “operate.” I now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, on Clause 28(2), the committee proposes an amendment to insert paragraph (k), immediately after paragraph (j) to read as follows: “An officer from the police department responsible for fire prevention.”
The justification is to ensure the presence of such an officer to advise on issues of fire protection and prevention on the building committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If that is clear, I now put the question to that – 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. From the previous amendments in regard to the representation of fire officers, we were informed by hon. Amuriat that it is not very easy to get these specialised officers, most especially for districts or urban councils. 

My thinking is that it may not be necessary especially looking at the institution we are legislating for.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Chairman of the committee, would you like to reconsider your position on that?

MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE: Mr Chairman, we are not legislating for the present alone; we are also legislating for tomorrow. The fact that we do not have manpower does not mean we will not have it forever. My suggestion is that it will be in order for it to remain the way it is.

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I also would like to support the honourable colleague. We are not looking for an expert; we should be looking at somebody from that department to take care of the interests of fighting the fires. Also, if the manpower is not there now, we expect it to be there in future. So, I propose that we go ahead as proposed by the chairman of the committee.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I thought this is one opportunity where we can create jobs for our people and we have institutions to do just that; to create trained personnel. I think by passing this, we shall have created an opportunity for these institutions to create these courses. As the Member proposed, we are not legislating for today alone but for the future as well.

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Mr Chairman, we do not seem to be taking this matter of fire very seriously but we have always had buildings burning in this country, and we have a lot of retired police officers who have been in the fire department scattered across the country. We could start with those, so, the issue of having no people should not arise because you are saying that as a country, we have failed yet we have fire experts and we should have them.

I am convinced that we can find people who can give advice on fire committees and retired police officers are also there.

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the clarification I am seeking is whether this House can legislate in anticipation of a future occurrence because it is possible that in future, we shall have experts in this area. It is also possible that at one point, these maybe essential but we are legislating for today and once assented to, this law will be operational. We are talking about districts. What is the capacity of the districts to have these officers? So, my thinking is that yes, at the point when we are in position to do that, then we can amend the law but once the law is in place, it should be - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, you know my rule on the microphone. I will have the Member for -

MR LOKII: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have an experience from Kotido. Last week, three huts were burnt at a police station and the Police could not save anything. I am just wondering what this proposal about the police officer is about because what exactly will the role of this police officer be in terms of fighting fire? As hon. Tashobya has said, you are talking about putting up committees in districts. Even in terms of manpower establishment of the Police in the districts like in the case of Karamoja, it is very low with a very high desertion rate. So, who is this that you are going to put to take over this responsibility?

I would like to request my colleague, the hon. Chairman, to concede and just delete this. Thank you.

MS ACAYO: I thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to agree with the chairperson of the committee that an officer in charge of fire should be there. In our police force, we have these officers although we may not have experts to the level of those in developed countries. Honourable members, we must live in a world of reality. Fire is gutting schools every now and then and from my experience of working in schools, it was the police officers who used to train the students on what to do in the event of fire. 

I believe that even in the districts, we can build capacity through training and workshops for people to be able to handle these fires. In addition, regional police stations are supposed to have fire equipment. So, it is a reality and we have lost very many buildings to fire. It will be a very big omission if this committee does not have an officer in charge of fire. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal that is very strong now and coming from the Members is that the fire officer is necessary. Mr Chairman -

MR SSEMUGABA: It is good that they have realised that it is necessary, mainly because the first function of the committee is to scrutinise and approve building plans. When we put this provision, even if that person is not there within that district, it gives leeway for the committee to adopt one from a neighbouring district, which has one. 

At the same time, the Uganda Police Force has trained many officers in fire fighting. Even now, they are in Luzira training others. So, this is to act as a safeguard because many municipalities have had these problems. When Police go there to extinguish fire, they find no access where to pass to extinguish these fires. When someone is on the building committee, he can give advice.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, that is the plea from the chairman of the committee.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am just seeking clarification from the chairman. Would it not be proper that the head of the water department be involved here and probably the arm of the presidency in the name of the RDC’s office? This is because I see that we are picking more technical experts in the district and there is no directly represented political interest here. I am looking at a situation where probably a report must be sent as soon as possible to the centre, and I am also looking at a situation where water systems have been neglected or interfered with. The water officer of the district, I would think, should be part and parcel here. That is the only clarification I am seeking.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can I put the question on the issue of the fire officer? I put the question to the amendment on the inclusion of paragraph (k) in Clause 28(2). 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is an amendment - was it an amendment?

MR ANYWARACH: Yes, it can serve as an amendment - from clarification to amendment. If that is the case then, Mr Chairman, I would seek to propose an amendment named (l) to include a person or an officer responsible for water in the district or the water engineers. And then, also, the office of the RDC that is now from – [Hon. Members: “No”] Okay, at least the district engineer for water. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there is a proposal for the inclusion of the district water officer or engineer.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, there is already a provision for an officer responsible for engineering and actually, engineering includes civil works, water and electrical engineering. I think this suffices and takes care of the amendment that he is proposing.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, that is a very nice correction but I worked in the local government as a district councillor and all these departments you are talking about are semi-autonomous. The water engineering department is very different from the road engineering/works department. That even brings a question of clarity on which engineering department we are talking about. So, actually, you are moving more ground for us to make amendments because when you talk of the officer responsible for engineering, what form of engineering; mechanical, water?

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, I would like to clarify on that issue. In the district, when you have a district engineer, he takes charge of all engineering, including water engineering. Although there is water engineering, the district engineer is more qualified and he is in charge of that department.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Anywarach, would you like to reconsider this, in light of the chairperson’s response?

MR ANYWARACH: Okay, I will now backtrack. 

MR NOKRACH: Mr Chairman, on Clause 28(2)(j), I request that it reads as follows: “A representative of the persons with disability nominated by the National Council for Disability at district level.” If we leave it as “National Council for Disability”, we are leaving the structure at national level to nominate at district level and this would be very difficult.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay? I think that is straight forward. I will now put a question to that amendment – 

MR NOKRACH: Then the second issue is – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we first finish with this? I put the question to the amendment to insert immediately after the words “National Council for Disability” the words “at the district level”.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NOKRACH: Regarding the board, I suggest that at least one third of the committee should be women.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is now consequential. That will work to adopt that “a third of this board shall be comprised of women”. Let us hear from the Member for Makindye East.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, that might be a bit complicated on this one because these are officers already in those positions. You might find out that it may be difficult for you to get an officer responsible for physical planning, health, engineering, land management – they might not be in those positions as women. Does that mean that on enacting this law, then some positions within these stipulated offices should be given to women? This is because these are not nominated offices and officers in charge are already in place.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, that seems to be a valid point because you might have a chief administrative officer who is a man, a town clerk who is a man and all the others who are men. Are you going to fire them in order to create positions for women? 

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, it was not my motion and it would be a good motion if we had enough technical women at the district level. Personally, I would not have any problem with that proposal but like Members have clarified, won’t we make work difficult at the district level to constitute this committee?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question – of course, we have not adopted the proposal by hon. Nokrach on the a third of the women. 

Clause 28, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, we would like to propose an amendment to insert the phrase “based on a checklist provided by the building committee” immediately after the word “committee”. The justification is to require the building control officer to comply with the checklist provided by the building committee. 

Then Clause 33(b), insert just after the word “review” in line 1 the phrase “within five working days”. The justification is to provide for a timeframe for forwarding the application by the building control office. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that Clause 33? I see only one in the – Do you have a new report? Are we still on Clause 33? Okay, they are two; there is (a) and (b). Can we first deal with these two now?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, the first amendment proposed by the chairperson in Clause 33(a) is an administrative matter, “to make recommendations to the building committee based on a checklist”. That to me is an administrative matter and so, it does not have to be put here. In (b), I think the proposed amendment – even if you insert the expression “within five days” it does not even make sense. That amendment should reside in Clause 39(3) because that is the one that deals with the forwarding. It says: “The building control officer shall forward to the building committee for review a copy of each application for a permit made under this section and his or her decision on that application.” They can then bring in their expression “within five days” after “his or her decision”. That would be a better place for the amendment. 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: But Clause 39 is about minor building works, not on major works. So, I doubt if it fits here, unless he is also going to change the heading. It is still better placed where it was initially proposed than what the Attorney-General is proposing. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is it the first bit of the amendment that is administrative?

MR RUHINDI: If we maintain it in Clause 33(b), I will not have any problem with it as long as you put there “forward to the building committee for review within five days” after “his or her decision.” Otherwise, “five days” will remain hanging if you do not peg it to the time of making the decision.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Committee Chairperson, that is now a proposed amendment to your amendment. Would that be acceptable under Clause 33(b)? A formulation by the Attorney-General - can we adopt that one? In other words, the five days would be upon the officer making this decision so that we do not just put “five days”; from what date? 

MR SSEMUBAGA: First of all, Mr Chairman, I think we should finish the first amendment on the checklist.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The Attorney-General says the checklist could be administrative rather than putting it in the legislation. 

MR SSEMUGABA: But our justification is to require the building control officer to comply with the checklist provided by the building committee. 

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, I am rising on the matter being addressed by the Chairman, that is, the checklist. Since the Bill does not talk about the checklist within the functions of the building committee, I do not see how we should import it now as one of the requirements in his amendments. 

When you read the functions of the building committee, it does not stipulate that it must formulate a checklist. So, I agree with the Attorney-General because one, it is not stipulated in the functions of the committee and there is no need for us importing it at this time and two, it can be done administratively. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think that first bit is clear. 

MR BYANDALA: As the Attorney-General said, a checklist is just a guide for somebody performing his duties. So, if he is doing his work properly, there is need to look at a checklist. So, we do not need to put it in here. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Chairman, the amendment I would like to make on this matter concerns something that has not been provided for in the entire Bill – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: why don’t we exhaust this one and then we come to you? 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: It has also to do with the functions of the building control officer –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, let us finish with the amendments proposed by the committee then you can bring in your amendment. So, Mr Chairman, have you withdrawn the first bit of the checklist?

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, I withdraw it, with difficulty. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That means it is withdrawn. Now, on the proposal in Clause 33(b), “within five working days”, it is supposed to be dependent on something. learned Attorney-General, can you draft something for us?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I had proposed that it should read, “To forward to the building committee for review within five working days after his or her decision copies of all applications for minor building works - “ and so on, to the end.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that clear? 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Chairman, this is meant to ensure that people do their work; that we do not have to wait forever. Therefore, on the five days, I imagine that when I submit my papers to the land officer, I need results within five days. But if the Attorney-General says, “after he has finished his work he must submit within five days” then he could take one year to finish his work, which I think is not right. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, it reads, “To forward to the building committee for review within five working days after –” 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: After what? It should be after I handover my papers for processing. They must be worked on within five days. I am sure that is what the committee wants. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I think hon. Wafula Oguttu is looking at another clause in the Bill because this particular provision is pegged to section 39. Look at section 39 – (Interjections) – Yes, this is Clause 33(b), how do you finish it? “To forward to the building committee for review copies of all applications for minor building works submitted to the building control officer under section 39 and his or her decision on the application must be taken -”; if you look at section 39(3), it says, “A building control officer shall forward to the building committee for review a copy of each application for a permit made under this section and his or her decision on that application”. 

That means that he or she will already have made the decision. So, what the committee is emphasising is that that should be done within five days. We can make it better by saying, “...five working days”. But that should be done after the decision. So, if he or she makes a decision today, it should be within five working days after that decision is made together with the application and the decision to forward to the building committee. I believe it is clear now. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, now that we have looked at it again - Clause 33 is not commanding; it is not making a demand on the building officer. But section 39 is imposing an obligation on what the building officer must do. So, the original proposal by the learned Attorney-General might have to come back for review.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I rise to agree with the first suggestion by the learned Attorney-General and in line with what you have said. Clause 33 is laying down bare functions. Now, section 39 is laying down procedures which procedures will also convict the person applying for the permit and also the person to issue the permit. 

So, the question of the days should not even be reflected in Clause 33. It should be taken to section 39. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Chairman, there is something I want to see inserted immediately after (e); one of the things that the building control officer has to check are installed security cameras on storied buildings. I intend to move an amendment putting an obligation on Clause 35, where it will be a requirement for security reasons for all people constructing buildings that are particularly in cities and municipalities that are above –(Interruption) 

MR KIYINGI: Mr Chairman, I rise on a point of procedure and with a very heavy heart because hon. Tinkasiimire is a very good friend of mine but I think there is something that is just not right. When the Speaker made a decision that hon. Tinkasiimire and his colleagues sit in front of the Speaker, it was clearly put that they had left this side and that they were no longer part of the government side. This microphone here is for the government side. I just do not understand how a person who is not on the government side uses a government microphone. (Laughter) I just want to be guided, Mr Chairman, whether it is right for hon. Tinkasiimire to stand here as if he is a member of the frontbench. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: One of the principles of the Rules of Procedure is that only one member is allowed the attention of the House at any one given time. Once that member is chosen by the Speaker, that member has the right to address the House - (Applause) - and there is no limitation as to where he or she – (Interjections) - But certainly, by now we know that the microphone on the dispatch box on my right is normally used by members of the frontbench of the Government side and the microphone on the dispatch box on my left hand side is normally used by the Opposition and the ministers who shadow the Cabinet ministers in Government.

The ruling of the Speaker should have been completed by making provision for the members who now have a new situation in the House to have a new microphone that could not bring – (Laughter). Now that such a provision has not been made, I will use my discretion to provisionally allow the members to use the microphones, either this one or this one; whichever way. (Laughter)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for your wise ruling. He is well aware- 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Proceed.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Chairman, I am bringing that function under clause 33 because I intend to move an amendment putting a burden on every person constructing a building which is three floors and above to have provision for security cameras. The main reason, of course, will be to monitor crime, particularly in cities and their surroundings.                 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, how do we process this amendment? We have not dealt with the clause. Is it an intended amendment?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Yes. I would propose that after (e) we have (f) and then (f) would shift to become (g).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No. What I am asking is how to process it. Are we together on this? Is it the view of the House that we impose this on builders, just like they do when they say that after a certain number of floors you need a lift, so that after a certain number of floors there should be a requirement for security cameras for purposes of monitoring the situations around that particular building? Would that be something that the House would go with? That is what the member is suggesting.  

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would really think that we should leave this to the security agencies because this is putting an extra cost on the people who have put money into the construction sector. On the issues of security, the security agencies can come up and give directives to institutions and to companies, depending on the requirements or the security situation in the country. Today we may have terrorism but tomorrow it will be gone and we may not require to even have cameras on the buildings. Maybe the cameras will be required at the entrance of the buildings. So, I suggest that we leave that to the security agencies. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You have made your point, honourable member; we are trying to see how to process it.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would wish to concur with my colleague on the other side that we do not have to impose sanctions on the construction companies or the builders. I would also wish to be educated on how these cameras would work. There are some towns where electricity is still not a privilege to many. If they put a sanction on these people constructing, that they have to make a provision for CCTV cameras and yet they do not have electricity, how does it work?

Two, I would imagine that everyone constructing, depending on the purpose of the building, can be at liberty to choose whether to have these cameras or not. It should not be in one of the laws that we have to impose sanctions on people who wish to build; otherwise, we limit our people who would want to develop our cities and towns. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, would you like to think about it again?  

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Chairman, I brought this amendment up because after the death of one of our officers called Ariong during the demonstrations, there was no concrete evidence on who actually killed the officer. If there had been security cameras installed on that particular building, this would have been a foregone conclusion. They would have seen this crime being committed. 

We have gone to developed countries and we have found these cameras well situated on those buildings to a level that it becomes very difficult to commit crime in those developed countries. This is because it is a requirement that when you have to construct a building that is storied, you install security cameras to link up with the Police cameras and later on this is a development. If we do not provide for this requirement in this Bill, tomorrow it is will be difficult for us to import it. 

MR SSEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Hon. Tinkasiimire has made a good suggestion, but it is for future consumption. He has given us one example but there are various incidences where buildings have collapsed and the main reason is because of the quality of building materials and not because of cameras. He has only mentioned one incident where a camera was necessary, but we have seen many incidents where buildings have collapsed due to poor quality building materials. I believe as of now, cameras are not necessary. We should just ensure the quality of building materials.

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. While we all agree that security is an important issue on any building, we need to be aware that technology is changing day in, day out. Yes, you may need cameras today, but you may not need to install a camera tomorrow. You could just need a small dragon or something that captures that information.

I think hon. Tinkasiimire could concede on that. That is an issue the minister can look at later while drafting regulations. Where he finds it necessary, the minister can issue regulations regarding security of buildings especially in regard to public buildings. I would like to urge hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire to concede so that we can proceed. Otherwise, be assured that we have taken note of that important point.

MR MAGANDA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. At this point we are discussing an issue that touches building control. While we talk about security, we are trying to move away from whether the security would be required at the inception, when the person is just starting to construct a building, or whether it would be required when the building is already complete. 

I want to think that we should talk about security when the building is complete. It is at that moment that you can ask how to provide security for the structure. This is because security is not part of the requirements for the construction, quality and nature of the building to be constructed. 

We should also bear in mind that we are developing instructions that will be taken by people from as far as villages where some people may not need the installation of security cameras. Some of them may just need a dog for security purposes. So, a person applying to construct a house should not be required to have that as part of the things on which to base before permission is granted.

What I want to request the House to do is to give the minister powers to generate the checklist as far as requirements are concerned. I implore my brother to be considerate on that aspect. We should pay a lot of attention to the control - constructing these buildings in terms of quality of material. The security aspect can come in later. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Chairman, if only I could get, on the Floor of the House, an assurance that when the minister will issue regulations, – because we know that at the time of occupying this building, everything must be complete – he looks for almost every detail that was supposed to be there. I have taken into consideration all the concerns that Members are raising to have a strong building. However, I equally have a concern in having a secure building and a secure environment. That is the spirit in which I introduced this amendment.

Mr Chairman, as we go on, the crime rate in this congested city will continue to rise unnoticed if we do not impose this sanction. Last time we saw the Inspector-General of Police trying to gamble installing security cameras in the city. This would have been amplified if the owners of the buildings had complied with this requirement. That would have made work of the IGP easy; the Police would just monitor what goes on around these buildings.

Anyway, with the assurance that this requirement will appear in the regulations to be issued by the minister, Mr Chairman –(Interjections)  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, please proceed.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Chairman, the honourable minister is the Minister of Defence and not the minister responsible for buildings. He is already protesting like he is not interested in the security in this country. (Laughter) You can see where we are going –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, the House has not heard what you have just said.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Chairman, in the interest of us proceeding, I will raise this issue at the right moment.

MR NGOZHU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to concur with what hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire is saying because –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But he has withdrawn that matter.

MR NGOZHU: Mr Chairman, I think he withdrew it so early.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, no, honourable member; please, let us move on. I now put the question to clause 33 –

MR WANGOLO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am worried about sub clause (d) (ii). I know very well that if this Bill is passed into law, it will affect so many people in towns and the city. It says, “the demolition of any building”. Look at (d) (ii) –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, these are functions of a building control officer. “The functions of a Building Control Officer are – 
(d) to inspect – 
(ii) the demolition of any building.” This means that where there is a demolition being done, the control officer should inspect.

MR WANGOLO: Mr Chairman, how? We already have the building committee; when a building is going to be erected, I think everything will be in place and they will be there to monitor. Will the control officers demolish their own work?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But you have read (i) on the erection of any building before you go to the demolition of any building. I think it follows. It talks about building, demolishing and all the other things that go with it. The control officer has a function to inspect all this. 

MR WANGOLO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I still wonder why that same inspector who is inspecting the erection of that building will now order the demolition of that same building. That is my concern.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I can see the worry of the honourable member. I think he would want to add (iv), or insert (iii) or paragraph (g) to say, “and to witness the collapsing of any building”.


THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to clause 33 as there is no amendment. I put the question that clause 33 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend 35(2)(d)by redrafting it to read as follows: “the name, registration number and copy of the practising certificate of the architect or engineer and his or her signature and the official stamp of the Architects or Engineer’s Registration Board.” 

The justification is: to provide for engineers as well, since a building plan may be approved by an engineer.

There is another amendment - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think it is easier if we process them one by one.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman and colleagues, I do not concur with my chairman. I would want (d) to remain as it is but also add that in case of engineers, a certificate of good structural practice is attached.

Mr Chairman, I say this because engineers have an official form, which includes all this. It is different from the one of architects. As engineers, we have to state the strength of the materials we are using, the strength of the soil for purposes of the foundation and we also need to tell the strength of the concrete. All these are incorporated in this certificate of good structural practice. So, it should remain as it is and then we add that in case of engineers, a certificate of good engineering practice should be attached.

MR SEBUNYA: I am sorry for interfering at a wrong time, Mr Chairman, but I want to ask if the minister could allow that certificate of good practice to be attached as a schedule on the actual Bill. 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, the practice even now is that you cannot submit structural work unless you are registered. We also have a stamp and there are particulars you have to fill in showing how you did the design. This is because the strength of steel, for example, differs; some is stronger than others. Even the grade of concrete, the strength of in situ material and the bearing capacity of the soil are all different. That is why we have these certificates of good structural practice.

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, in the principal law they only catered for architects because they mention the Uganda Society of Architects. So we also want to cater for engineers because in many places, you will find no architects. In districts, for example, there are no architects and you will find that engineers are the ones doing the work of architects. If you do not provide for them then who will undertake that function?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the minister is agreeing with you. Minister, can you now propose your amendment to your Bill properly. 

MR BYANDALA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want 35(b) to stay as it is in the Bill now but add, “in case of engineers, a certificate of good structural practice should be attached.” These are attached when you submit drawings to the local authorities for approval.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, mine is just a clerical correction. When read from (2), it says, “An application for a building permit shall be in a form prescribed by the Board, and shall – (d) the name, registration…” Should it be “shall include” or “shall bear”? I think there must be some clerical error there.  A word was missed and as such a verb should be inserted. Otherwise, I totally agree with what the honourable minister is saying, except let us try to read it from the end, from “shall”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The honourable member is proposing that you put the word “contain”, which is also used in paragraph (a), “shall contain the name, registration…”, so that it is complete. 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, in case of engineers, this single form contains all that information. It gives you-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is not the issue. Your issue has been captured. The honourable member is saying that if you read the opening sub clause (2) and you join it with (d), it does not make sense.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, that is correct. There should be an expression “contain” as you open paragraph (d), and that should be the same with paragraph (f) - “contain a letter” - to also make it flow.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that clear? So, that means we make the adjustment at the beginning of paragraphs (d) and (f). Also in (d), the minister is suggesting that after the semi colon, you continue and say, “in the case of engineers…”

MR BYANDALA: In the case of engineers, a certificate of good structural practice is attached. Honourable members, this form is standard. It is official and no drawings of an engineering nature can be approved without this form. It is the one, which contains all the necessary data that somebody approving can use to check your work.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I guess we really want to distinguish between the role of an architect and that of an engineer. I think that we should hold our fire until we go to the amendments on sub clause (3) where there is a requirement for structural work, which is the domain of structural engineers and not of the architect. 

I want to think that the spirit of the Bill is meant to be two-fold, and one is to look at what the architect is meant to do. There are drawings that may not require the serious input of a structural engineer; if it is a bungalow, for example, a one-floor building, such a simple building does not require structural calculations. However, in the case of multi-storeyed buildings, it is going to be a must that you have got to have the input of a structural engineer because then in most cases you have to design the columns, the beams, the slabs and such engineering structures that the buildings may require. So, I think the Minister is right but I guess he is bringing in his amendment a little bit early. It would be appropriate in sub clause (b).

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, applying for a building permit means that you have submitted drawings and they have been checked. You cannot approve drawings which are partially submitted. In that case, you cannot get a permit until the drawings are approved. What council used to do was that the development committee would pass the development plans pending the submission of structural details. So for you to get a building permit, you must have submitted one or both, depending on the nature as engineer Amuriat has explained.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: “and in the case of an engineer, a certificate of good structural practice.” That is the amendment proposed by the Minister; should we adopt it? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We have moved to amend the opening paragraphs of (d) and (f) to insert the word “contain”. I put the question to those amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to insert a new sub clause (3) after (2) to read as follows: “Where the building is a multi-storied structure/building, the application shall include: (a) a structural design and plans, stamped by a registered structural engineer including the name, registration number and his or her signature, a copy of the registration certificate and a copy of the structural design calculations.”

Justification: to provide for the checking of structural designs by the approving authority before granting a building permit.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that clear, Members? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEMUGABA: Sub clause (3) (b), “a geotechnical report made by a geotechnical laboratory accredited by the Ugandan National Bureau of Standards and endorsed by a registered geotechnical engineer.” Justification: to provide for a geotechnical report on the soil type and conditions to guide the designer in choosing an acceptable building type to construct in a particular area.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay, Members? Let us hear from the engineer Amuriat.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I do not want to discredit the Uganda National Bureau of Standards in accrediting geotechnical laboratories. However, I feel that we will get better results if this function were to be given to the Ministry of Works. This is because they have the biggest material laboratories across the country and they have the capacity to efficiently determine which laboratory around the country, even though privately run, has the competence to carry out geotechnical surveys on any piece of land. Whereas this amendment is good, because for obvious reasons you need to know the strength of soil because it accommodates the structure, if both the committee chairperson and the Minister agree, we could give the authority to the Ministry of Works and Transport.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I was also beginning to wonder whether UNBS can also measure the quality of soil, how it was produced and things like that.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Definitely, the current UNBS does not have the capacity and I do not see it getting it because getting materials engineers and geotextile engineers is not very easy. Above that, the central materials laboratory of the Ministry of Works and Transport is the authority in this country for checking these standards. Standard settings and specifications are also part of the functions of the restructured Ministry of Works and Transport. So, I totally agree with the honourable engineer Amuriat that this should be put under the central materials lab.

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, we concede.

MR SEBUNYA: Much as you have agreed, you must be wary of the spread of – Recently, I wanted to book somebody from the city council because it is a new input that whenever you are building something deeper than two metres, you are required to have that geotechnical inspection done. But imagine somebody in Kaberamaido who is planning to put up a building but has to run to the ministry’s one laboratory in Kampala; how practical is this? Can’t we find alternatives? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let us get information from the engineer Amuriat.

MR AMURIAT: Well, as far as material labs are concerned, we have them across the country. Everywhere you have an UNRA station, you should have a lab. It is a requirement for a contractor doing major structural works on roads that they should have a field laboratory. So, every time you see young men and women taking samples from roads, they are being taken to the laboratory for necessary tests to determine the structures’ strength. So, it is absolutely possible for anybody from Kaberamaido or Kalangala to take their samples to these labs for tests so as to determine the soil’s integrity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, “engineer” Ssimbwa? (Laughter)
 
MR SSIMBWA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for that new title –(Laughter)- but I have two clarifications that I want to get from the Minister. 

First, we are aware that there are other international bodies that accredit laboratories and this accreditation is internationally recognised. What if there is a laboratory in this country that does the same work and is internationally accredited? Does this mean that all contractors must go to the government-run one as per the law or these other internationally accredited laboratories can also do the work? This is because, Mr Chairman – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, no, no, please. All it is saying is that it should be accredited by the Ministry of Works.

MR SSIMBWA: Here, they had indicated that it should be accredited by the UNBS.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, the discussion is now on the Ministry of Works. 

MR SSIMBWA: But Mr Chairman, even when it comes to accreditation by the Ministry of Works, I do not know whether this central laboratory can accredit because it is one thing to be a laboratory and another to be able to accredit. When it comes to accrediting, then a laboratory must have a certain calibre of personnel to do the accreditation. So what type of accreditation are we talking about in this case of the Ministry of Works?

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, let me put it in an easy way for everybody to understand. We have what we call the Auditor-General who audits all government accounts, but he can get somebody to help as long as he checks and approves their work. Substitute the Auditor-General with Ministry of Works, then you will see that it works. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So it is clearer. Mr Chairman, you have adjusted your amendment to replace the Uganda National Bureau of Standards with the Ministry of Works and Transport. Please, state it clearly for the record. 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, it is called the Central Materials Laboratory of the Ministry of Works and Transport –(Mr Sebunya rose_)-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, honourable member, do not access the microphone before you are allowed to. It is difficult to record the Hansard when in the middle of a speech there is a “Mr Chairman”. 

MR BYANDALA: It is the Central Materials Laboratory of the Ministry of Works and Transport. 

MR SEBUNYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman, and I apologise for my action. I want to seek for clarification. Are we legislating for the ministry? Once we highlight the department, it is as though we have removed the power from the ministry itself to this small laboratory. Next time, it may be named differently. So why don’t we retain the Ministry of Works. By saying the Ministry of Works, it is implied that it will appoint a certain department to handle this work? 

MS SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, the minister should come up with the actual amendment that he wants. If he wants to add just that word, “laboratory”, when you talk about accreditation on issues of standards, it means that the laboratory must have the capacity to accredit. Capacity to accredit goes with other things. So, is it approve or accredit? I want the minister to come up with the actual amendment that he wants to appear here so that these two words are made clear before we pass them. 

MS NTABAZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I concur with my colleague because as government, we fail to pin down the people who are responsible. The Central Materials Laboratory is under the Ministry of Works. So, if we are to give powers, power should be given to the Ministry of Works so that the ministry can assign work to its other arms. So, I propose the amendment should give the powers to the Ministry of Works directly. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, what happened to the last part of, “endorsed by a registered geotechnical engineer”?

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, first of all, the geotechnical report must be produced by a registered engineer. This report is either produced in the materials lab of the ministry or another approved laboratory. So the sentence should read: “A geotechnical report made by the central materials laboratory or its agent...”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, I think it should read, “A geotechnical report made by a geotechnical laboratory accredited by…” The function being sought here is accreditation, not of making the report. 

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, I want to agree with you that we should use “accredited agent” and not “agent”. When you say, “agent” it is too general and open, but accreditation is specific and definite. It is done specifically and it is clear. So, I agree with you that we should have it as “accredited agent”. 

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, I agree with this addition of the Ministry of Works - “A geotechnical report made by a geotechnical laboratory accredited by the Ministry of Works and Transport and endorsed by a registered geotechnical engineer”. 

MR TASHOBYA: I do not have the exact text, but first of all, we are recognising the laboratory of the Ministry of Works or its accredited agent – (Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, what we are looking for here is the authority that is going to accredit. The wonderful amendment brought by the chairman of the committee, in my view, just lacked the competent authority to accredit. So, this provision is for any geotechnical laboratory so long as it is accredited by an authority to carry out geotechnical surveys and produce a report, and the report needs to be endorsed by a registered geotechnical engineer. So, it is the authority we are looking for. 

In my considered view, I thought that authority should lay in the hands of the Ministry of Works and Transport and not with the labs. I know that the chief materials engineer is going to be handy in this, but really, the authority should be given to the Ministry of works and Transport. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, this is the final text: “A geotechnical report made by a geotechnical laboratory accredited by the ministry responsible for works and endorsed by a registered geotechnical engineer”. I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, sub clause (3)(c), “where there are excavations exceeding two meters deep, a design of the soil support system and protection of the adjacent structures, endorsed by a registered geotechnical/structural engineer.” 

The justification is: to ensure that the earthworks are well monitored and have the capacity to withstand the intended development. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The Attorney-General is not here to advise us on the use of the stroke symbol in drafting. 

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, we can improve it to read, “...by a registered geotechnical or structural engineer”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is clearer. Honourable members, I put the question to that amendment – 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, it is mandatory and not linked to two metres for the protection of excavations. So, if we put two metres and something happens, then there will be a problem. It is incumbent on whoever is constructing to protect all excavations. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, you are saying this amendment is not necessary? What are you changing? “Where there are any excavations...”

MR BYANDALA: Exactly! It should read, “where there are any excavations, design of the soil support system and protection of the adjacent structures, endorsed by a registered geotechnical/structural engineer.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, the amendment now is to take away “exceeding two metres deep”. So, it should read, “where there are any excavations, a design of the soil support system…” and the rest continues like that. There is also the amendment of using “or” instead of the stroke. Is that clear? I put the question to that amendment. 

Let me read it for clarity - “where there are any excavations, a design of the soil support system and protection of the adjacent structures, endorsed by a registered geotechnical or structural engineer.” Is that okay? 

DR BAYIGGA: I think these provisions, Mr Chairman, are meant for urban areas. I just want to get clarification because excavations go on even in villages when they are digging pit latrines, for instance. Can those provisions be part of it?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This is the Building Control Bill. 

DR BAYIGGA: Latrines are also built, Mr Chairman. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, I propose to renumber sub-clause- 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Renumbering is not for Parliament to pronounce itself on. That is automatic. I put the question that clause 35, as amended, stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 36

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, we propose to delete paragraph 2(d) and renumber the paragraphs accordingly as paragraphs (a) to (g).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Renumbering is automatic once you have deleted something. 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. If, the Minister could pay attention to me - There was a form he was talking about, the designers’ or engineers’ form, and the chairman had also wanted to introduce a checklist. I do not know what was contained in the checklist but my problem is with clause 36 (b). 

Clause 36(b) and (d) are quite related. If you look at our towns, especially our city, Kampala, we have a lot of soil degradation and a lot of dust caused by builders. People build, clear the distance between their buildings and the road, and they leave it unpaved or without grass and the rain washes all this soil onto our roads and into the lake, clogging the drainage system. 

I would like to appeal to the minister and the chairman that we consider settling this problem, particularly in towns, within this Bill. If you have put up a house, which is reaches the tarmac, any distance between your house and the road reserve should be paved by you. It should be part of the requirement.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, we have reached a stage where we only handle amendments. Would you like to propose one? You propose the amendment then you justify it. 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Chairman, I am finding it difficult deciding where to put it exactly. That is why I am appealing to the minister. I was looking here at the designs and the checklists but it is not there. So, I do not know where to put the amendment. The amendment I would like to propose is that for any building to be approved for occupation, especially in towns, the distance between the building and the road reserve should be paved or planted with grass to avoid soil erosion and dust in our towns.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am looking at the section which we are deleting, that is section (2)(d), and I would like to seek clarification from the chairman. The original Bill reads, “A building committee may refuse to issue a permit where…” (Interruption)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Chairman, he is going to another point. I made – 

MR KAKOOZA: It is the same point. 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: No, it is not.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If you are to sequentially follow what was happening, then he is the one who we should be allowing to speak because the chairman had proposed a deletion of (d) and hon. Kakooza is speaking on that whereas you are still searching for where to accommodate your concerns. 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Chairman, for that ruling. Section (2)(d) says, “A Building Committee may refuse to issue a permit where the building operation in respect of which the permit is applied for- (d) may result in a building which is unsightly or objectionable to the public.” 

Mr Chairman, suppose somebody wants to put a building in front of a mosque or a church, can’t the committee refuse to give you a permit to construct it? I thought this was the meaning of this part. Someone may want to build a toilet in front of my building or a restaurant. Why should we delete the section? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, you need to help us with your justification for proposing to delete (d). 

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, we had failed to conceive it in its proper meaning. If the minister satisfies the House, we shall have no problem. It sounded vague and somehow not clear in interpretation. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, would you want to make it clearer to the House? You did not make it clear to the committee.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Dear colleagues, these laws we are making are made for the people; they are not for luxury but for the people. When you read (d), it clearly brings out the central role of the people. It says, “may result in a building which is unsightly or objectionable to the public.” We must respect the people and we are here to serve the people. We are not making laws for Mars but for the people here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, why didn’t you object to the proposal to delete? The chairperson had proposed a deletion of that and now you are defending it without having come to defend it at first.

MR KAKOOZA: For it to have a meaning, I would propose that we do not delete it and it remains as it is. When the committee finds that the building is in front of a church or a mosque or even a toilet or something else which is against public interest, it will apply. That is why I propose that we leave it as it is.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, now that you know, do you still want to delete it?

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, now that a clarification has been made beyond any reasonable doubt, I concede to the existence of this sub clause (d); it should remain.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Any other amendments? There was the issue raised by the honourable Member for Bukooli Central on the process of completing your building, where you have to make sure it is paved so that you do not cause commotions. Yes, minister.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, hon. Wafula Oguttu has a good point, but we should think about how to implement these laws. When you read the Local Governments Act, this provision appears there but for urban centres and not villages. I have tried my best, and I am sure politicians and technical people in urban centres have tried, but it is very difficult to enforce that as of now. So, I want to think that we should leave it out –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, your point is that the legal provision exists in another law; not so?

MR BYANDALA: Yes. It is in the Local Governments Act. I cannot remember the sections, but when you get to that law I am very sure it is there because I tried my level best to implement it. It says that you are responsible for the paving of the front of your building, but implementing this provision has been very difficult.

MR SEBUNYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to suggest that we go by hon. Wafula Oguttu’s suggestion, if we can only include it in the miscellaneous provisions. I am saying this because as of now, the clauses we are considering are a bit specific.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Wafula Oguttu, you might have to start drafting it now so that from clause 46, it might be included as a standalone provision.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Chairman, hon. Wafula Oguttu brought a very good amendment. Since we are failing to find a position for it, it might ultimately be forgotten. But look at circumstances where somebody is constructing a building near a tarmacked road, for example along that Nsambya Hospital Road where KCCA workers have to sweep everyday because the place is unpaved. If we just keep skipping those important provisions, we will lose them.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, it has been said that there is a chapter in this Bill called “miscellaneous provisions”, the mixed provisions that apply generally to everything. I have asked hon. Wafula Oguttu to draft a proposal so that it when we get to that area, it will be inserted.

MR WANGOLO: Mr Chairman, between paragraphs (g) and (h) of sub clause (2), I propose to insert the following phrase: “may be located on gazetted land, for example forests, national game parks and wetlands.” One should not be given a permit to construct a house in such an area. Thank you.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, when you submit your plans, they are in four sets usually. One of those sets is to help the engineers to check on the ownership of your land. The second one is to help them check on the planning conformity. The third is for engineering purposes and the fourth one is for health checkups. If the land belongs to Uganda Wildlife Authority, for example, that plan cannot be approved by the land officer.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, so it is already taken care of; not so?

MR WANGOLO: Mr Chairman, it is not. Let it be clear here that if one applies for any construction permit for a house in such an area, it should not be granted to them. That should be reflected in this Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, they are saying that is resolved by the question of ownership. Once the issue of ownership is resolved, then the issue of whether you want to construct through a road reserve or not does not arise. If you own it, you will have proof that you own it. If you have a certificate of title for it, you will have proved that it is your land. So, if you have a certificate of title for a forest reserve, that is now another matter.

MR WANGOLO: Mr Chairman, these things have been happening. I do not know whether the minister is aware of this, but as we talk wetlands around Kampala and those surrounding Lake Victoria and forests have buildings all over. We have to make it clear so that when this Bill becomes operational, people should understand this.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I think the member has a point in what he is saying. However, I want to call his attention to the provisions of clause 36 (2) (b), which talks about the possibility of degradation of the environment. This provision talks about wetlands, forests. So, your fears, in my view, are adequately addressed by this Bill.

MR WANGOLO: Thank you, colleague. However, I want to assure you that when you talk about the environment, you realise that even here where we are, is part of it. When I talk about gazetted land, it is different from the environment, much as it may be part of it. I gave the example of forests, national game parks and other wetlands that are gazetted. Thank you.

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think the minister has given a clear explanation that the Registration of Titles Act provides that when a person holds a title, that person has ownership of that land. So, if it is a matter of challenging the ownership of such land, the due process of the law must take place. In this case, as the minister has put it, even in Kampala which he is referring to, if a permit is to be issued the issue of ownership of land must be clearly spelt out.

I believe that if somebody has a land title of land in a wetland or a forest reserve, until that title is cancelled according to the Registration of Titles Act, that person remains the owner of that particular piece of land. So, what the minister has explained is right and covers the concerns of the honourable Member of Parliament.

MR TINKASIMIRE: Mr Chairman, let us make clear and not vague laws. The provision that my honourable friend is trying to suggest is to make it very clear that as much as you may have a title, particularly for land in a gazetted forest or wetland, you should not be given permission to construct a building on it. This is because some people are scrupulous. We have seen in the Ministry of Lands people owning land titles for land in wetlands and in the lakes, reducing the size of Lake Victoria.

Mr Chairman, if we do not make it clear at this stage, we will not be doing justice to our country and we will have a problem tomorrow when we start seeing buildings in these places. You may have a title but you will not have a building. It will be an extra cost on the owner of the title and extra inconvenience on the public.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let me just say this: Are we trying to suggest that we impose a duty on the people issuing building permits to investigate even the title? Should they investigate beyond the title presented to them? That is onerous because under the Registration of Titles Act, a Certificate of Title is conclusive evidence of ownership. So, an institution that has been presented with a Certificate of Title cannot investigate beyond the title. The only thing that would come in is if upon commencement of activities, the other people show up. But if you are to say that the people issuing the permit should also investigate beyond the title, that would be beyond what they can do.

Besides (a) states, “may constitute a change in land use different from that for which the land is designated.” In other words, if the place is designated as a residential area and you want to construct a hotel or a factory then they would not give it to you - that is user.  But where somebody has a title and the user conforms to everything, certainly this committee cannot go beyond the title.

MR OKUPA: Mr Chairman, in the last Parliament we had a living example of Lugogo By-pass where approval was given for the construction of a hotel and on the title half of the road had been carved. You know Lugogo By-pass is two-way, with one half going towards Kira Police Station, which had been given to a hotel investor. It took the Minister of Works at that time, hon. Nasasira, and hon. Byandala who was our chairperson of the Committee of Physical Infrastructure, to stop it. With such a clear case, I think this is what this amendment is meant to address. Thank you.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, when we are legislating we must know and conform to other laws. When I become the owner of land, it is my property; I own it. The person giving a licence is not part of my land. So if you are giving a licence, as the registered owner of the title it is you to go to court and tell me that you owned the title wrongly and you cancel it. But before you do that, you cannot say that you are going to construct and you remove that property ownership of mine. 

If a mistake has been made, like people getting the land fraudulently and they get Certificates of Title, Mr Chairman, we know that sometimes mistakes happen and titles are cancelled. However, if somebody is given a title, it is incumbent upon you to challenge that title as wrong and it does not bar somebody from owning it. That is why sometimes when Government goes to construct roads and finds that that land belongs to somebody, it goes an extra mile and compensates. I do not think that in this law you are instructing the people issuing permits to go, investigate and even prosecute those owners who have the titles.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please keep your remarks short; the issue is very clear.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Chairman, I think the issue we are trying to fight for is like having a roadblock or check point as you enter the main gate of Parliament, and then immediately after you enter the main building, there is another check point. This is to emphasise that no unscrupulous person enters this House to harm Members of Parliament.

This law provides that you may own a title but when it comes to issues of construction, there should be another stage of checking, finding out where you got this title. It could have been an oversight by those who issued the title and during construction time it is brought to their attention. For sure, all of us know what a wetland is. You will not tell me that you are going to have a title in a lake, for instance, when everybody can see that this is a lake or a forest.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The problem is not everybody can see it based on the title. That is the problem. What you are doing, hon. Tinkasiimire, is to impose a duty on the people issuing the licence to leave their offices, drive to Kasilo, crosscheck that the land that is drawn - In fact, go with surveyors to open the boundaries and confirm that what is on the title is what is on the ground. It is a huge process.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to agree with you because first of all, once one has a title that is really evidence of ownership. Besides that, and relevant to this argument, is the matter of a wetland; the determination of what a wetland is and is not is also a technical issue. There are relevant institutions, which have the capacity of advising and determining what a wetland is and those capacities are not within what we have prescribed to constitute these committees. I think it would be requiring too much of these institutions to inquire into the type of land and the location of the land. 

Mr Chairman, as you have said, what capacity will these institutions have to go and open up boundaries and look at these places? It will even cause litigations. They may not have that capacity to determine but there are Government institutions, which have the capacity to determine and they will tell you. Even if the plans are approved, they will say “no, you cannot build here because this is a wetland.” I have seen instances where an ordinary person will think this is a wetland and actually it may not be a wetland. Let us leave the technical institutions charged with that responsibility to do the job. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MRS LUMUMBA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I support hon. Tashobya’s submission. However, I would like to add that where, as Members, you are not happy with what some institutions or ministries are doing it should mean that we have to give the responsibility to this committee to go and do that. Members are quoting issues like wetlands; for the Ministry of Lands to issue a land title in an area which is gazetted as a wetland or a forest, the mother ministry – for the sake of wetlands, NEMA – must have already evaluated and recommended. So, if the problem is with the institution, for example NEMA, we cannot now ask this committee to go and do NEMA’s work. We would rather look at the laws and consider making tougher laws to strengthen NEMA’s work. This is better than giving the work of some institutions to other institutions. 

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The checks and balances hon. Tinkasiimire wanted should in fact go to the institutions as the Government Chief Whip has said, those that issue the land titles. In fact, nobody has authority to cancel a land title other than a court of law. So you cannot all of a sudden wake up and say, “I am cancelling your title.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is true. Yes, Member for Kasilo.

MR OKUPA: Yes, it is true that the courts have the power to cancel the titles but there must be a basis. If this committee went and found out that there is a problem, then it is at that point that they go to court. They cannot just go to court before establishing that there is a problem. So it is not just the court coming on its own. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This is the district building committee we are looking at here. Let us hear from the learned Attorney-General.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I associate myself with the observations made, particularly in respect of the fact that we cannot detail organisations to do work that belongs to others. I think the only small clarification I would want from the sector minister in charge of this Bill is: How will these related agencies inform and feed into each other? If you wait until you issue a permit and a person goes and puts up a multi-billion structure, by the time you come to correct the mistake it would certainly be too late and sometimes these buildings are left to stay. 

I was a councillor in the defunct KCC and there is one multi-storied building in this city which, we were informed, lacked a building permit when the building was already up. This happens often but when you wish to take action, you cannot correct the mistake. So, I want a linkage so that there is a connection of activity; it is not that this committee will be doing the work of that institution but it either gives feedback or a clearance of some sort from some of the agencies. 

Secondly, we say, “shall comply with this Act” but there is an obvious one which must be complied with also, that is the Physical Planning Act, which we passed here. So, I am not comfortable with disregarding the application of the Physical Planning Act by this particular body, unless I am comforted by the fact that the physical planning board or the institutions at the relevant level, say district level, will give information to this committee or clear a project.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Colleagues, I thought I was very clear; when you go to your architect to produce drawings for approval in any local authority, that architect submits four sets of drawings. One set goes to the land office for certification that it really belongs to the owner. The second set goes to the physical planning section in order to confirm that you are complying with the physical planning requirements. The land may be yours but are you conforming to what is supposed to be developed there. The third one goes to the public health section to ensure that public health issues like ventilation and so on, are addressed. The final one goes to the engineering section to ensure that engineering issues are taken care of. When these files come, the four offices sit down together to see if all of them approved. If any of them objected, the plan will not be approved and hence you cannot get a building permit.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think I agree with your guidance that if we went ahead to say that the building committee must consider whether the place is going to be a gazetted area, we are imposing too much work on it.

I will raise two points.  The first one is under clause 28, where we talked about the establishment of the building committee. We provided for an officer responsible for environment management. Secondly, by the time one comes out with a building plan, as the minister advised us, all those other factors would have been taken into consideration. So I would think that the amendment the Member is trying to put forth will overburden the committee. I think we should leave the clause as it is without requiring them to deny permission to build on the grounds that the building is going to be in a wetland and so on; that would be too much.

MS SARAH OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. As other speakers have said here, we have relevant laws in this country. However, the challenge has been lack of enforcement or corruption on the part of the officers. We have instances, like what the Deputy Attorney-General raised here, where people fail to comply with the law. We have also had instances where people have gone and reclaimed wetlands before putting up buildings. We have the most recent case I am currently handling where somebody went and constructed a factory next – (Interruption)

MS LUMUMBA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I know the honourable engineer is saying he should have been the one to do it, but he is happy about it. 

Mr Chairman, is the honourable minister in order to lament to the country yet this country gave the responsibility to her, through the President, to take charge of this country? She belongs to the team which is supposed to monitor and enforce the laws passed by this Parliament, is she in order to cause fear in the citizens of this country?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there are rules of the House and there are rules of the game as we play here. The minister who was holding the Floor certainly stood to say that there are laws and that those laws are not being implemented. Now, can the gap in the implementation be cured by the enactment of another law? That is the point being raised by the point of order. 

This Parliament passes laws for implementation by the Executive. Failure by the Executive to implement a particular law does not give cause to the Executive to bring another law to fill the gap of lack of implementation of another law. Certainly, we are not just pilling laws because the others are not being implemented. The honourable minister certainly was not in order. (Laughter) We are making these laws to cure a gap, not an implementation gap but a legislative gap that exists as of now. A gap of implementation cannot be cured by another law. So you are out of order. (Laughter)

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Chairman, for your wise ruling –(Interjections)– What else can I say? I was trying to give information to the House, which you have ruled on, but what I am saying is a fact. If we looked back at the Hansard – (Interruption) 

MR OKUPA: Mr Chairman, the Chief Whip rose on a point of order and you have ruled wisely. Is the minister in order to continue pursuing the same line? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: A ruling of the Speaker is a ruling of the Speaker. No comment or explanation is required from a Member. The honourable member is again out of order. (Laughter)

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I now go to the issue that I wanted to raise. That is the issue of the building committee. I want to suggest an amendment following from the Deputy Attorney-General’s comment on (h). Sub clause (2)(h) says, “A Building Committee may refuse to issue a permit where the building operation in respect of which the permit applied for- (h) does not comply with the requirements of this Act.” I would like to add, “and other relevant laws”. This is to take care of the Physical Planning Act, the NEMA Act and all the others. 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, we carefully went through this Bill, we widely consulted and all relevant Acts like physical planning and environment are incorporated in this Bill. That is why you see that membership of those institutions is well embedded in here. We thought about them. We would not want to create ambiguity, where somebody would came here and say, “You cannot do this because of...” Hon. Wafula is looking at me, he thinks I am going to say, “because of security”; no, I am not going there. Mr Chairman, this Bill is protective enough as it stands to make the law operational, instead of locking it up.   

MR SEMUGABA: Mr Chairman, I would like to clarify to the honourable minister, Sarah Opendi, that at the end of this Bill we have clause 3(5) which talks about the relevant laws, which should go along or can assist this Building Control Act when it is passed. What she wants to add on (h) is already provided for in the last page, 39. 

MS OPENDI: Mr Chairman, I do appreciate that, but what is being referred to does not bring out the Physical Planning Act, which is very relevant to what we are discussing now. 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think there is necessity for all of us to read through the Bill and internalise it. I belong to the Committee of Physical Infrastructure and reading through this Bill and examining it at different stages gave me the satisfaction that this Bill when passed will be adequate to capture all the concerns that the Minister of State for Health is attempting to raise. 

I wish to concur with the Minister of Works in saying that even the physical planning aspects are actually captured within the Bill, and also the environmental aspect. When you talk about building a house or a multi-storied building in a swamp, you need to go to somebody who is technically competent to examine the soils to see whether it can support the kind of structure you have designed. 

So I would like to allay the fears of all Members, including the Minister of State for Health and other like thinking Members of Parliament, that the Act would adequately cover those concerns. Where shall we end if we keep adding elements of different laws?  You will come up with another concern like environmental law and that kind of thing. So, this is endless in nature. I think it will be sufficient for us to be confident about what we are passing as being adequate. So, I advise that we read through the Bill, maybe before we reach its final stages, and understand it well before we make additions. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there are two amendments. One was proposed by the honourable member for Bunyole in relation to making sure that there is a requirement for issues of wetlands and related matters. The second amendment was proposed by the honourable Minister of State for Health in (h) to add, “other relevant laws”. So, it should say, “does not comply with the requirements of this Act and other relevant laws.” Those are two amendments. 

I will start with the amendment from the member from Bunyole. I am going to put the question. Honourable minister, you are not allowed to vote while standing. I put the question to the amendment proposed by the honourable member for Bunyole. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment proposed by the honourable Minister of State for Health to make a requirement of other relevant laws included in (h). 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is no amendment to clause 36 now. So, I put the question that clause 36 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to propose an amendment to clause 38 that instead of talking of 60 months-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Where in particular? 

MR ANYWARACH: That is clause 38(1) where it says, “A building operation in respect of which a building permit is issued under section 36 shall commence within twelve months of the date on which the building permit is issued and shall be completed within a period of sixty months of the date on which the building operation was commenced.”

My justification is that 60 months should be extended because when I converted 60 months, I found that was a period of five years. What amounts to an incomplete building? If we go by level, if the building is at the window level and it has remained for three years, it could be dangerous. However, it is not the same as a situation where a building has remained incomplete say when you have constructed the ring beam or even when you put the roof. If you have roofed a house and it has remained incomplete, you may realise that that building may still remain very strong past the period of five or seven years. 

Why I am talking of completing a building first is to accommodate the different levels; depending on the level of incompleteness of the building, we should define a period that includes even when the building has already been roofed but it is still incomplete within the consideration of the building committee. That therefore brings me to the second amendment I was proposing to sub clause (2) -(hon. Member rose_)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But the honourable member is holding the Floor. You need to tell me why you want to intervene. Under what rule - order, information? I need to know on what point you are rising. Do you want to give information? If it is information then the member holding the Floor has to allow you.

MR ANYWARACH: The point of information he wants to give is on sub clause (2). He is saying that there is a provision on the extension of a period within which you are allowed; probably if after five years you did not complete the building, you should be allowed to apply. That is why I was moving to the second one. 

If you say that I must apply, with application also comes some fees that you must pay. If I had already applied to construct a house and within five years I had not completed it, this brings me to the second amendment to say that, “Notwithstanding subsection (1), where a person, due to unforeseen circumstances, is unable to comply with the period of time specified in subsection (1), he or she shall give notice in writing.” It should not be “shall apply to the Building Committee” again. It should be, “shall give notice in writing” to the effect of the continuation of the building operation. 

The justification I am giving is that imagine a building which is roofed and it stays at that stage for almost 24 years.  Let me give the example of the Old Kampala Mosque, which actually stood still from 1976 and they started building again in 2001. That was a period of 24 years. If you tell someone to keep on applying, I understand that you will reapply and perhaps you are given an extension of two years and then another two years and another two years. How much money would this person have paid? What amounts to an incomplete building should be defined. If I have already roofed my house, surely it can even remain for 10 years. What is the justification for the five years? Thank you very much.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and I thank my colleague. We do not want to use this law to promote illegality. Where leases are concerned, the initial lease is five years and so after five years, you do not have land. That is why we are saying you can come back. You may have applied for extension of a lease or if it is not necessary, it will be easy to check and they will tell you to go.

Also, depending on where you are doing the construction, you can mess up the place. You can imagine if we leave it open, for places like the Constitutional Square, somebody gets plans and then he can be there for another 10 years. Who can allow that in the city centre? That is why we bring in what we call building obligations. We agree that in year 1, you will do this, and in year 2, 3, 4, 5. We do not want white elephants in some places. We do not want to promote illegality, because your lease has expired, and also we want to ensure that things are moving on correctly.

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Honourable minister, I want to find out, supposing it is not about the leases that expire after five years. One may have a 99-year lease but the building, as he has said, is incomplete. I can give another example of Workers’ House, which stood there for so many years. What do you do for somebody who has a continuous title which is clean and he still holds on?

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, subsection (2) clearly answers that. You apply and they unduly do not delay approval. They will see it is not a lease but that it is mailo land or it is freehold and they will say, “Please, go ahead.” Assuming the issue of white elephants does not come in, we do not want speculators to be given land in the city centre, they hoard it for one year, two or five years waiting for a rich Wafula Oguttu to buy this from him and make money. (Laughter)

MR RUHINDI: I am collectively bound to this Bill and I am anticipating a point of order, but I hope it does not come. 

Mr Chairman, I just want clarification – there may be a provision I have not seen in the Bill – from the chairman of the committee or the minister. I have read the offence in (3), which is on the contravention of what is this clause. What happens if a person who constructs a building does not get the extension or does not apply for it but the building is there? I want to know whether there is a provision. What do you do with that building? Do you demolish it? Where is the provision to that effect?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, it is now 6.20p.m. and we have greatly slowed down in our operations. It would be a good time for us to adjourn now to continue tomorrow at 2.00p.m.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

2.20
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. I now put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.21
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House considered the Bill entitled, “The Building Control Bill, 2012” and made amendments to clauses 1,2,4,9,10,21,33,35 and –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it would be easier to just state the clauses that have been passed with amendments.

MY BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Building Control Bill, 2012” and passed it with a few amendments.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, but which clauses were passed?

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, the Committee of the whole House passed clauses 1 to 38.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Clause 2 was stood over.

MR BYANDALA: The Committee of the whole House passed clause 1, stood over clause 2 and passed the rest up to clause 37, with amendments.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.24
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that House do adopt the report from the Committee of the whole House with the amendments therein.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the report did not have any amendments. (Laughter)

MR BYANDALA: I am sorry, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that House adopts the report from the Committee of the whole House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the motion as moved by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much for enduring to sit for this long. We have certainly made a lot of progress on this Bill. I congratulate you for the spirit we have adopted in managing this Bill. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00p.m. exactly.
 
(The House rose at 6.25p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 15 May 2013 at 2.00 p.m.)
