
Tuesday, 7 May 2013

Parliament met at 2.25 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I wish to draw your attention to the fact that the Second Session will soon be prorogued. As the political head of this institution, I am not very content with our performance in plenary and also in the committees. I am certain that we could have done better and we still have to do better. There is some element of complacency and laxity, which results in work not being completed in time.

I expect reports on the following Bills to be ready so that we can handle them at the end of this week or next week:
1. 	The Trade Licensing (Amendment) Bill, 2012.
2. 	The Building Control Bill, 2013.
3. 	The National Population Council Bill, 2011.
4. 	The Anti-Money Laundering Bill, 2009.

These Bills have great significance in managing the affairs of this nation and therefore need to be concluded. Other committees with various businesses are also urged to expeditiously handle them. I know that you are working on business in the committees, which is at various stages of processing. Please, endeavour to expedite this work and conclude it so that Parliament can consider it for approval.

Honourable members, on a sad note, I wish to inform you of the passing on of hon. Ruth Christine Aliu, former Member of the National Resistance Council from Soroti District. She was in Parliament between 1989 and 1996 and represented the then Soroti District, which had eight counties, which are now five districts.

She had a distinguished career in the civil service where she began work as an administrative officer in the Office of the President between 1970 and 1971. She also rose in the ranks and served in various ministries and agencies of Government. Hon. Aliu served on various boards including those of Mbarara University of Science and Technology and the Uganda Land Commission. She will be greatly missed by the people of Teso as well as Uganda at large.

She is to be laid to rest in Omodoi village, Soroti District, this afternoon. On behalf of the Parliament, I wish to convey our sincere condolences to the family and friends for this great loss. For that, let us rise for a moment of silence in her respect.

(The Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you are aware, the UN Decade of Action for Road Safety 2011-2020 was launched worldwide on 11 May 2013. As the decade enters the third year, the United Nations General Assembly has declared the week of May 6th to 12th this year as the Global Road Safety Week with “Pedestrian Safety” as the theme. 

Members of Parliament of Uganda are requested to support the objectives of the UN Decade and in particular, encourage their constituents to observe traffic laws and regulations in order to save lives of not only the pedestrians but also of all other road users. Please, take note of this particular announcement.

Finally, and on a very good note, I wish to happily report to you, honourable members, that His Excellency the President of Uganda and the Commander-in-Chief of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces has with effect from the 2 May 2013 promoted one of our own, hon. Katirima Manoni Phinehas, who we have known always as Colonel to the rank of Brigadier-General. So, he joins the ranks of Generals now.

Honourable members, I take this opportunity on your behalf and on my own behalf to congratulate Brig. Gen. Katirima for his distinguished service in this House, for his service as the Public Relations Officer of the UPDF for a long time and for the other work he has done for this country, deserving the promotion he has now attained. We wish you all the best in your work in your new rank as Brigadier-General to serve your country better. I am sure you are very satisfied now and look forward to the few remaining - I think there are only two or three - ranks before you clock the very highest. On behalf of the House, I congratulate. Thank you very much.

Honourable members, you know that my standing rule is that all matters of urgent public importance should be raised in consultation with the ministers concerned; so that when we raise these issues, they are directly handled in that same meeting by the ministers responsible. 

I have got information from the Members that there are two issues that have got to be raised. I am going to amend my ruling on this matter and allow them to be raised now because there are developments that require these ministers to be out. The honourable member is supposed to be in Kasese and there is another one who is supposed to be in the meeting of the Uganda Aids Commission Board. So, I am going to allow these matters to be raised now rather than later, so that they can be handled quickly. (Brig. Gen. Katirima rose_) Member for Ntoroko District, just hold on; I think having congratulated Brig. Gen. Katirima, he would like to make a brief statement.

2.38
BRIG. GEN. PHINEHAS KATIRIMA (UPDF Representative): Mr Speaker and honourable members, allow me to feel happy and appreciate the promotion that I have received, and also thank His Excellency the President and Commander-in-Chief of the UPDF for this promotion.

My abilities to command, control and administer effectively and efficiently the land, water and air forces are now formally recognised. It has always been my commitment in the service of the defence forces and Uganda to always and permanently make positive contributions. My service to the defence forces and the country to-date stretches over 27 years and I must say it has been an enviable track record. I pledge to continue to do my best for the defence forces, the country and also the Parliament of Uganda. I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to make this brief statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Brig. Gen. Katirima.  

2.40
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker, I also want to congratulate my brother, Brig. Gen. Phinehas Katirima. You know, in the Seventh Parliament I was the chairman of a committee in which he was a member. He knows how I used to lead that team. Those ranks he is getting are coming because he worked with me. (Laughter) Yes, because we really marketed him.

What I also want to talk about is the fact that promotions are very good. You can see that Brig. Gen. Katirima is now happy. However, I think there are others who should also be promoted so that they too can be happy. I believe that the President should be fair in promoting his army officers. A case in point is Capt. Juma Seiko who has been at the rank of captain since time immemorial. (Laughter) You know he comes from Sebei, the Mountains of the Sun. This is a serious matter. This man has been a captain in the Army for so long that the rank has become part of his name – (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition, for giving way. I think we have another example of somebody called the honourable Col Fred Mwesigye. This is one man I respect for his patience. He is one of the original 27 but up to now, he remains a colonel and a happy colonel at that. (Laughter) We also have army generals that have been promoted in retirement. Very soon, we are going to see people being decorated as generals even when they are peacefully lying in their graves. That is the information I wanted to give to the House.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you. Mr Speaker, there are other examples. We have Maj. Gen. Mugisha Muntu. He has been at that rank for quite some time. [Hon. Members: “He retired.”] Yes, he was retired at that rank, but you will recall that the President promoted Lt Gen. Moses Ali while in retirement from the Army. Hon. David Guma Gumisiriza was also promoted when he had retired. Maj. Bright Rwamirama and hon. Capt. Maj. Jessica Alupo – (Laughter) - were promoted in retirement and all those others.

Mr Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, the Army is not like that accounting profession of yours, where one can have both ACCA and CPA still fitting in. You cannot be an Army Major and a Captain at the same time. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: My apologies, Mr Speaker. What I am trying to say is that we should really have a better designed method of promoting these people so that everybody can benefit. If one tells me what Brig. Gen. Katirima applied to get that rank, I can pass on similar information to Capt. Juma Seiko.

Anyway, once more, let me congratulate Brig. Gen. Katirima for that high achievement. Thank you.

2.44
MS JENNIFER MUJUNGU (Independent, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to take this opportunity to congratulate the honourable Brig. Gen. Phinehas Katirima for attaining that high rank in the Army. 

I rise on a matter of national importance. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to inform you about the state in Ntoroko District regarding the serious floods, which have already killed five people in the sub-counties of Karugutu and Nombe. Between these two sub-counties, there is River Wasa whose banks have burst causing floods. The river has no bridge constructed over it; when it is a dry season, the place is dry enough for people to just walk through. However, when it rains the river floods and this makes it very difficult for people to cross from one sub-county to the other. People have tried to improvise by building some temporary bridges, but these can no longer stand the volume of water for now. It is in this river that five people drowned and two are still missing and believed to be dead. They were together with the five who died.

In the same vein, let me give a report in respect of Bweramule sub-county. This sub-county has also been hit by heavy floods and has been cut off from the other parts of the district. The floods in this subcounty emerge from River Semiliki. I would like to inform Government, especially the Minister of Water and Environment, that River Semiliki is now a threat to the district and the nation at large. I am saying this because this is a border feature between Uganda and the Democratic Republic of Congo. The river has changed its course and keeps flowing along Uganda’s side. Because of that, the original boundary points have changed towards Uganda. 

Whenever it rains in the mountains, the banks of that river will burst and the water floods the entire sub-county. So, practically speaking, all the six sub-counties of Ntoroko District are all flooded. Many people have been displaced. Animals, especially cows, are sleeping in water and spending the whole day in water. Children are not going to school because all the crossing points have been filled with water.

I would like to also inform the ministers concerned, especially the Minister for Disaster Preparedness – I am happy he is here and he has ever been to these places – the places you visited at that time are the very ones that have flooded. I appeal to the concerned ministries to take urgent action; as they help Kasese out, Ntoroko is also really in need. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.47
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the House that the same matter has arisen in Bundibugyo District. This is owing to the fact that we share the mountain slopes with Kasese District and whenever it rains uphill, water flows on both sides of the hills. The floods have also hit Bundibugyo District with all the roads and alternative routes under UNRA being swept away. All the bridges on the rivers of Ntotoro and Kirumya have also been swept away. As of yesterday, after it had rained heavily, one child drowned in the floods and died. 

We have been trying to raise issues of such national importance, but sometimes when people do not die, issues of this nature are not given priority. (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. It is actually true that I have been to Bundibugyo rather involuntarily and I know the geographical features that my colleague is talking about. To that extent, I just want to emphasise what she is saying.

However, the information I would like to give is that we actually need a comprehensive plan on these issues. The road between Nateete and Nakawuka, crossing through my constituency, is facing similar problems. It appears that UNRA is not taking serious steps especially on swamps. We have all heard of the bridge in Kanungu – (Interjections) – Colleagues, this is a very serious matter and I said, “For emphasis”. 

What they are going through is a difficult time. Just three days ago, a person would not cross from Nateete to Nakawuka yet this is a road that UNRA took over from Wakiso District Local Government because Kampala and Wakiso districts were saying that it is no man’s land.  I think that is valuable information to my sister.

MS NTABAZI: Thank you very much. Since we share the same country, we share the same problems. 

As I wind up, I would like to say that the alternative route from Ntandi to Bundibugyo has been a song for the people of Bundibugyo, always reminding UNRA to work on it. Now all the bridges have been swept away. We have been suffering from landslides flowing into the roads yet nobody is willing to come to our rescue. 

The same water has flooded the camps of the pigmies. Now the pigmies’ camps are all washed away. (Interruption) Okay, since you are a minister.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Dr Stephen Chebrot): Thank you, honourable member. I want to inform you that it is not true that we have done nothing as a ministry. As I speak now, my colleague, hon. John Byabagambi, is in Kasese handling issues there and he will be proceeding to Bundibugyo to examine the status of the bridges. 

As you all know, most of the bridges that we have had in this country are below the standard code which is required. The cargo that those bridges are carrying is way beyond the limit, which they are supposed to carry. So, we are carrying out a total review of all the bridges in the country in order to make sure that bridges are standard. Therefore, I wish to reassure the Member for Bundibugyo that the ministry and UNRA are already on site in Kasese and will be proceeding to Bundibugyo. 

MS NTABAZI: I hope this is an assurance because such promises have been made by the same minister yet nothing is really done on that road. For four years now, no repairs have been done on the road. So, since now he has said it on the Floor of Parliament, I hope he is going to respect it. 

I was still emphasising the issue of the pigmies. The late hon. Mallinga - may God give him peaceful rest - had responded to my emergency calls. He had promised to give me some food and iron sheets to build a camp for the pigmies. But the day he was supposed to give them to me, he was laid here in Parliament. The person who took over his office, I wonder what he is going to tell me because I have followed him up, I have gone to his office - I am on the door, I am everywhere. I do not know what I am supposed to do to make sure that he responds to my issue as an emergency. Mr Speaker, I beg you to plead for me so that the minister can respond to the issues of Bundibugyo as an emergency. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, just for the benefit of those who will be reading the Hansard later, you said you have visited his door and everywhere; would you like to be more careful? (Laughter)

MS NTABAZI: Mr Speaker, I have visited his office, but not his bedroom door. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is clear now. Honourable members, this is a specific set of issues and they are kind of related. It is about roads, it is about disaster and it looks like it is everywhere. I want to ask the Minister in charge of Relief and Disaster Preparedness to give a response and also the issue of the bridges to be dealt with. I think we need a comprehensive response one day covering the whole country so that we can be satisfied. 

2.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, I want, from the onset, to request my colleagues to pardon me because I have not come here with a comprehensive written statement. My technical people are compiling a comprehensive statement that will be given to this august House. The statement will not only capture the current events but it will also help the House to appreciate what Government has done and how we want our colleagues, the Members of Parliament, to help us in working around the different corners of the country. 

Mr Speaker, if that request is granted, I would like to report now that I came from Kasese a few days ago. I want to make it very clear to honourable members here that I have been directed that while we must keep our attention on what is happening in Kasese, we must not lose sight of what is happening in the rest of the country, particularly in the steep areas like the Elgon region. We are aware that with climate change, the weather is going to be very unpredictable; the weather is continuing to be extremely violent. Many people are asking us whether we are prepared at all. I want to say we are. (Interjections) Allow me to continue to explain myself. 

Just recently, we signed and supported an autonomous organisation called the Meteorology Department. I want to say here that with the little that has so far been given to that department, the information we are getting now is to a greater extent reliable compared to what it used to be. It is helping us particularly in predicting what is going to happen in the country. 

This weather situation was predicated about three months ago. I remember going on television with the Commissioner of Meteorology to indicate to the country that we are likely to have what they call “above normal rain” and this was likely to trigger flash floods in some areas that are prone to floods. I also said that it was also likely to trigger landslides in areas that are prone to landslides. We mobilised and we are still continuing to mobilise. 

Our mobilisation is now as follows: One, in the entire Elgon region, apart from establishing the vulnerable communities we are also working with the local authorities to bring all the people down, particularly in the next two months. We will support them with some relief that can sustain them in the low laying areas that are not vulnerable to slides. This is going to happen in the entire Elgon region. This is also going to happen in the Rwenzori sub-region. 

My sister from Bundibugyo has indicated to us that she has knocked everywhere. It is true that she has indicated from time to time that there is a problem in Bundibugyo, but it is also true that we have from time to time responded, given the magnitude of the problem. 

I want to thank Parliament, particularly for the support that you have always accorded the ministry whenever there is pressure and we come here to ask for supplementary support. Right now, since we are in the budget-making process, we have insisted to the Ministry of Finance to operationalise the provision of the Constitution that establishes a contingency fund. If the contingency fund was alive, it would be very easy for us to run to the Ministry of Finance, without necessarily bothering Parliament or Cabinet, and draw the attention of the minister and we would respond. 

Even with the limited resources, the disaster happened in Kasese on the 1st of May, my leaders directed me to report to Kasese on the 2nd and by 2nd there was already the presence of Government in Kasese. We have been able to do whatever it takes to make sure that we save lives, property and look after the welfare of the victims. 

There are certainly some gaps because we are putting in place systems in Kasese, including thinking about establishing a camp. I want my people to appreciate – many were asking me yesterday why up to now we have not opened the camp. Mr Speaker, the water is flowing from the top of the mountain and going down to areas where there was space and areas like Nyakasanga are waterlogged. So, we are looking at places where we can relocate these traumatised people who have been affected by these boulders, but we do not want to take them to a place where they can get a bigger crisis than what they have survived. So, we are very careful, we are very systematic, we are demonstrating leadership and Government is in touch. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have not said anything about Ntoroko, who actually raised the matter.

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, for Ntoroko, we are conscious about what is happening in the entire region. Bundibugyo, Ntoroko and even Kabarole, to be broad, have been affected. We are sending emergency support to all those districts. That emergency support is also accompanied by teams that are going there to look at the nitty-gritty of the challenges that might be the after-effects of these emergencies. So, we are going to respond and the leadership knows this. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Members, is there a flood in Mbale Municipality? 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to sympathise with the people of Kasese and the people of Ntoroko. In Bugisu, we have been going through the same, so I know what it means when people get such calamities in their areas; NTV showed us what is happening in the Kasese sub-region and Ntoroko. 

The clarification I seek, Mr Minister, is: we have got the Army and we have got the Police but yesterday, I saw an Army officer lamenting about what we can do. The Army has got helicopters and the Police have helicopters; I did not see them make an effort to try to evacuate the people from one side to the other side. 

Secondly, the Army should have been on standby to even bring sandbags to stop the flow of the river. What is the Army doing? Every time the minister comes to the Floor of Parliament, he tells us that we are prepared. (Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I was writing a note to hon. Wamanga-Wamai to ask him what he would do if he were in the position of hon. Musa Ecweru and immediately, I heard him talk about helicopters dropping sandbags. 

Mr Speaker, is the honourable member in order to imagine that hon. Musa Ecweru, a human being like him, would be able to control the way the skies are behaving now, not only in Uganda but worldwide? Is he in order to ignore the serious efforts that the ministry is doing, thanks to hon. Musa Ecweru for his presence of mind? Is he in order to think that words can solve problems? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, the honourable Member for Mbale Municipality was an ambassador. He was in these foreign countries where there are many helicopters. (Laughter) I am sure he does not see a reason why Uganda should not have those helicopters and that is the point he was making. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am rise on a procedural issue. I came to Parliament in 2001 with Prof. Kabwegyere and he knows our rules very well. Is it procedurally right that every now and then when you see hon. Kabwegyere rising, it is on a point of order, which points of order are not really relevant? Is he procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Whether the point of order is in order or not is the responsibility of the Speaker and not the Leader of the Opposition. (Laughter)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I respect hon. Kabwegyere but hon. Kabwegyere knows very well - he was my minister at one time - that when there are calamities, the Army steps in and helicopters evacuate people. We have seen this all over the world. 

The Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness comes and tells us that they are always ever prepared, but we see people stranded on the other side of Kasese. Helicopters should have gone to evacuate our people from the other side. They should have dropped sandbags. We think that the government should come up and send helicopters. The General is here; you should plan on how to evacuate our people from one side to another. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Member holding the Floor has already sat, so you cannot give information. Please, let us move forward. Let us have the response from the minister. The rules allow us only 15 minutes. 

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, I promised this House that we would be delivering a comprehensive report about what we have done and what we will continue to do. However, just allow me indicate to this House that by the time I left Kasese, it was the UPDF and it still is the UPDF that is helping in de-silting Kilembe Valley Hospital, which was submerged. The Army is available on the ground and I thought it would be captured in our comprehensive report. 

The other piece of information that I want to give to this House is that the Army has also availed us a helicopter, particularly for airlifting emergency supplies to the people of Kasese.  This has been done and it will be captured in a comprehensive report. 

On the issue of the sandbags to help direct the river, right now the engineers are doing everything it takes to make sure that they try, but the river is so violent. Even the experts say that we may have to observe it for some time before we make some interventions, but in some areas action is taking place. So, I will be giving that comprehensive report. (Interruption)

MS ALUPO: Mr Speaker, I was in Kasese on Sunday and I moved over a very flooded road with turbulent waters, but I managed to cross over to Kasese town. The information I would like to give my brother, hon. Musa Ecweru, together with colleagues here is that as hon. Ecweru said, the issue of this disaster across the country is being handled comprehensively by Government. 

Particularly, to the honourable Member from Mbale Municipality, the information is that hon. Dr Crispus Kiyonga, who is the minister responsible for the choppers that you have talked about and all the human resource in the UPDF, is now based in Kasese. He is there to oversee and supervise efforts in the direction of how those choppers can be used and how the sandbags can be filled and dropped in the correct direction. I interacted with him and left him there. So, the information that the Member of Parliament from Mbale Municipality should know is that all efforts are being done by Government, including using helicopters. 

Mr Speaker, like you said, maybe next time when the Minister of Finance comes for a supplementary for more choppers, there should be no debate on that matter because we now have a greater need for choppers. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please conclude.

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, first of all I want to thank the Minister of Education for the support. Like I promised, everything is being done. We have generally captured what is happening in all the corners of the country, including Bukwo and all these other areas that are threatened, and we are going to make necessary interventions. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. 

3.09
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here to raise an issue of national importance on immunisation and specifically, vaccines. 

Mr Speaker, you are aware that last week, Government launched new vaccines for pneumococcal and meningitis. All our media houses are now talking about that vaccine and even encouraging parents to take their children to be immunised. The funny part of it is that parents are flocking the health centres but that new vaccine is nowhere to be seen. They have caused anxiety among the parents but now, they are not getting the vaccines. I do not know why, as Government, we do things when we are not fully prepared. Can the ministry give a statement to our mothers and tell them when they can begin to get the new vaccines for their children?

Mr Speaker, another thing is that it is now more than three months in this country and there is a stock-out of all the vaccines in all the districts of this country including Kampala City. Right now, if you go to Kawempe Health Centre IV, there is no polio vaccine. If you go to Kiswa Health Centre III, there is no diphtheria vaccine. 

As a country, we know that the most effective tool for our children is immunisation. We are also aware that among the Southern and East African countries, we are only doing better than Somalia. Still, we are not seriously tackling this concern, knowing fully that the future of this country belongs to the children and the key is for the children to be immunised. Can the minister tell us why there are these irregular stock-outs of vaccines in this country?

Similarly, we have a stock-out of child health cards and we know that those cards are very important for recording. We are here moving around telling the whole country that we have more than 500,000 children who are not fully immunised but the cards where they are supposed to get properly recorded are not there. How sure are we that the data we are giving is correct? Maybe even the numbers of those that have not been immunised is more than what we are giving because we do not have a clear record. What the parents are doing is buying exercise books for recording but in the end, they do not even keep those exercise books. So, we are not clear concerning the data we give in this country.

The challenge of the vaccines is not only in Yumbe; it is in the whole country. I know there are Members who have concerns and who might need to raise some of these issues - (Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if a Member rises on a matter of urgent importance, that person does not require information. I will only give you time to give your intervention after she has finished.

MS OLERU: Thank you for the ruling. Lastly, most of our fridges are down yet we are supposed to keep all these vaccines in fridges. I do not know whether the vaccines we are using to immunise our children are safe if the fridges are all down. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.14
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

Another major issue that we have found in many of the health centres is that they are not carrying out what are called immunisation outreaches. The reason is that the amount of money provided to them in the budget per health centre is about Shs 100,000 per month. Of that amount, they are allowed to take only 30 per cent for immunisation activities and that works out to about Shs 33,000. As a result, immunisation outreaches are not being carried out and yet in some rural areas, many parents are unable to take their children to the health centres because of the distances involved. The final result is that a number of children remain unimmunised or they are not fully immunised. There are also cases where children only get the initial immunisation after the mother has just given birth. That puts our country and health system at great risk. 

We would, therefore, like to request the Ministry of Health and the National Medical Stores, who are responsible for distributing the vaccines and ensuring that vaccines are available in the different health centres, to put in more effort because prevention is better than cure and we all know that. As a country, we need to put in more effort in immunisation. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the two Members who have spoken have done so because they are from the Parliamentary Forum on Immunisation. That is the reason they have raised these matters. I think it would be better for us to hear from the ministers because they have done the research, including countrywide surveys, and that is why they are speaking on this subject.

3.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the two Members of Parliament for raising this matter. However, I am a little surprised because we did hold a workshop with Members of Parliament prior to the introduction of the pneumococcal vaccines and we took Members of Parliament through what we are planning to do and what we have done, and this was a week before we formally launched this vaccine.

At that breakfast meeting, which a good number of Members of Parliament attended, including hon. Oleru, we did inform the Members then that after the official launch, we shall take between one to two months to roll this programme throughout the country. This is because, as you are aware, before a country actually introduces this vaccine, there are conditions that must be met, one of which is the availability of the fridges and as a country we actually have the fridges. The other requirement is training of health workers. We did conduct the training at national level and also at regional level and we are yet to conduct the training at the district level. 

We launched this vaccine in Iganga District because it is one of the districts where all the health workers have been trained. That is why we did not want to go to any other district where we would launch and people cannot access the services. We had hoped that just a week after the launch we would have the funds sent to the districts so that the training can be done for the nurses and other health workers at that level. However, this has not been possible- (interruption)

MS BAKO: Mr Speaker, in a functioning government, when you are launching a programme that means you are ready for take-off. It means you have adequately prepared and, therefore, you are launching a programme for effective implementation. Here is our honourable minister who has decided to launch a very serious vaccine before preparing the health workforce to undertake the immunisation process. Is she, therefore, in order to do work haphazardly by first launching a product when she is not yet ready to sell it out?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I carefully listened to and heard from the minister was that they would be ready to roll out this immunisation programme to the districts once people have been trained. She also said the reason they launched it in Iganga was because training had already been done in that district. They cannot roll out the programme before doing the training and as this went on, people needed to know that this vaccine is already in existence in Uganda. That is what I heard and if my hearing did not mislead me, then the minister is in order.

MS OPENDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. The other information I would also like to give to the House is that we had hoped that by now, funds should have been sent to the various districts accounts to enable the training of health workers take off. However, there was a little technical problem with the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS), which has caused a delay. However, that problem was rectified yesterday in Bank of Uganda. Monies should be getting to the districts and we hope that in a week’s time, training should commence – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the concern of the Member is that while parents keep taking children to the health centres, the vaccines are not yet there though public media have said they are already there.  

MR KABAJO: Mr Speaker, on that, actually, the media are telling parents that the vaccines are already at the various health centres. The ministry should send out a message to tell people to go to the health centres after, for example, two months. Otherwise, the impression that the media have given to the people is that the vaccines are already available, which is not correct.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member for Kiboga, I do not remember giving you the authority to speak to this matter. (Laughter)

PROF. KASIRIVU: Mr Speaker, maybe we would benefit from the minister if she explained the type of training the health workers require in order to handle this type of vaccine. Otherwise, just saying training has to take place without giving details on the type of training these people require may not make us appreciate the difficulties. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you suggesting that we should get to do the training by ourselves? Would the information on how they are going to be trained be necessary to us? Minister, please wind up.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The training is specific to the nurses who handle the immunisation programmes at the various health facilities and the paediatricians who will join them in that training as specialists in child health.

Mr Speaker, we were very specific at the time we issued the press release. We informed the country and the people that this vaccine would be launched in Iganga and rolled out only after the training has been done at the various districts. We will inform the people about the availability of the vaccines after that training.

Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the minister for giving way. The immunisation we are talking about is scheduled to be effected after birth, after two weeks and three months as the process goes on. It does not require us to first prepare; it should be a continuous process because after every hour or day, children are being born in Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, this is a specific vaccine called pneumococcal; it is not a general vaccine. This is a new one.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I am coming to that, Mr Speaker. I want to say that this is a reflection of what is happening in the health sector. I would like to point out that throughout the country there is a big problem as a result of the failure by Government to provide these vaccines. This has gone to the extent that although Uganda had been declared polio-free by the World Health Organisation, we have now plummeted to the extent of being compared to Somalia, which has been a failed State. How can we be compared to a failed state? So, by going down to the levels of Somalia – not only with this polio issue but the entire spectrum - it means we got things wrong.

May I know from the minister what happened to the GAVI funds that were received as a country? If those who took this money are still around – (Laughter) – what has Government done to recover those funds so that our children can be saved? It is because of this trend, Mr Speaker, that we have degenerated from 90 per cent immunisation level to below 50 per cent. That is also why we are being rated as a failed State. We need clarifications on this matter. The minister should tell us – if the GAVI funds were suspended, which we were using in the first place, what contingent measures have been put in place? 

Is it not fair to launch the mass immunisation when people all over the country, in Sembabule and elsewhere, as Members have been voicing, are still waiting for this vaccine? Was this information intended to keep people quiet? Was it a sign of seriousness on the part of Government? Can we get to know, in precise terms, what Government has arranged to immunise our children in the country? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please wind up.

MS OPENDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What is now true is that there has been misinformation amongst members of the public through the media. I pledge to correct that situation so that people can be informed correctly.

On the issue of vaccines being out of stock, I can say yes, this was a problem but it was only for last month. I want to report that I have consulted and as I talk, Mr Speaker, all the vaccines are now available at all the health facilities. It is true we had a challenge – (Interjections) – Please, can I finish; I am not accepting any more information. As I was saying, yes we got a challenge where vaccines were delivered without BCG syringes. However, this has been corrected; it is not a problem anymore. 

The issue of child health cards is being handled by National Medical Stores. I can say that we have taken note of this. I have also found this as a problem in the health facilities I have personally visited.

Mr Speaker – (Interruption)

MS AURU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, together with the chairperson of the Parliamentary Forum on Immunisation and the general-secretary, we visited three health centres within Kampala. At Kawempe Health Centre IV, we were informed that as of now, the vaccine for polio is out of stock; from March up to around April, DPT also has been out of stock. Therefore, is the honourable minister in order to misinform this House that stock outs for the vaccines were experienced last year and not this year?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, that is our own forum on immunisation and they visited health centres yesterday and they confirmed that vaccines were lacking. Your statement says that the vaccines are in all the health centres. The statement is therefore untrue. Kindly withdraw and make general statements on other things.  (Applause)

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will withdraw the statement, but I also want to inform the House that I checked and vaccines were delivered to all health facilities in Kampala on 11th April. The next delivery –(Interjections)– it is possible that they are now out of stock because the next delivery is expected on 11th May; usually they deliver after one month. So I take note of that and I will follow it up.

I want to inform this august House that following the action that this Government took against those who misappropriated the GAVI Funds and following the recovery of funds from those who had misappropriated money – (Interjections) – I do not have the list here, but the money was refunded. GAVI came in and has pledged to give this Government $21 million to help us with the immunisation –(Interruption)

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I have learnt from my own observation – I have seen that the private clinics are providing these vaccines at Shs 3,000 per injection. If you want to get a full dose, you pay Shs 9,000. Are you aware of that and are those nurses trained to do that kind of work?

MS OPENDI: Thank you. I can only ask the honourable member to give me details. I will make a follow up on those health facilities that are charging this money – (Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, the minister hinted that some GAVI money which was stolen was returned. Can we know how much money was returned and who are the people who had stolen money from GAVI?

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I read in the press that there is already a fight about the $21 million which the minister is talking about; that the First Lady would like the money to be under her office yet she was involved in the GAVI Fund losses – (Interjections) – the Minister of Health is also fighting to retain the money. 

So, we want to find out whether it is true that the $21 million given by GAVI for immunisation is actually being fought for by the First Lady and the Minister of Health. 

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did indicate that GAVI will give us $21 million, out of which, $7.1 million has so far been transferred to our accounts in this country; the other will be sent in a phased manner. 

Mr Speaker, I am not in position to name exactly who returned these monies, but at least I know that a total of Shs 330 million was returned by individuals. Maybe at a later time, we can provide the details of that information to this House. 

The outreaches by the district are quite an important activity. I am glad that Members are raising this. But as you all know, it is all dependent on funds. Give us more money so that the districts can undertake the outreaches at the district level; it is because of the low funding that the districts are not in position to carryout outreaches. 

On the issue of the press statement, it is a rumour. I am not aware of any fight. I am aware of some consultations though. We have our champion, but that does not mean that there is a fight between the Ministry of Health and the First Lady. I do not know of any such fight apart from reading about it in the papers. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, today in the VIP Gallery, we have delegates from the Parliament of Zimbabwe. They are here to benchmark with our Parliament on how to handle the budget and research. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

In the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery also this afternoon, we have Members and staff of the House of the Representatives of the Regional State of Puntland, Republic of Somalia. (Applause) They are here on a week-long study mission to our Parliament and they are led by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, hon. Abdurashid Mohamed Hersi and the Deputy Speaker, Salad Hared Ali and ten other members of Parliament whose names are here but it will take me a long time to read the names; they are complicated. They are also accompanied by four members of staff. Please join me in welcoming these distinguished delegates from Puntland, Republic of Somalia. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

HEALTH SERVICE COMMISSION ANNUAL REPORT FOR 2011/12

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the honourable minister here – (Interjections) – next item. 

THE PUBLIC ORDER MANAGEMENT BILL, 2011

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Public Order Management Bill. The Bill is at committee stage - 

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House -(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill is already at committee stage. Hon. Minister, proceed with what you were saying. Let the minister brief us on what it is about.

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Speaker, the last time we adjourned, the House had formed itself into the Committee of the Whole House for the Bill’s second reading. I therefore wish to move that – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we were at committee stage but issues arose where the minister had a big document that members did not have and when we asked him whether he had met the chairperson and the committee, he said he had but the chairperson said they hadn’t met. We agreed that they go to the committee, agree and come back. I am reliably informed by my members who sit on that committee that that meeting never took place. This means that there is no position from the committee and that is very dangerous in this law we are making. We have been moving on well and we said that where we have agreed that we go and do something, we should go and do it. So, did you meet the committee? Did you agree? As far as I am concerned, that meeting never took place. 

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Speaker, the Speaker asked me to consult with the chairperson of the committee which I did and the chairperson delegated his vice, hon. Fox Odoi, because the chairperson of the committee had other commitments and we discussed with hon. Odoi. When the substantive chairperson came back, I further consulted him on what the Speaker asked us to do and we generally agreed that we should come back to this House. This is in respect to clause 3 and clause 6 which tasks the Speaker assign us. Mr Speaker, we are ready to report on those consultations on how far we have gone. We should not allow –(Interruption) 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me first of all say that as a committee, we had done our work and submitted our report to this House and before we submitted that report, we met so many stakeholders who were mentioned in that report. It is true that a matter arose about clause 3 and clause 6 and the minister was asked to explain or throw light on the issues that came out of the discussions on clause 3 and clause 6. 

In my absence, I requested hon. Fox Odoi to represent me and attend a meeting to look at the definitions that had been proposed by the minister. When I came at the last sitting, I was asked whether I had been consulted and I said hadn’t been consulted at the time. But today morning, hon. Fox Odoi and the minister came to my office and informed me that they had met and they took me through the definitions that were being proposed by the minister –(Interjections) – let me conclude first. I started by saying that as a committee, we submitted a report. 

As a committee, we shall not go back to consider every other matter in the committee. The minister has made his proposals, I propose they should be submitted in the plenary and the plenary can reject them or accept them because we shall not subject all proposals to committee scrutiny because that process was done and concluded by the committee before we wrote a report, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, that is clear. We should go and handle those particular issues appropriately when they come on the clauses. Is that clear?  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the clauses which are being talked about just flow through the whole Bill and we said that if they agreed upon at committee level, then the issue would come here. I see no reason why the minister could not meet the whole committee or why the chairman could not call a meeting of a few members because we have been talking to our colleagues on our side and they said that the meeting never took place and yet we had interest to also have an input. 

Hon. Fox Odoi is not the Vice-Chairperson of the committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs; he is a member. If it were meeting members, then you would have asked more members to attend the committee meeting. So, Mr Speaker, we agreed on Thursday that the minister goes and meets the committee. It is on the Hansard and that is what we are waiting to see - what the committee has decided. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the debate that preceded that particular referral to the committee, it occurred to the House that the minister had come with too many amendments which fundamentally changed everything, departing from the position the committee had earlier on reviewed, and it really required that the committee goes back and scrutinise the new position - actually it is now totally a new Bill. It is as though this House, using its committee, had not had the opportunity to even look at it.

Mr Speaker, when we ask the committee to revisit on our behalf, we actually did not mean the chairperson; we meant a duly constituted committee. That is my assumption. So, when the chairperson, or when one vice-chairperson is able to meet the minister, I do not think it meets the required standards. Whether the hon. Minister met hon. Fox Odoi or not, what we are expecting is that the committee should have convened, looked through all these amendments and brought a report to this House. Otherwise if we go back and forth, next time the minister meets me in the canteen, he might as well say, we passed a resolution on this and the other and it doesn’t work like that. So, Mr Speaker, we pray that since the House already pronounced itself and referred the matter - the discomfort of the Chairperson on the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs notwithstanding, the position of the House should still stay and let the minister go and meet the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and then give us a report and we proceed on the basis of that report. That is my prayer, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what I have received from the processes of this Bill is a report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Public Order Management Bill dated 12th March. This morning, I received responses to the committee’s report on the Bill and proposed amendments by the Minister of State for Internal Affairs and I also received potential challenges if the Bill is passed in its current state and proposed amendments from the hon. Member for Butambala - I have it here. He made proposals on what he would want to includein  terms of improving on the clauses in the Bill as it is. 

In the documents I have, I do not have anything that is raising new sets of amendments except responses to what has been proposed by the committee, which in my opinion can be better handled if you call a clause and we have the discussions on that clause. That would be the best way to move. The Bill is already at Committee Stage. Even if they had consulted, we are not going to have general debate on the report of the consultation. We are going to have to go to the clause and invite responses on the specific discussions that were held by all sides on that clause not going back again as if we are handling the principles of the Bill at Second Reading. 

That would be my understanding on how we should proceed. We would not be opening general debate on the report again. What we would be doing is going to the clause and then the people who are involved in the consultations would raise the agreed amendments on the specific clause and then you move from there. That would be the better way to move because the Bill is already at Committee Stage. In fact by sitting here, I am violating procedure and talking about this same Bill. The Bill was at Committee Stage and that is where we should go.

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When we were here last, those two clauses were very contentious and that is when the Speaker ruled and said that the minister should go and meet the committee itself so that we can be able to go forward because we found out that these two clauses were affecting the entire Bill. These members of the committee are the ones who represent us on that committee. Therefore, if they agree on a certain clause, then we can discuss it here. But because it was very contentious on the Floor of the House, the Speaker ruled and said, please hon. minister, go and meet the committee and agree.

3.52
MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me first of all respond to what my friend, hon. Nsubuga is talking about that if we go back to the committee and agree, when we come back you will accept what we have agreed upon. I want to say that even this report, which is before the House was agreed upon in the committee with all the members you are talking about. So really going back does not mean that whatever is agreed upon in the committee will necessarily be adopted by this House.

Mr Speaker, when I came in last time, I remember the Leader of the Opposition and another colleague raised the same matter as to whether I had been contacted because I had not been around and I said, no. The Speaker then directed that “Yes, you should go and brief him, which was done.” This is because the final arbiter on this matter at the committee stage or the final position should be taken by the House. If for some reason we misdirected our minds on some provisions, this is the right forum to discuss and decide on this Bill.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I would like to remind the House, as part of the clarification, that by the time we adjourned, we had actually received the document from the hon. minister, which document carried the contentious clauses/amendments. It was almost eight pages - it was such a thick document.

Secondly, Mr speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that the same document, which has responses to the committee’s report on the Bill?

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, you do not have that document. This one is entitled, “Proposed amendments to the Public Order Management Bill, 2011 following the report on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee.” It is dated 9 April 2013. This is the document that caused us to have that referral.

Secondly, for some of us the Bill we are dealing with is a very technical thing. For you in the legal fraternity, it is a very easy matter and you can understand these matters easily and make a decision. Would it be wrong if we drew from the legal expertise that is so rich in the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to inform the rest of us; assessors and lay persons as we pass this Bill? 

Moreover, this is a Bill that has previously seen us in court labelling it as a bad law and now we want to take all the necessary care as we make it. Is it really bad if our legal committee, which is full of legal brains, helps the rest of us to appreciate this new Bill? This is not what they reviewed, this is now a new thing altogether. And when they simplify it for some of us then we will pass the Bill. That is what I think.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Following what the chairperson of the committee stated, that would have been the case if he had raised that matter the day it was referred. I think it is important for us to follow the precedence because that day, Mr Chairman you and hon. Fox Odoi were here when the matter was referred to you. For you to come now and say, “No the right forum is here.” You should have stated this on that day. Why did you accept the Speaker's ruling at that time? Why did you go back and not call the committee to discuss the matter? I think if something is referred to the committee, let the committee do the work and then come back to report. That is it otherwise we shall cause confusion amongst the leadership, which is wrong.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The legislative function, as a constitutional mandate, ought to be treated with seriousness. I am hearing it and I am perturbed. If a matter arose on the Floor that the minister had introduced a raft of amendments to his own Bill, automatically it means that the Bill needed to be looked at afresh because he brought another set – and not one or two but a raft of amendments. Therefore, there is no way the committee chairperson can say that. “I was not around, I referred him to so and so and today they came to my office.” Mr Speaker, that is a casual way of doing such a national duty and it should not be accepted by this Parliament – (Interruption)

MS BAKO: Thank you, colleague for giving way. The information I want to give you and this House is that the current Leader of Government Business, with us here, stood right there and said whether we liked it or not, this Bill will be passed. Therefore, when you have segments of information missing from the Speaker and then the committee going into denial that they had done their part yet this House had recommended them for further work, it tells this House the magnitude –(Interjections)- yes, the Chairperson is in denial of what the Speaker had committed him to do. That therefore means - (Interruption)

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have informed the House that when we met here last time, the matter at stake was whether I had been personally consulted because the committee can run whether I am around or not and I said I hadn’t been consulted. That is the matter on which I am reporting now. 

So, is the hon. Abia Bako in order to say that I am in a state of denial; that I am not very sure of what I am saying; and that I need counseling when actually I am reporting on the response that has taken place since the Speaker ruled on that matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that I wasn’t in the Chair when these discussions took place. And all of you, including the person who raised the point of order and the other who made the statement, is referring to those discussions, which now seem to have so many variations in a set of facts that are not coordinated and no longer speaking as one, it is almost impossible for the Speaker to rule on an order arising on factual matters. So, I am not able to rule on that point of order.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, is the honourable member in order to mislead the House on a statement –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which honourable member?

GEN. (RTD) ALI: I mean hon. Abia Bako from Arua Municipality –(Interjections)- I mean Arua District. Is she in order to misquote me and also misinform the House of what I was supposed to have said?

Allow me to also inform you, Mr Speaker, since you were not in the Chair that time, that I didn’t say that whether the House would sit or not, the Bill would be passed. That is wrong. That is her dream in her own brain. I dint say that. What I said was that Government had no intentions to withdraw this Bill. That is what I said and it is not the same as what you have said. You know if the Bill is not withdrawn, it doesn’t mean it has to be passed. Therefore, can I refresh your minds –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

GEN. (RTD) ALI: Okay, therefore, is it in order – (Laughter)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Again those are factual matters, which are not within the full knowledge of the Speaker. And so, I am unable to rule on that subject. Please, let us close this.

MS BAKO Yes, Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Were you making a contribution or –

MS ABIA: I was just finishing on giving him the information. Thank you for that wise ruling.

Mr Speaker, there seems to be an issue where this House gets derailed, given time, that once a statement of a legislation is made, you take time but agree that you first sit over it for some time for people to forget, but bring it back, ambushing the people with half information; for example, you don’t have the information that hon. Alice Alaso has.

Therefore, it is prudent that the Executive takes this House seriously by stopping this haphazard way of managing affairs of the State and try as much as possible to undermine this institution.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I was going to my second point and I was saying it is one of the principles of Parliament to have continuity and certainty. So, if the last sitting on a matter was done and you know that that was captured on our Hansard, what will the future readers of that Hansard make out of this Parliament?

Honourable members can take this point lightly, but the reason some of us are seated where we are – one of the core things that has enabled us to sit at this position of this House is the Hansard. The Hansard was clear at a particular point in time and it has saved us -(Laughter)- so, if at this time, we just decide to throw away the record of Parliament called the Hansard that is very dangerous. It perverts certainty, but also deprives the future readers, when a matter arises, an opportunity to follow up as to what the intentions of Parliament were.

For that matter, my dear colleagues, once a decision was taken that this matter and the amendments therein be referred to the committee, let us first have the committee report from which we will sit as Parliament to make a decision. Let us not take shortcuts. And through you, Mr Speaker, to the Chairman of   the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, we should not involve ourselves in adhocism; we should not involve ourselves in shortcuts because this country is there for us all. Should we mismanage this stage, the future will catch up with some of us if we are still alive.

Mr Speaker, I plead that for purposes of continuity, being deliberate and for purposes of this Parliament retaining its honour, we should follow our rules and procedures. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us first hear from the responsible minister before I make a statement on this subject.

4.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker and honourable members, maybe at this stage, the Clerk could assist us by producing the Hansard of that day’s sitting. My clear understanding of the instructions from the Speaker in the Chair then was to go and consult with the Chairman and not the committee.

When I consulted the Chairman, he said he had a scheduled arrangement somewhere and so he advised me to see hon. Fox Odoi. That was my understanding. In any case, I had no locus to convene the entire committee. That is why I had to go through its chairman –(Interjections)- please let me finish. I consulted the chairman on the clear instructions that “You go and consult the chairperson and see how you move on those two clauses.” 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I don’t know where hon. Alice Alaso got that other document from. I have been working with a number of documents, some to help me consult with my own members of the caucus and the Attorney-General. But the document I brought to the House related to responses to the report of the committee.

Some of the responses included many acceptances to the committee recommendations. I did not reject all of them. But I also think that as the sponsor of the Bill, I have every right to make further amendments to what the committee recommended. That is what I have done in this document.

So, Mr Speaker and honourable members, this is not a new set of amendments. It is a response to the committee’s report, clause by clause and where I accepted, I said so, where I didn’t accept, I said so. All is contained in here. We should not waste more time. We should move on to committee stage to consider this Bill. I would like to disown the document by hon. Alice Alaso. I don’t know anything about it; I did not bring it to the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules of the House are very clear on what processes Bills go through and the more we try to to insert new procedures in the middle, we end up with this kind of situation. Those who do not learn from history are condemned to repeat them and this is the situation we are in. 

I recollect very clearly a similar discussion when we were debating the oil Bill; particular proceedings took place in the absence of the Deputy Speaker and when I came back, the matter was brought to me and there were variations of this nature about what transpired in the last sitting of the House. I had to go through the painful process of reading aloud the entire proceedings of a sitting of Parliament; it wasn’t very pleasurable. But I had to do it so that I can know exactly what had happened. 

One of the reasons why we have rules of procedure is to embed certainty about what to expect when something has happened. What should happen next? There would be no reason, absolutely no reason, at committee stage for the whole Bill to be referred to the committee. The procedure for doing that is                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           separate; a specific motion has got to be moved that that Bill be sent back to a specialised committee, not even the same committee –(Interjections)– no, I happen to understand these rules a little. 

If a Bill becomes very complicated for the House to process, a Bill that has already gone through a committee of this House – it has come to this House and there is a complication, a substantial motion has got to be moved for that Bill to go to a special committee that would have to be selected by the House. That is the understanding of the Rules I have. 

When a Bill is at committee stage, the mandate of the House is to go through that Bill, clause by clause. If any discussions are going to be carried out, it cannot be carried out on a Bill generally. It can only be carried out clause by clause. So if a reference has got to be made, a reference will have to be made in respect of a clause or set of clauses. 

And when we come back, we do not go back to general debates on what has transpired. I do sit here as Speaker and sit there as chairperson of the committee of the whole House and then we go to the specific clauses that have been referred. This is the procedure we should be following so that there is predictability in what we do. 

I find myself in a similar situation like the last time because of what has transpired. It is almost now impossible; I am not going to read the Hansard today to find out what happened. I am not going to. I will save myself that stress. I am not going to. Today, I decline to read the Hansard. 

But certainly, there are some procedural difficulties that we have got ourselves into. There is no situation that would arise where a Bill which is at committee stage can be referred back to that same committee to again handle the whole Bill. If the amendments had been so big and those amendments had come at committee stage, the proper course of action for the minister to take was to withdraw the whole Bill and submit a new Bill. If the minister is bringing substantial amendments to his own Bill at committee stage, then the whole Bill should have been withdrawn and a new Bill should have been submitted. 

But as of now, the conditions that we are in, I am no longer even sure about what transpired. I will in my own private time look at the Hansard, but I am not going to go through the pain of reading it aloud on another record of Parliament. I decline to do so. So, this matter is deferred; we will deal with it tomorrow, at 2 O’clock. Next item. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS REGULATIONS, 2011

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, when we left that day, it wasn’t going – (Interjections) – for committee 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, have we listened to the report of the committee on this particular Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Regulations; have we had the report? 

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We read the report of the committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Floor of Parliament; these are rules to the PPDA Amendment Act. So I beg the House that we immediately go to the second reading because these are rules and they are specific in nature. It would be better for us to go to the rules themselves and debate them therein. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, again, does Parliament pass regulations clause by clause; does Parliament handle regulations made from Acts of Parliament through committee stage? What is going on here? 

Honourable members, this Parliament already passed the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Act. The procedure of adopting regulations made under that Act cannot be the same procedure used to adopt Bills; it cannot be. There is no way we can go to regulations made from a Bill; an Act of Parliament passed by this House and we again go clause by clause to approve provisions of regulations made by the authority of this House. 

The procedure is this; if a regulation requires the approval of the House, it is presented as a whole. It is rejected as a whole or approved as a whole. Parliament has no authority to amend regulations; it cannot amend regulations or even discuss regulations clause by clause. So if we are satisfied with the report of the committee on this particular set of regulations that were made under the authority of an Act of Parliament, we can adopt it - [HON. MEMBER: “We can propose amendments.”] - to the regulations? How? For as long they are regulations, they remain regulations; they remain statutory instruments. How can Parliament amend statutory instruments? This particular subject is also deferred. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE SECOND REPORT BY THE DELEGATION  TO THE PAN AFRICAN PARLIAMENT ON THE SIXTH ORDINARY SESSION OF THE SECOND PARLIAMENT OF THE PAN AFRICAN PARLIAMENT HELD IN ADDIS ABABA – ETHIOPIA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are the members of PAP here? Is there somebody ready to present this report?  This House is adjourned to tomorrow, at 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 4.21 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 8 May 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 
