Thursday, 2 May 2013 

Parliament met at 2.35 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you back to the plenary, which we suspended in order to analyse the Budget Framework Paper. During that period, I launched the Africa Vaccination Week and during that launch, it became clear that as a country, we were not doing well on issues of immunisation. Some areas of the country have reported very low coverage, so, I would like to appeal to the Members to include in your message to the public the need to take children for immunisation and to inform them that it is safe and free and it will enable the growth of healthy families.

I want to note the following districts, which are well below the national average and to ask their Members of Parliament to scale up the advocacy.These are Adjumani, Agago, Amuria, Amuru, Bududa, Bugiri, Bukwo, Busia, Butambala, Gomba, Jinja, Kalangala, Kampala, Kanungu, Kapchorwa, Kole, Kween, Lwengo, Lyantonde, Mbarara, Mitooma, Mityana, Moroto, Moyo, Mubende, Nakaseke, Nakosongora, Namayingo, Ntoroko, Otuke, Pader, Pallisa, Serere, Sironko, Tororo and Yumbe. Members from those areas, please, help in scaling up the campaign. Those are the poorly performing districts in the country.

Hon. Members, you also recall that we adjourned so that we can deal with the budget framework paper but when I realised that by the 25th many of the committees were not ready, I decided to extend the deadline. For that reason, I gave you more time to complete the work and present reports to the Budget Committee.

During this sitting, I will give opportunity to the sectoral committees to give us a brief progress report and I wish to emphasise that we are behind schedule; we would have by now completed the work. But as you know, it was the Minister of Finance who first requested us to give extra time which interfered with our programme.

We have just concluded the North-Eastern Uganda Parliamentary outreach programme. We were in Karamoja from the 26th to the 28th of April and I wish to report that we had a successful meeting in Moroto.The Parliamentary outreach programmes have taken place in Fort Portal and Mbale in the NinthParliament and we are hoping that next time, we shall move to the islands such as Ssese, Buvuma or Namayingo so that islanders can also have an opportunity to interact with and to have us understand their special issues.

On the drawing board is the Arua sector to cover the north western districts; we shall inform you about the date.A detailed report on the outreach will be presented and debated by Parliament at an appropriate time.

I wish to point out the following areas; I want to commend the Government, the UPDF, the leadership and the people of Karamoja for successfully going through the disarmament exercise. Actually, the chairman of Moroto said that for once, they have had 12 years of peace and they are able to do work.So, I want to thank all those who participated -Karamoja is now peaceful; there are no more marauding warriors. There should also be mental disarmament so that the population can appreciate life without a gun. So, we ask Government to continue supporting them so that they can transform their lives effectively.

I commend the positive efforts being undertaken by the leaders of Teso and Karamoja but also, notably, I want to thank the Minister for Karamoja Affairs for the work done - it was visible. We thank the ministry for the work done. We ask the leaders to continue working together to consolidate the gains made.

Some areas of concern were raised by the leaders; there were some complaints that Members are not conducting constituency surgeries but they instead go on radio. Instead of going to meet them, they go to speak to them on the radio – the people were not very happy about that.

We are requesting that since we facilitate you, do have some physical interaction with the population. Do not just concentrate on the radio.

We had the whole of greater Teso, the whole of greater Karamoja and one district of Amolatar also attended this outreach. These were some of the issues raised; they want more physical interaction with the Members rather than radio consultations. So, please do the needful.

There were also concerns that the Office of the Attorney-General is not responding to the ordinances and by-laws presented. In one district, they said that they have got four by-laws sitting there since 2010. So, I appeal to the Attorney-General’s Office to assist the local governments to formulate their laws so that they can govern their areas.

They had complained that Members do not attend council meetings but I have advised them to schedule the meetings either on Mondays or on Fridays so that they leave Members to Parliament work in the middle of the week and I think that they have accepted.
There were also concerns about service delivery, poor monitoring of government projects. I want to ask the committees of Parliament to put more time on their oversight roles so that they can assist in bringing out the issues. For now, I am directing the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to travel to Teso and Karamoja regions to check especially on the roads connecting Kotido to South Sudan; the roads in Amuria District and the uncompleted roads by Zzimwe Company in Karamoja region.

I am also directing the Committee on Health to travel to Abim and Moroto and check on the health facilities in those districts.In addition they should check on health facilities in Amuria and Katakwi where it is reported that some sub-counties do not have any health units whatsoever. They should further check on Hepatitis B in those same districts and report back to Parliament for solutions.Various other concerns were brought but we shall be writing letters to the ministries concerned.

We did issue corrigenda on the Rules of Procedure to those which were issued earlier, so, please make sure you pick your corrigenda from the pigeon holes and affix it appropriately in your Rules of Procedure.

Hon. Members, you have heard about the much publicised letter from the Secretary-General of the National Resistance Movement Party informing the Speaker that the Central Executive Committee of the NRM Party had received a report and recommendations of its internal disciplinary committee and that four members of the party who are also Members of Parliament, namely: Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, Member of Parliament for Lwemiyaga County; hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, Member of Parliament for Ndorwa East Constituency; hon. Mohammed Nsereko, Member of Parliament for Kampala Central Constituency; and hon. Banarbas Tinkasimire, Member of Parliament for Buyaga County West Constituency had been expelled from the NRM.

The letter also requested the Speaker to invoke her powers to direct the Clerk to Parliament to declare the seats of the said Members of Parliament vacant so as to enable the Electoral Commission to organise by-elections in their respective constituencies.

Hon. Members, you will appreciate that since we embraced the multiparty system of government, this will be the first time that a political organisation or party has expelled its members who are at the same time elected Members of Parliament and formally requested the Speaker to direct the Clerk to declare their seats vacant.

I draw your attention to Article 83 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda which provides as follows:
“83. Tenure of office of members of Parliament.

(1) A member of Parliament shall vacate his or her seat in Parliament—

(a) if he or she resigns his or her office in writing signed by him or her and addressed to the Speaker;
(b) if such circumstances arise that if that person were not a member of Parliament would cause that person to be disqualified for election as a Member of Parliament under article 80 of this Constitution;
(c) subject to the provisions of this Constitution, upon the dissolution of Parliament;
(d) if that person is absent from fifteen sittings of Parliament without permission in writing of the Speaker during any period when Parliament is continuously meeting and is unable to offer satisfactory explanation to the relevant parliamentary committee for his or her absence;
(e) if that person is found guilty by the appropriate tribunal of violation of the Leadership Code of Conduct and the punishment imposed is or includes the vacation of the office of a member of Parliament;
(f) if recalled by the electorate in his or her constituency in accordance with this Constitution;
(g) if that person leaves the political party for which he or she stood as a candidate for election to Parliament to join another party or to remain in Parliament as an independent member;
(h) if, having been elected to Parliament as an independent candidate, that person joins a political party;
(i) if that person is appointed a public officer.

(2) 	Notwithstanding clause (1) (g) and (h) of this article, membership of a coalition government of which his or her original political party forms part shall not affect the status of any member of Parliament.

(3) 	The provisions of clauses (1)(g) and (h) and (2) of this article shall only apply during any period when the multiparty system of government is in operation.”

Hon. Members, as you will note from the above quoted Article of the Constitution and indeed from reading of the whole Constitution, there is no specific provision of the Constitution on the expulsion of Members of Parliament–(Applause)- by their political parties leading to the declaration of their seats in Parliament vacant.(Applause)

This issue of the effect of the expulsion of Members of Parliament from their political parties’ vis-à-vis their membership in Parliament is not new. You may recall that it was a subject of vibrant debate during the Seventh Parliament while considering the Constitutional (Amendment) (No.3) Bill, 2005. Specifically, the House was considering clause 26 (g) of the Bill which had then provided as follows-
“(g) if a person leaves a political organisation or political party for which he or she stood as a candidate for election to Parliament to join another political organisation or political party or to remain in Parliament as an independent member or “– this is what the minister had wanted to add – 
“…if he or she is expelled from the political organisation or political party for which he or she stood as a candidate for election to parliament”.

After a spirited debate on that matter, on the 7th of July 2005, the mover of the Bill, the then Attorney-General, proposed and he said this in his own words:
“Mr Chairman, the last time we discussed clause 26, it caused a lot of controversy. Honourable members expressed serious concerns over what it meant. We can go into explaining what it meant and so on, but we propose that in the interest of peace that the clause be deleted”. That clause was deleted. The Constitution (Amendment) Bill was passed without it.

From the foregoing, it is my firm belief that a decision on this matter has the potential of having serious constitutional ramifications. This is especially so that the office of a Member of Parliament is a weighty office which goes to the core of our democracy and therefore, a decision to declare such an office vacant can only be made on clear, unambiguous and unequivocal provisions of the law. (Applause)

I donot find those circumstances pertaining. The matter calls for caution on all parties involved. If I make an error, I want to err on the side of caution and protect the interests of the Members of Parliament as I am duty bound. (Applause)

In the circumstances, I am not persuaded and I will not direct the Clerk to Parliament to declare any seat vacant. I am fortified in taking this position by a decision of the Supreme Court of Uganda in Brigadier Henry Tumukunde v. Attorney-General & Another, Constitutional Appeal No.02 of 2006.I would like to conclude by quoting from that unanimous decision of Supreme Court and they said as follows:

“The reactions and powers of the Speaker should always be much more vocal and clear when the person of a Member of Parliament is threatened or its rules are challenged. The oldest rules and conventions which have guided Parliaments, Speakers and Governments in free and democratic countries, particularly those of the Commonwealth of Nations date back to centuries. In 1642, when Charles 1 of England, at that time, an absolute monarch attempted to arrest five Members of the House of Commons and demanded that its Speaker identify them so that they could be arrested, the then Speaker of Parliament, Lenthall, bravely, politely but firmly responded to the King, thus; “Sire, I have neither the eyes to see nor ears to hear except as directed by this House whose servant I am.” (Applause)

I have communicated this position in my response to the letter to the Speaker from the Secretary-General of the NRM – so whatever I have said here is what is contained in the letter to the Secretary General. This is my ruling on the issue. We will next go to the other business. 

But before, we go to other business I just wanted to mention that one of our colleagues and two other Ugandans are having some difficulty in India.I just want to assure the House that I am in constant touch with the President and the President is in touch with the Government of India to unravel the issues surrounding their being in that country.So,we shall keep you updated if we get other information about them. (Applause)

Hon. Members, in the Public Gallery, we have Mr Herman Sentongo, RDC of Yumbe, I do not know where he is sitting. There he is,you are welcome. We also have teachers of Cornerstone Nursery and Primary School, Arua, represented by hon. Dr Ajedra and hon. Christine Abia. There they are. (Applause)

Now,we shall receive some urgent matters of national importance.

2.55
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for giving me this opportunity to convey a very disheartening message from Kasese but before I can move to that issue, I would like to take this special moment, in a sincere and honest way, to congratulate you on your strong stamina and brilliant composition in making sure that our honourable colleagues are retained in Parliament.(Applause)

Madam Speaker, I think you even delayed to stand for presidency–(Laughter)- because if you were the President of this country, this country would be at peace. I can tell you that Ugandans all over the country and all over the world were waiting for you to pronounce yourself on this. I am very thankful to you, on behalf of the people of Kasese. May God bless you.(Applause)

The matter of contention that I want to bring to the attention of this House is in regard to the floods, which occurred in Kasese on 1st May 2013 and I am moving under Rule 45(1) of our Rules of Procedure.

On that day, Kasese District experienced a heavy and prolonged downpour, which lasted over 15 hours. This culminated into destructive floods on the streams of //Lume, Kuruhe,Kitakena and Mubuku in Busongora North as well as Nyamwamba in Kasese Municipality/Busongora South and Nyamwasana in Bukonzo East.

The floods paralysed activities in the area, culminating into connectivity challenges between Kasese and Fort Portal. The floods have consequently caused the following havoc: four people have been confirmed dead as of now, over 50 houses have been destroyed and this includes the staff houses for Kilembe Hospital, offices of Kilembe Mines, local communities, residential and commercial buildings, all inclusive.

The drugs – (Interruption)

MR KAFUDA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, as I was seated outside, I received a phone call from my constituency that three of the victims who were rescued from Kilembe yesterday have passed away and right now, the situation is worsening in Kasese District. The floods are increasing and people are still held up in the mountains. We are calling upon Government to intervene in this matter and rescue our people. Thank you.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you for that information. All the drugs for Kilembe Hospital have been destroyed so there are no drugs, not even Aspirin. Also, the canals for Mubuku Irrigation Scheme, which is under rehabilitationhave also been seriously damaged and we are going back to scratch. The people’s merchandise has also been destroyed although the extent of the damage has not yet been established. In addition, over 50 temporary bridges have been swept away, including the permanent bridge of Nyamwasani.

There is also an unknown number of livestock and crops, which has been destroyed and we pray that Government will take action and rescue the people of Kasese. Four coffee hulling machines have also been swept away, which machines the people in the community have been using for their income generation.

I am giving the following prayers to this House:
    1.  That Government should provide and/or relocate the communities under threat to safer areas.
    2. Government should immediately and quickly reinstate the status quo of Kilembe Hospital especially the wards and also the quarters because they were all swept away.
    3. Government should work out a swift mechanism of accessing the amount of damage and then come up with the modalities of curbing the situation.
    4. Government should reinstate the temporary bridges that have been washed away so that people’s activities are not put to halt.
    5. Government should provide relief items to the affected communities in terms of food, temporary shelter, clothing and essential drugs.

Madam Speaker, I want to say that the people of Kasese are waiting for your action on this. I am leaving right now to go to Kasese and I am going to convey the message there that I think the Ninth Parliament has the most sensible Speaker I have seen in this World and in this country. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.02
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. For two weeks now, Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited (UETCL) has cut off electricity from the lines of Pader-Abim via Agago and the three districts of Agago, Pader and Abim have been without electricity. This has greatly impacted on the lives of Ugandans especially those who needed care in the hospitals of Kalongo and Abim and also some other health centres that needed attention. 

I would like the Minister of Energy to explain to Ugandans why and under what circumstances should electricity be cut off for two solid weeks, which puts the life of Ugandans at stake. Disconnecting electricity from hospitals- I do not know what the ministry can tell this Parliament as to why such a thing is done and if such explanations could really also bring- (Interjections) - can I be protected, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Order.

MS AKELLO: Madam Speaker, such explanations should also inform this Parliament to decide how such disconnections can be avoided, especially from health units, in the event that management and UETCL have managerial issues to sort out.

A number of women have died in Kalongo hospital because of this power cut, so, I want to request the ministry to explain this. Secondly, I also want to request that UETCL reconnects this power line forthwith to avoid further deaths.

The other issue of national importance, which I want to bring to the attention of this august House goes to the Ministry of Education and Sports. For the last two to three weeks, the media has been awash with information about the financial scandals and corruption in KyambogoUniversity.Of course, I know that investigations are going on, to the effect of wanting to discover what has happened but the biggest worry of Ugandans concerns the fate of the students of this institution.

As you know, they are supposed to start their examinations and so, we want to know the fate of the students who have paid school fees already but they would be denied sitting their examinations.

Lastly, I also want the Minister of Education to clearly explain what measures they have in plan to sort out such problems especially in public institutions, like KyambogoUniversity and we are also not sure if this is not happening in other institutions like Makerere University, Gulu University, MbararaUniversity – we are not sure. Can the ministry explain to this House whether such financial mismanagements are not happening in the other public institutions as well? I thank you for this opportunity, Madam Speaker.

3.06
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you. Madam Speaker, it is true that as a developing country, we still depend on charcoal for preparing food in homes. Because of this, there are a lot of commercial charcoal burnerswho have invaded my district. These people have been cutting down trees for the last almost two years. I want to believe that as a country, we cannot tolerate a situation where within a short time, over ten hectares of natural trees are cut down for charcoal burning.

The presence of these large charcoal burners is degenerating into a conflict that has affected the country and I think this is a matter of national importance.

On 27 March, the district council passed a resolution to ban charcoal burning in the entire district. However, I want to report that the charcoal burners have ignored this resolution; they have gone on to cut down trees for charcoal burning. They have continued to buy trees from local people. And when one buys say one acre, they will cut trees from over five acres.

The situation got worse on Monday, when one of the locals was involved in a quarrel with some of the charcoal burners. The two groups engaged in a fight, which saw the charcoal burners castrate one of the local people. The man, called Sunday Oluma, 32 years, is now nursing wounds in hospital.

Last month, I reported this matter to the Ministry of Water and Environment, requesting them to intervene by stopping this charcoal burning business –(Interjections)- they are not from the local area; they are mainly from the central region. All that charcoal you are using comes from Nwoya District.

But my serious worry is that the areas from which they are cutting these trees are at the source of Ayago River. And you will recall that Government is planning to set up a hydro power station on Ayago River. So, if all the trees at this river are cut down, then Ayago Power Plant might remain a dream.

The other most unfortunate thing is that while all these conflicts take place, the police are just looking on. They are not –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, who has a telephone in this Chamber?

MS ADONG: As I was saying, the police have not come out to help the community. The affected people are struggling to sort out this problem on their own.

Madam Speaker, I now request that the responsible minister intervenes in this matter so that this illegal charcoal business is brought to a halt before it degenerates into a bigger conflict that may see more men being castrated.

Secondly, I request the police to come to the rescue of the community by assisting the district council to implement its resolution.  I beg to request. Thank you.

3.10
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank colleagues who have raised these issues and – (Interjections) – I am coming to that.

I want to take this opportunity to inform the ministers in charge to ensure they bring reports pertaining to these issues to Parliament soon. I have noticed that some of them are really very urgent, for example, the issue of Kasese, which cannot wait for long.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, allow me seek guidance from you –

THE SPEAKER: On the Kasese matter?

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Government Chief Whip for her directive. However, in our opinion, the matter of Kasese is extremely urgent and important. Today is Thursday and she is already talking about next week, which is about five days from now. 

I would prefer that Government takes this as something for immediate attention. There should be some remedy to be announced now instead of waiting till Tuesday. Something ought to be done to rescue the people of Kasese. I think next week is too far.

THE SPEAKER: But she had just started. May be she was about to say the immediate action.

3.13
MS EVERLINE CHELANGAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo):Madam Speaker, on the same problem, I would like to inform the House about a more serious issue than that of Kasese. (Laughter) On 20thof last month, disaster seriously hit Bukwo District after about four sub-counties were affected by hailstorms and floods. As I talk, the crops – beans, maize - in that area have been affected. Even lives were lost.

I reported this matter to the Office of the Prime Minister and I was told that they would send a team on 26thof last month. Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, nobody has gone there. It is only unfortunate that we do not get adequate media coverage in that place to highlight our issues. Maybe, that is why our issues are not quickly handled. Otherwise, there is a very big problem there. 

The Office of the Prime Minister, which promised to send emergency aid to the people in Bukwo, is now engaged in the Kasese disaster, which occurred yesterday. I do not know how this office has come to discriminate other districts. I am a little disappointed, Madam Speaker.

MS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, when this issue of Kasese occurred – as we talk now, the Ministry of Works is represented in Kasese. Actually, the Minister of Works and Transport is currently in Kasese.

The Minister of State for Disaster and Refugees is also in Kasese. What I was talking about was the statement to be made on the Floor; it was not that Government would get there later because Government is already on the ground in Kasese. And this is because it is an emergency.
As we talk, the Minister of Health who is here can also give us an update on what the ministry has so far done.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you heard that the drugs in hospitals in Kasese have been washed away. Would you like to say something about that?

3.14
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Ms Christine Ondoa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I send condolences to the people of Kasese and the families that have lost their dear ones.

This morning, our team from the headquarters and also from Kasese briefed us about the disaster in Kasese. In the health sector, the staff quarters and the Paediatric Ward of Kilembe Mines Hospital were affected. The children from that ward have been evacuated to a nearby health facility.

Similarly, the health workers whose houses were swept away have also been relocated. We have ordered the National Medical Stores to dispatch some of the emergency medicines and health supplies that are needed for those who are affected. The District Health Officer has also promised to keep updating us. Part of our team from the headquarters has already joined those on the ground to help in the rescue mission. That is the update I can give.

THE SPEAKER: Any hope for Bukwo District, because they are also complaining about what happened a few weeks ago? Minister for Energy and Mineral Development, do you have anything to say about the issue of Umeme blackout in Agago District? Yes, hon. D’Ujanga

3.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Madam Speaker, we have just been notified of this by the honourable member this afternoon. We will go back and find out what happened in this particular case. It looks a bit unusual; there must be a good reason for it. 

But I would like to appeal to Members to work with us on such important matters before bringing them to the Floor of the House. May be we would have solved this problem already – (Interjections) – let me finish, then you will inform me. By next week, we will come here with a report on this matter.

MS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, they also raised an issue to do with Kyambogo University and the Minister of Education is here. 

3.17
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I am happy you realise that there are challenges in Kyambogo University, which are of an urgent nature. I would like to inform hon. Franca Akello who raised the matter together with colleagues that the IGG together with the CID are handling the financial fraud in Kyambogo University. The IGG has clearly indicated to the Ministry of Education and Sports that by the end of May, their report will be out. 

What the ministry is doing now is to attend to other matters like restructuring of the university where we are going to have independent schools like one in charge of training; the school of technical and vocational and special needs education which was the case initially before Kyambogo University was created. 

THE SPEAKER: Can we have the Minister for Environment on the issues of Nwoya – Okay, hon. Bitekyerezo.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I thank you. I would like further clarification from the Minister of Education. It is alleged that more than Shs 20 billion meant for school fees was taken by the people in Kyambogo. The parents are in the villages without any money yet the students must sit for their exams. I want the minister to clarify, what is going to be the fate of those students of Kyambogo whose money has been stolen by these unscrupulous Ugandans in Kyambogo? This is an emergency; it is now another disaster; in fact, we should send there the Minister of Disaster Preparedness. You saw the sewage oozing out in that place. We cannot accept this trend where things keep going wrong and you remain in that building; I want you to clarify. 

MR REMEGIO ACHIA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the issue of Kyambogo, initially, the Minister of Education and Sports looked into the matter after Parliament was alerted through the committee. Investigation was done; the ministry directed Police to do its work and Parliament directed the IGG to do further investigations. 

In my interactions with staff of Kyambogo, they were wondering what they should do. At one moment, the IGG is interrogating them as directed by Parliament through a committee; the next moment, Police are asking them for the same documents. Members of staff at Kyambogo are confused. They asked me, “How does this Government work? The Police and IGG are all asking for the same documents. Who is in charge of the investigations?” So let government guide us on who is in charge of the investigations into the allegations of fraud in Kyambogo? We do not know who is in charge – (Interruption)

MS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, the students of Kyambogo and staff of Kyambogo University petitioned this Parliament and the Committee of Education made a report to this House and part of the resolution was that the investigative arms of Government should go and investigate all the alleged financial mismanagement and embezzlement in Kyambogo University. Part of the investigating institutions in this Government are the Police and IGG. So they are all doing their work, which work is mandated by law and Parliament also requested them to do so. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it is emerging very clearly that all institutions of Government are not functioning; there is stealing of public funds. So, wouldn’t it be prudent for Parliament to ask the Auditor-General not to do the normal audit, but do forensic audit in all organisations in Uganda, because this normal audit is not capturing all such issues. Let him do forensic audit even in primary schools. Don’t you think it would be important for Parliament to make that directive?

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the response by the minister. But our major concern is the fate of the students of Kyambogo University; but it is not only the students, there are more problems with lecturers. There are lecturers who are part-timers and are not on the payroll of Government. They have been working for five or six months without pay. And if this issue is not handled well, they may even refuse to give exams to the students. So, that brings us back to the fate of the students.  

What this Parliament wants to hear most at this moment is what the ministry is currently doing about the fate of the students as investigations are being carried on.  

Secondly, we also want to know how the ministry is planning to carry out such investigations or forensic audits, if you want to call them so, on institutions especially like Makerere, Mbarara andGulu Universities because I am very sure that these scandals are not happening only in Kyambogo University. So, what does the minister have on the plate for this Parliament on that issue?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister of Education, what are you going to do about the students who have paid fees? They have to do exams. Many of them are from poor families.

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Madam Speaker, what I can add on top of what I have already said is that Government, through the Ministry of Education and Sports, is following very closely the events, which are happening in Kyambogo University. As a matter of fact, we have a technical official from the ministry who is at Kyambogo University on a daily basis, representing the ministry in any meetings, which take place about the circus that is happening at Kyambogo University. She is Ms Uzamukunda. So, I want to assure hon. Franca Akello that we are also closely relating with government agencies and departments including the Auditor-General’s Office, the IGG’s Office and the CID‘s Office who are currently investigating the matter and we would not want as a ministry, to interfere with the investigations. That is why I said that our request to the investigating bodies is that they expeditiously handle the matter and that is how we got the response from the IGG that by the end of May this year, the report will be out. But what the ministry is doing – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you have not addressed the issue of the students who paid fees, which has been embezzled and they will not be allowed to sit exams.

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Madam Speaker, what is on the ground is that the students who paid fees and their fees was stolen is an allegation until the investigating bodies who are empowered under the law, who are trained to do the investigations, come up with a report and tell us that yes, this amount of money was stolen. Therefore, the same investigating bodies of government should be able to prescribe a solution under the law on what will happen to the students. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think this matter is really a bit intricate. The students are about to do exams; that is the question. Will they do exams or not? Those who have paid and – 

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Madam Speaker, as I have already said, the ministry is handling other policy matters relating to the university and one of the policy matters is to ensure that when students are undertaking a semester, they should undertake it to the logical conclusion, including doing exams and lecturers marking the exams and disseminating the results. So, I want to assure you, Madam Speaker, that we are closely monitoring what is happening in the university and all the students who have paid their semester tuition should be able to sit their exams. There should be no cause for alarm on how a student who has paid their examination fees will be denied doing examinations. 

3.29
MS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The response from the minister on the fate of the students is very crucial. There are those students who paid their tuition fully. The issue of the tuition having been fraudulently misused is not a concern of the students or the parents. What we would like to know is the fate of the students after what you call the investigation and so on. Are you assuring them that they will not have to incur extra tuition, just in case? We must be assured. We have been approached by many parents about this concern. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, there is a petition that I brought to the Floor from the support staff. They had a lot of information to reveal to this House but to my dismay, when the Committee on Education and Sports handled the issue of the dispute of Kyambogo University, those people did not interface with the committee and in fact, they never focussed on anything. So, it is good that the students came up because they had a lot of information to reveal but the petition for the workers was never taken serious and I complained. I just kept it but things have been revealed but people do not take others seriously. I am sorry about that.

3.31
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think there are two things; it is true that there are many students that have paid and the Minister of Education and Sports is saying they will be allowed to sit for their exams but the point of contention is, the receipts of those who paid are being disowned by the administration of Kyambogo University; that they do not know them and that they do not belong to the university. So, we want assurance. Even if a receipt is fake and you are still doing investigations, I assume there are some issues that cannot wait. Can we allow all those students who claim to have paid to sit for their exams as you do your investigations and your audits so that at the end of the day, when the results of your investigations come out, you will say,“Yes, you paid genuinely, here are your results.” If one did not pay genuinely, then you can claim the money from the students before you release the   results. Otherwise this cannot wait and Government may even be taken to court. As you may be aware - I will not go into that but we want an assurance that the students who claim to have paid be allowed to do their exams and the exams will be conducted before the investigations of the Police and IGG are concluded. (Mr Ssewungu rose_)

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Madam Speaker, hon. Ssewungu is standing but I know he is in support of what I am about to say – (Laughter)- the assurance I would like to make to this House is that all the students of Kyambogo University will be allowed to sit for their examinations as investigations continue. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister for Environment on the issues of Nwoya -

3.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENVIRONMENT (Ms Flavia Munaaba): Madam Speaker, I am not very conversant with what the Minister of Environment is supposed to be presenting today. So, I will first consult and then I will come back to the House. 

THE SPEAKER: Maybe, if you look at the Hansard, hon. Adong said that there are serious problems arising from masses of people burning charcoal in Nwoya and they fought and castrated a man. The charcoal burners castrated a man in Nwoya; they are fighting over the trees. So, maybe you can look at the Hansard and answer.

MS MUNAABA: I will get back to you on Tuesday.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before we proceed, there was a complaint from hon. Tete that nobody hears about Bukwo but I also want to say that each time I go to Kapchorwa and Karamoja, there is a complaint that there are no radios but when we were in Karamoja for the outreach, we received information that the government bought ten FM radio stations in the 1990s and they are scattered in containers. 

I want the Government Chief Whip to follow up that matter so that if they are available, they should be given to those districts because they listen to Kenyan radios, not Ugandan ones. I am told there are some in Gulu and others in Moroto, Soroti, and I think one in Kotido. So, honourable Government Chief Whip, I would really appreciate if you followed that up and ensured that there are - they were bought during the insurgency.

MS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, most obliged. I have also listened to your ruling on the letter that was written by the Secretary General of NRM but I am here to seek for your guidance. When you look at Rule 9 (2) and (3) of our Rules of Procedure, I want to be guided – (Hon. Amuriat rose_)

THE SPEAKER: She has not said what she wanted to say. Why don’t you let her say what she wants? She has not said anything. [Mr Amuriat: “Order”] No, she is seeking guidance. Order to who? There is no one on the Floor. Who is on the Floor? There is no point of order.

MS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, when you look at Rule 9(2) and (3), there are two sides in this House. “The right hand side of the Speaker shall be reserved for the Leader of Government Business and members of the party in Government.”

The Secretary General of NRM wrote to you as Speaker and informed you that four members of NRM in this House had their sponsorship withdrawn by the party and were expelled from the party. So, which side of the House are they going to sit?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, if the Members are unattached, they will be given seats in front of me because they are Members of Parliament. So, there is no problem.

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT TO COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 14 (10) (C) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba):Madam Speaker, in reference to Rule 148 (2) and Rule 176 (2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, as a Government Chief Whip, I would like to designate the following Members to various committees of Parliament. I wish to designate the following members of NRM party who have never been assigned to sectoral or standing committees. 

For sectoral committees, hon. Florence Nebanda Andiru, Woman MP Butaleja to the Committee on Presidential Affairs; hon. Proscovia Oromait, the MP for Usuk County, to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development; hon. Saleh Kamba, Kibuku County to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs; hon. James Kakooza, MP Kabula County to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

For standing committees, I designate hon. Florence Nebanda Andiru, Woman MP Butaleja, to the Budget Committee; hon. Proscovia Oromait, the MP for Usuk, to the Committee on Government Assurances; hon. Kamba Saleh, MP Kibuku County to Public Accounts Committee; hon. James Kakooza, MP Kabula County to the Committee on Commissions and Statutory Enterprises; hon. Kabakumba Masiko, MP Bujenje County to the Committee on National Economy; hon. Edward Khiddu Makubuya, MP Katikamu South to the Committee on Rules, Privilege’s and Discipline; and hon. Syda Bbumba Namirembe, MP Nakaseke County to the Committee on National Economy. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that all those Members, as read, be moved to those committees.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, I beg to move under Rule 176(5) of the Rules of Procedure that reads, “Parties or organisations shall have powers to withdraw and relocate members from individual committees.” I have been directed by my party to withdraw hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire, MP Buyaga West, from the responsibility of both chairing and also being a member on the sectoral Committee on Presidential Affairs of Parliament.

I also want to move under Rule 148(5) which states that, “Parties have powers to withdraw and relocate members from individual committees.” So, I am standing here to withdraw hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire, the MP of Buyaga West from the standing Committee on Government Assurances as a member.

I also stand here under Rule 176(5) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to withdraw hon. Muhammad Nsereko, MP Kampala Central as a member of the sectoral Committee on Natural Resources and also from the standing Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline under Rule 148(6).

I am also standing here under the same Rules 176(5) and 148(6) to withdraw hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, MP Lwemiyaga County, as a member of the sectoral Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and also from the standing Committee on Public Accounts.

Under the same rules, I am standing here to withdraw hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, MP Ndorwa East as a member of the sectoral Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and also the standing Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, sometime back, the Leader of the Opposition made changes to the shadow cabinet and withdrew members from committees and substituted others and nobody interfered. I think we should leave the whips to do their work.

MS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, I stand here to on behalf of the NRM Party to designate hon. Col Fred Mwesigye, the MP for Nyabushozi County as chairperson of the Presidential Affairs Committee and to be deputized by hon. Peter Ogwang as leaders of that committee. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members that is noted.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it is true I also withdrew people from committees but I re-designated them and I never left them hanging. But for the chief whip of that side, she has withdrawn and left them hanging.(Laughter)But having said that, the chairperson she has nominated, hon. Col Fred Mwesigye, is still answering a big case. The man has an ethical problem relating to transactions with Dura.

I think as Parliament, we must be serious on this matter-(Applause)- I am saying this because there is a report implicating this honourable member, which was adopted by this House. He still has to answer queries relating to Shs 50 billion. How do we again make him the Chairperson of the Committee of Parliament on Presidential Affairs? The man will now sell the President, State House – (Laughter) – and he will sell everything.

So, it is important that as Parliament, we do not accept such a person to chair a committee.

MS ANITE: Madam Speaker, thank you. I have always accorded respect to the Leader of Opposition until now. The point of order I am raising is that we have party whips on both sides of the House. We have the whip for the Opposition and the Government whip, for the party in power. But we also have the whips for UPC and DP. It is also known that each political party is left to do the whipping of their members, independently. That means the role of designating members to the various committees is entirely the responsibility of those whips.

In the circumstances, is the hon. Leader of Opposition, hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi–(Interjections)- the shadow leader of FDC who failed - in order to say that the hon. Col Fred Mwesigye is not fit to be the Chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs basing on allegations? The decision to make him the chairperson of the committee is not within his powers. So, is he in order to say that the decision of the Government Chief Whip is wrong? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, I think we should allow the whips to do their work. But also, on the report that was adopted by this House, I think we directed that investigations be carried out to establish the truth. I believe those investigations are still going on. So, when the results implicate him, we can remove him.

MS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, as the Government Chief Whip, in consultation with the party, we got to this decision on the basis of the Constitution, which states that one is innocent until proved guilty.

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to the next item.

LAYING OF PAPERS 

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2011 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR GENERAL

MS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, I am seeking some clarification. When I sought guidance, you ably said you were going to allocate them (Expelled members of Parliament) seats. Can I request that they move away from this side? I am not comfortable to have them sitting on my side.

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to the next item, please.

3.51
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Jack Sabiiti): Madam Speaker, may I, as directed under Rules 30 and 31 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, lay on Table financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 together with reports and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General.
    a) Kyankwanzi District Local Government 
    b) Rakai District Local Government
    c) Zombo District Local Government
    d) Mubende District Local Government
    e) Mityana District Local Government
    f) Lwengo District Local Government
    g) Kalungu District Local Government
    h) Masaka District Local Government
    i) Lyantonde District Local Government
    j) Kiboga District Local Government
    k) Sembabule District Local Government
    l) Kalangala District Local Government
    m) Bukomansimbi District Local Government
    n) Kijura Town Council
    o) Mubende Town Council
    p) Kalangala Town Council
    q) Sembabule Town Council
    r) Masaka Municipal Council 
    s) Bukomansimbi Town Council
    t) Mityana Town Council
    u) Kalungu Town Council
    v) Lwengo Town Council
    w) Kiboga Town Council

I beg to lay on Table.

Madam Speaker, I have looked at this order paper. We have over three reports, which are now with your Office. When we were in this Parliament last, we were supposed to present at least one report. But now, we have been put on notice of business to follow; there are many issues with regard to these districts, which we would like to be debated on the Floor of Parliament; they are very urgent. I request that you give our committee a chance to present some of these reports as soon as possible. 

THE SPEAKER: Of course, we would want you to present them. I do not want to create the impression that you have not been given the opportunity. There was a time before we went for the short recess that neither you nor your deputy was here. So, no one could present your report; but the opportunity was there. But we have noted that. 

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION BY THE MEMBERS OF UGANDA FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION ON THE STATE OF FOOTBALL IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the members of the football association are in the Gallery. You are welcome. Hon. Nsanja, read the topic and the prayers. 

3.59
MR PATRICK NSANJA (Independent, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to present this petition under Rule 29 of our Rules of Procedure. 

The humble petition of the members of the Federation of the Uganda Football Association also referred to as FUFA on the state of Ugandan football; its administration and mismanagement. I am the team captain, Uganda Parliament Football Club, the champions of the East African Community. 
Your petitioners pray that:
    1. Government suspends all dealings with FUFA Ltd.
    2. FUFA Ltd be investigated for the fraudulent receipt of money without authorisation.
    3. FUFA Ltd be prohibited from using FUFA House with immediate effect.
    4.  Declare FUFA as the authorised and recognised football management body in Uganda. 
    5. To hold Mr Lawrence Mulindwa and Mr Jasper Aligawesa and the Ministry of Education and Sports accountable for the negligence of duty.

And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray. 

This petition is supported by over 100 signatures, which are appended on this petition. Therefore, I take the honour to lay on Table this petition entitled, “The humble petition of members of the Federation of Uganda Football Association, also referred to as FUFA on the state of the Ugandan football, its administration and mismanagement.” I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Nsanja. The petition is sent to the Committee on Education for expeditious handling and report back. 

PRESENTATION OF PROGRESS REPORTS ON THE BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER AND INDICATIVE ALLOCATIONS OF ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/14 FOR CONSIDERATION OF THE BUDGET COMMITTEE

THE SPEAKER: You will come in the following order: Health, Defence and Internal Affairs, Public Service, Local Government, Gender, Labour and Social Development. Let us start with those four. A short statement on where you stand.

4.03
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr SamLyomoki): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I give the report, I just want to move a vote of thanks to you for that important ruling on the issue of the rights of Members of Parliament. (Applause)

You have made this House proud of the Office of the Speaker because you have achieved an important milestone in the history of Uganda, that institutions and heads of institutions can be able to do their work without fear and favour. Looking at what you have passed through, I know there was a lot of speculation from various corners. Even us as Members of Parliament, we came here not knowing what would happen today. So, we were following your ruling very keenly and we want to thank you because you have saved us from many things. 

The matter you have ruled on is not for individuals, but for Parliament of Uganda. Therefore, we have nothing we can do, but just to pray to God to give you more grace so that it is sufficient for you. (Applause)

On the report of the Committee on Health, we have been able to interact with all the relevant stakeholders – of course, we did not have much time but we did our best. We have finished our report. We are now finalising with writing it up. We are ready with it. 

We saw the communication from the Budget Committee and there is a time table for all committees to present. So, I think tomorrow and the other two days or three, all committees have been lined up to present and we shall be ready with the report.

Madam Speaker, I just want to ask for your permission early next week to present, as a committee, a motion here which is very urgent, relating to urgent measures needed in hospitals. We had an oversight tour and they guided us and directed us to undertake these tours in other parts of the country but we have been doing our oversight tours. When we went to some of the hospitals, for instance Kitagata Hospital, we were shocked. We found it in terrible state. Patients use mattresses that even have maggots in them. From our point of view, as professionals, we are even not sure whether patients are not getting infections from the hospital because you may find that someone with a wound or a broken bone has been put on a mattress that has been stained with blood from another patient or a rotten mattress. There is no water in the theatre; they have to go to a well to bring water in a jerry can to operate. So, as a committee, we want to move a motion for urgent measures to be taken on a series of hospitals just to make them really useful for the people of Uganda, instead of giving them other infections. 

So, we shall request you, Madam Speaker, to give us space on Tuesday so that we are able to raise this motion. Thank you very much. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon. Members, let us get the reports first. 

4.07
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Remigio Achia): Madam Speaker, we are trying to finalise the issues of the Supplementary Schedule No. 1 and we have requested the different sessional committees to present their reports to the Budget Committee for correlation and discussion starting this Monday. There is nothing to stop us from receiving their reports but from last year’s experience, Parliament received committee reports or reports of different sectors and adapted them and later on, the Budget Committee came back with a report putting together all these documents and picking the resolutions. Somehow, we ended up in an awkward position where we had adopted committee reports and the Budget Committee came later on with another report and it became a bit confusing and they were the resolutions of Parliament that were eventually sent to the President and which, finally, became part of our discussion from the Ministry of Finance and the Executive. So, Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance with respect to this issue. Would it be proper if you gave us another few days to receive reports and then they can be presented to Parliament after the Budget Committee has received them?

THE SPEAKER: You want the report of the supplementary prior to - 

MR ACHIA: No, the sectoral committee reports because if we adapt the resolutions of committee reports before the Budget Committee has looked through them – 

THE SPEAKER: No, they are going to bring them to you. We just want to know from them how quickly they will get to you. They must come to you. Actually, it is just to know when you are ready to hand over to the Budget Committee.  
4.09
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Simon Mulongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs has just concluded meeting the various ministries today and their agencies but we hope to be ready with the report by Tuesday, next week. 

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Members, I hope you are bearing in mind that our calendar requires us to close the session on 16th May. 

MS KABASHARIRA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want a simple clarification on what appeared in the papers concerning the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the land that was given to Sudhir Ruparelia. We just read that everything is okay and some of us have got some questions. Can it be clarified after bringing the report or even before?

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson, will you undertake to explain to us how you withdrew from the CMI land? There was something in the papers. Okay, let us get public service and local government.

4.10
MS MABLE BAKEINE (NRM, Bugangaizi County East, Kibaale): Madam Speaker, both the chairperson and vice-chairperson of our committee are away on a trip but as a committee, we had interfaced with all stakeholders. We concluded our work on Monday and I believe next week, our report should be ready. Thank you. 

4.10
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr William Nokrach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have done our work and the report will be ready by Tuesday. 

4.11
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Ms Paula Turyahikayo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The report of the Committee on Information and Communication Technology is now ready for presentation before the Budget Committee tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

4.11
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS(Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Our committee has one ministry - the Chambers of the Attorney-General and 10 accounting institutions and we have held meetings with all the institutions. We are yet to conclude with the Ministry of Justice and the Parliamentary Commission. We are scheduled to meet the Budget Committee on Wednesday. So, we should be ready with our committee report by Tuesday next week.

THE SPEAKER: Just for information of the House and for the comfort of the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. I have received some nominations for judges to the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeal and the High Court and the vetting will be on the 14th, 15th and 16th of this month. This is just for your comfort. I heard you lamenting. 

4.12
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Ms Veronica Babirye Kadogo): Madam Speaker, the report of the Committee on the East African Affairs will be ready tomorrow for presentation to the Budget Committee. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

4.13 
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Sylvia Namabidde): Madam Speaker, the report for the Committee on Education and Sports was delayed because twice, we failed to meet with the Minister of Education and Sports until today and that is why we all came in late for the plenary. But we hope that by Wednesday next week, we shall have the report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Committee on Physical Infrastructure -

4.14
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Samuel Ssemugaba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Committee on Physical Infrastructure has interacted with the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. We are making a report to present on Monday at 2.30 p.m. Thank you. 

4.14
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Hood Katuramu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The committee on Foreign Affairs has interacted with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and there were some issues, which we wanted sorted out and the report will be ready next week on Tuesday. 

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE): Madam Speaker, we have interacted with the Presidency and OPM and concluded our final report, which we are due to present to the Budget Committee on Monday afternoon. So, we are on the programme.

However, Madam Speaker, I need your protection from this protracted harassment by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Otherwise, I will seek further protection from the law. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we shall protect you.

4.15
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Kasirivu Atwooki): Madam Speaker, the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries has completed interfacing with the ministry and we are in the process of making our report. We are scheduled to meet the Budget Committee on Wednesday next week and I am sure we shall be ready then.

4.15
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry has interacted with most of the stakeholders and we are only left with one interaction with the Minister of Finance. We shall be ready by 8th May next week when we are supposed to present our report to the Budget Committee. So, we are nearing completion of our report.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. Although the Finance team is not here, I just want to really urge you to deal with the Anti-Money Laundering Bill. We are the only country on the African continent that has no law. You can imagine standing out alone as the one who has failed to make the law. I want this Anti-Money Laundering Bill before we go for recess and Public Finance Bill as well.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS ON THE PETITION BY THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF PRIVATE UNIVERSAL SECONDARY EDUCATION SCHOOLS ON THE INADEQUATE FACILITATIION AND IMPACT OF GOVERNMENT POLICY ON PRIVATE SECONDARY SCHOOLS

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson, you have 15 minutes to present.

4.17
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Slyvia Ssinabulya): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, allow me to present a report of the Committee on Education and Sports on the petition of the National Association of Private Universal Secondary Education schools on the inadequate facilitation of private Universal Secondary Schools and on the impact of government policies on private secondary schools implementing USE.

This petition was presented to this House by hon. Rosemary Nansubuga Seninde, Member of Parliament for Wakiso District and referred to the Committee on Education and Sports for consideration and report to the House as per Article 90 of the Constitution and Rules 147 and 177 of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure.

In their petition, members of the Private Universal Secondary Education Schools Association prayed that Parliament prevails upon the Government to rectify the following issues:
    1. To make early payment of Shs 47,000 per student per term as late payments cause grave challenges to the operations of the schools and services provided.
    2. The unfair treatment between Government-aided USE schools and private schools implementing the Universal Secondary Education programme.
    3. To review the Memorandum of Understanding that is guiding the operations of USE six years after its commencement.

Madam Speaker, the committee has considered the petition and now begs to report.

Methodology
The committee held meetings with the leaders -

THE SPEAKER: But for those, they can read for themselves.

MS SSINABULYA: Okay. Madam Speaker, on the specific prayers in the petition, prayer number one on the continuous delay of Government USE contribution, the committee was informed that Government contributes Shs 47,000 per student per term as Capitation Grant and that these releases are late. This has led to challenges whereby schools cannot procure goods and services, which are essential in the execution of their duties.

The committee was also informed that much as these funds are released late, sometimes they are not released in totality and the outstanding arrears are rarely paid. The committee noted with concern Government’s incessant delay in disbursement of funds to education institutions and yet these funds are always provided for in the National Budget.

The committee also noted that this delay has caused paralysis in the operations of these institutions and this has impacted negatively on the learning process of these institutions.

The committee was also informed that because of these delays, some schools have had their properties attached due to indebtedness accrued from financial obligations undertaken to keep the schools operational. The committee therefore recommends that Government makes timely releases in totality to enable schools operate smoothly.

The Government is also urged to carry out a comprehensive review on the unit cost provided per child given the ever rising cost of goods and services.

On the second prayer of the unfair treatment of private schools, the committee was informed that the difference in Capitation Grant per student per term between private USE schools and government aided schools is only Shs 6000 yet private schools have, apart from infrastructure development, to pay teachers and other support staff salaries unlike their counterparts whose salaries and infrastructure development is a responsibility of Government.

These insufficient funds impact negatively on the programmed activities and goals, leading to poor overall performance of private schools implementing USE.

The petitioners further informed the committee that revising the unit cost upwards to at least Shs 150,000 per student per term, Government contribution towards salaries for at least five teachers per school, provision of interest free loans for infrastructural development and involvement of relevant stakeholders in USE discussions would ease on the challenges facing private USE schools.

The committee notes the concerns raised by the petitioners and recommends that Government formulates a comprehensive support plan for private schools, bearing in mind that they incur various costs and that they are the major service providers in the education sector.

On the third prayer of reviewing of the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), the committee learnt that operations of USE schools are still being guided by an MOU that was done six years after the commencement of USE. This MOU is no longer relevant in view of the challenges of the changing socio-economic and political environment. 

The committee recommends and urges Government to review the current MOU in order to render it relevant and applicable to the prevailing socio-economic and political environment in the country.

Madam Speaker, in the interface between the committee, the petitioners and the ministry, a number of issues emerged. One is the composition of boards of governors. The committee was informed that in Part Two of the Third Schedule of the Education Pre-Primary and Post-Primary Act, it allows, apart from the other members of the board, the boards of governors to have one local government representative nominated by the district council standing committee responsible for education and also one nominee of the local councils within the area were the schools are located. 

The committee was further informed that the Act is silent on the presence of the above mentioned persons on the board. Note was also taken that given the changing political arena, where the multiparty system is taking root and slowly eating away the ethical and professional values, this is likely to promote partisan tendencies which may further weaken the education system. 

The committee notes the concerns raised by the petitioners and the absence for the provision of private schools’ management teams in the Act to cater for issues pertaining to private schools implementing USE. The committee, therefore, recommends that government comprehensively reviews the Education Act and considers amending it to include private schools’ management teams as they too are key stakeholders in the education sector. 

The committee also learnt that the policy to make political education compulsory in secondary schools has been formulated and passed. Teachers were then trained and examiners identified at a high cost; though, according to the petitioners, it died a natural death. This automatically degenerated into redundancy and joblessness of the trained staff. 

The committee appreciates Government’s effort in trying to support and boost the education sector through the introduction of various programmes. However, it also notes Government’s inadequacies in research and involvement of the relevant stakeholders when formulating programmes. This has led to grave challenges at the implementation stage.

The committee reiterates its earlier position that Government does extensive research and studies, and urges Government to involve the relevant stakeholders at the planning and consultation stages to avoid challenges that eventually lead to failure of what would have been a worthwhile policy. 

The committee further recommends the re-introduction of political education to cater for patriotism needs and the re-engagement of the already trained teachers.

On the policy of compulsory physical education, note was taken that although there is a government policy that all schools must teach and have PE timetabled for the promotion of national development, better health, nutrition and family life, most schools lack sports grounds and trained instructors to teach PE. The committee further notes that physical education is not examinable in our present education setting and so is not considered pertinent in most schools, given the high academic competitiveness.

The committee therefore recommends that Government addresses the challenges aforementioned before enforcing compulsory teaching of physical education.

The Advanced Level Subject Policy
The committee notes and appreciates Government’s continued effort towards the promotion of scientific and technical skills. According to the A’ level subject policy the principal subjects offered are reduced to three, though each student is compelled to offer either subsidiary mathematics or computer science. For those with economics as a principal, subsidiary mathematics is compulsory. The committee observes that while this is a good policy, it was implemented with minimum consultation with the relevant stakeholders both in the public and private institutions causing various challenges at the implementation stage. 

There is already a scarcity of teachers for mathematics and computer science. The cost and maintenance of computers is high, making it virtually impossible for most schools, especially private schools, to afford them. Second-hand computers that would have offered a cheaper alternative were banned by Government on the basis that they were environmentally hazardous. Most schools in the rural areas are neither connected to national electricity nor do they have any form of electricity, which has hindered the teaching of computer science. The text books to guide the teaching of computer science are not readily available let alone standardised. This has negatively impacted on the learners and examiners in the different schools.

The committee further noted that A’ Level students and teachers have not been furnished with a guide on the essential and relevant subjects in relation to the courses offered in universities. This has resulted into students selecting subject combinations that do not translate into any course at the university.

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that Government should always actively involve the relevant stakeholders, both private and public, in its initial planning and consultative process so as to avoid the consequences that come at implementation.  

The committee appreciates and commends Government’s effort in trying to equip Government schools with computers. The committee recommends that Government considers subsidising the price of computers in order to enable affordability by private schools. Further, emphasis should be placed on the training of teachers for sciences and equipping of laboratories plus subsidising laboratory equipment and chemicals to help private schools to afford them. 

Teaching materials and text books should also be standardised in order to create standard guiding tools for the students and teachers. This will highly boost Government’s policy of sciences.

The committee further recommends and urges Government to impress it upon the Public Universities Joint Admissions Board to formulate a guiding tool on the essential and relevant subjects at A’ level in relation to courses offered at the university.

Madam Speaker, on the patriotism classes, the committee was informed that it is Government’s policy that patriotism classes be taught in every school and that clubs be formed as well. This was in a bid to promote national unity, patriotism and cultural heritage. The committee was further informed that though head teachers were oriented in patriotism, most of those from the private schools were left out yet they too are stakeholders in  education, if not the major service providers, contributing 61 per cent of the education sector.

The committee was also informed that the training given leaned more towards political affairs rather than patriotism, besides it being financed and managed by the office of the President. This did not auger well with some participants given the fact that Uganda is under a multiparty dispensation.

The committee notes the concerns of the petitioners and recommends that Ministry of Education and Sports aligns patriotism classes with political education and African nationalism.

The committee further recommends that patriotism classes should be delinked from politics and the training be extended to private schools as well. We also recommend that the financing of the patriotism clubs be moved away from the Office of the President to Ministry of Education and Sports.

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, the committee recommends that the House adopts the report of the Committee on Education and Sports on the petition by members of the National Association of Private Universal Secondary Education Schools on the inadequate facilitation of private universal secondary schools and its impact on government policies on private secondary schools implementing USE. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson and your committee, for doing this good work. Can we now have a few comments, but only two minutes each because we only have 15 minutes to speak to this report.

4.22
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for bringing out very salient issues in as far as checking the performance of the USE programme is concerned. I also would like to thank Government for its premier partnership with the private sector. It has proved that it is cheaper to partner with private schools because with only Shs 47,000, without buildings and laboratories, these people are even performing better. 

However, this should help us review the delivery mechanism because it shows that in this country, two citizens who are deserving are given different treatment. There is one who gets proper treatment as a citizen and there is one who gets partial assistance. That is a big question, which policymakers must answer. It is a dualism and it shows that there is heterogeneity. This could help us think of what Government can do to make it cheaper, working with private schools and more so foundation bodies. You will agree with me that education without a foundation body is not holistic. Some LCs, because they have some interests, the moulding of children in some of these schools is lacking.

What I also expected the report to bring out is the lack of vocationalisation in the USE foundation. There is need for us to vocationalise our secondary education if we are to set a good foundation for Skilling Uganda. In that regard, I would like to urge Government to also use that PPP model when it comes to Skilling Uganda. It is much easier for the schools that have done well to actually implement Skilling Uganda.  

The other challenge I notice is that the standards agency has not been treating us equally. They are very strict when a private school wants a UNEB centre, a boarding section etc but they are so relaxed when it is an LC school. That is wrong; standards must apply across the board whether for a private or public school. 

I request that we review the compulsory subjects in all secondary schools, starting with vocationalisation. I also think that our parents who offered home economics, those who did health science as a compulsory subject, or book keeping for those who wanted to become entrepreneurs – (Member timed out).

4.37
MR BALTAZAR KASIRIVU-ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for the good report. 

I have been trying to help some students in my constituency access tertiary schools after A’ Level. The challenge I have always had is with students whose subject combinations are not adding up. There is a problem of career guidance in schools; students are not being guided. There is a subject called entrepreneurship. It seems every student wants to take that subject, and they usually pass it well. But it does not add up with other subjects. Eventually, they cannot access certain courses. So, I request, earnestly, that the ministry puts serious emphasis on career guidance for our students, especially those in secondary schools and A’ Level before they go higher. 

Madam Speaker, we have been talking about sciences and it came up in the report. When it comes to rural schools, even those we call traditional schools, the laboratories have been run down. I do not know what the problem is in the Ministry of Education. There are certain schools which they give attention, those schools near Kampala; every good thing that comes up is given to these schools and even the donors are guided to these schools, leaving rural schools – (Member timed out).

THE SPEAKER: I give you half a minute to finish. 

MR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. So, can we have the rural schools given attention? 

I have been reading about our neighbours; they are giving a laptop to each child. It is being implemented in Rwanda. Uganda, which has always been a model for other countries to learn, is left out. What has happened to us? We are saying that we are in the computer age yet our children cannot access computers; even children in urban schools, like those in Kampala, cannot also get a laptop. What should we do to make sure that this policy is adopted in our schools? I thank you.

4.40
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the chairperson for this report. 

Although the petitioners are concerned about private universal secondary education, I feel the challenges here and the recommendations made in this report cut across even to our government schools. Continuous delay of government USE contribution does not only concern private schools but also affects our government schools. This has been perennial. The problem has always remained and no matter how long we talk about it, we still suffer delays in the releases both for universal primary and secondary schools. 

I am very happy about the recommendations about the computers. The computer problem is very serious in the government schools. The recommendation that the prices for computers should be subsidised by Government is a very pertinent recommendation because many of our students finish senior 4 and get to A’ Level without ever touching a computer. In this world of information technology, it is unheard of that students should finish senior 4 without ever touching a computer. 

This goes to libraries too. Many of our schools receive books from the Ministry of Education but they do not have facilities to access the books; they have books being kept in boxes. That is not a library. So I ask the Ministry of Education to go beyond today’s petition and examine our system in the government education sector and see how well we are doing especially with computers, libraries and science teaching. 

It is also important that besides equipping our government schools with computers, we also address the challenge of electricity. I request the Ministry of Education to take it upon itself to ensure that wherever computers are given, there is a linkage with electricity. Why should a school receive computers that it will never use and we just keep records that a certain school has computers, which are just kept away? There is a school in my constituency with computers but they have no electricity. I am happy the minister is here and I am sure we are soon going to get electricity –(Member timed out). 

4.44
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I want to thank the committee that compiled this report. Government spends a lot of money on headcount exercises but it is disturbing that it continues releasing money that does not tally with the number of students counted in schools. I do not know why Government goes into such an expensive venture of headcounts when it will not release money as per the headcount results. I think this exercise has now become useless. At first we thought that Government would release money as per the headcount, but according to the report and the information on the ground, that is not happening. 

Two, on the issue of essential and relevant subjects, of recent I have been visiting schools in my constituency and, honourable  colleagues, this information about the essential and relevant subjects as far as career guidance is concerned is there. The books are available in the ministry, only that the ministry should also move out and ensure that these books reach the schools. I managed to get these books from the ministry and the information about the relevant and essential subjects is also part of the career guidance handbooks. So, I request my colleagues to assist the schools that cannot afford to get them from the ministry by getting them from the department of career guidance because I benefitted from them.

Lastly, we talk about private schools implementing USE and about science subjects being compulsory, but we do not support them in as far as provision of laboratory equipment is concerned. If we do not support them in computerisation and if we are not supporting them in the provision of books, then you really wonder how these schools that get late releases are expected to implement this programme. (Member timed out)

4.46
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for the good work. 

I think sometimes policies are put in place without clear consideration of other factors. It is good that USE should go to private schools to help Government but there are certain things we needed to put in place before we allowed that. They are now asking for facilitation as far as laboratories and computers are concerned; how is Government going to consider that? It is a private school but they also want to be facilitated. I think that we would rather use the schools that we have and make sure that our pupils and children go to government schools because we have many good schools. There are a good number of schools that came up in the subcounties and in those districts. If we continue mixing private and government, then we are likely to lose track and lose out. 

Some students are discriminated against; those private schools charge money for lunch and some of the students who are under the USE programme do not have this money. So, they sometimes go without food. When the others go for food, they stay hungry. How will they learn with those who are already satisfied? So, we need to look into some of these policies. 

Madam Speaker, these traditional schools that we have, schools like Ntare School, Buddo, Gayaza and others, take only first class students. Why can’t Government think of also giving them this USE programme if we want to promote good education and standards? The money these schools charge per term is the same as the money that private schools charge and yet they are facilitated by the Government in each and everything including utilities. They charge over one million shillings when also hon. Muyingo’s schools charge Shs 1 million. 

What is the rationale of these traditional schools and yet our people in Ntungamo can only manage to go to the third world schools? They cannot afford Ntare School, which charges Shs 1 million. What is the rationale used yet they are facilitated? The buildings are there and have been provided by Government but they charge a lot of money. How do they sit down and set that school fees? I thought the Government would set tuition fees, which are supposed to be paid by those schools, but the head teachers just sit and set certain tuition fees, which our people cannot afford; so, we end up sending only the rich students to university. We need to look into this, Madam Speaker. I thank you. 

4.49
MS GRACE ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee. When we talk about schools under the Universal Secondary Education programme, students with special needs also go to these schools. Unfortunately, there are no teachers for special needs education in secondary schools; they are completely lacking. I was in a school in Madera on Monday and all the teachers posted do not have any knowledge about special needs. 

It gets worse when the government policy talks of science and computer. You can imagine a blind student in the lab mixing chemicals and doing operations of everything that is done in the lab. I think it is a bit discriminatory. Even when the committee makes reports, nothing is said about special needs education. I think these children should be talked about. 

Madam Speaker, it is even worse when they reach university. When they give them admission on government, the JAB committee determines the course. So, you find that most students with disability are doing community rehabilitation for which jobs are never advertised anywhere. So, it seems they are dictated upon to go to Kyambogo University, as if that is the university for disabled people. 

Government should take care of all the citizens so that we do not have one tenth of Ugandans loitering on the streets and begging even after finishing education. We would then have wasted the resources that Government is putting in to ensure that students with special needs go to school.

Madam Speaker, it gets worse with the textbooks. There are no Braille books in secondary schools that bring in the transmission of instruction in secondary education. The ministry really should begin thinking about this. 

When we talk about physical education, we do not have special equipment like goalballs or those balls for football which have sound for students with special needs. I think this is unfortunate. Some of the students on Monday asked me, “What are we supposed to do; shouldn’t we play PE?” I told them that I will take back this report to the Minister. It is good that this debate has come here and I shall give more details to the Minister about the challenges that they have. (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Jovah Kamateeka, you can now see how much we need the checklist that you are developing on human rights and equity. You can see why we need it so quickly. Please, expedite it so that all the people are captured with their needs. 

4.52
MR WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report and recommendations therein. 

I think it is a good report but there are good things and good ideas that we think about but we never prepare for them. In the Ministry of Education, the Universal Primary Education programme was a good idea which was poorly implemented. That is why it is turning into a disaster. Another good idea was USE but again, it has been poorly implemented because it was not planned for. It is a great idea to introduce computer and science as compulsory subsidiaries at A’ Level, but are we prepared for it? 

There is lack of harmonisation in Government. Take the example of computers; UCC is giving out computers under the fund from the telecommunication companies but UCC gives computers to schools where there is no power and they expect the Ministry of Education to provide the solar panels and yet the solar panels are not provided by the Ministry of Education. I see that some of the schools in my constituency have had computers for six months and they are waiting for the Ministry of Education to provide the solar panels. So, why can’t Government ever harmonise its work? They behave as if they are not in the same institution or organisation. That is the problem we have in the country and that is why USE is actually retarding the development of private schools. We must rethink it. 

Shs 47,000 is given to a school and the parents think that this money is enough to run the school for their children, but the money is not enough. It would be better if the Ministry of Education could consider giving money to all children who qualify and they choose the schools they go to and then they top up. Otherwise, USE and the small money we are giving are retarding the development of the private secondary schools. Just give a bursary to everybody, including those in the university, by the way. It would be a better to give everybody a bursary and they go to universities they want to and they top up. Otherwise, we are pretending to be offering free education but we are not. Thank you very much. 

4.55
MS KEVINAH TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to thank the committee for presenting this report, and the report is so good. 

I stand here to support the committee’s recommendation that private schools should also be funded by Government. In my constituency, I have only one secondary school which is Government aided. So if I did not have these private schools, I do not know where these children would go. Busia Senior Secondary School has about 400 to 600 students in one class and Government did not consider that as it brought in UPE and USE. They should have considered the classroom to pupil ratio when introducing these programmes. They should also have considered the teacher to pupil ratio. One teacher teaching about 400 students in a class! I do not know what impact they can have.

Government is emphasising sciences, which is good, but we do not have laboratories. Government should put in place labs. We are talking about computer in HSC. Some computers were brought, but technology changes very easily and very quickly; computers are brought and after five years you find them obsolete and they are supposed to be used by the students. Kyambogo University students went on strike because they had never touched a computer. If the university students can go on strike because they are going to finish their degrees without touching a computer, what about the secondary school students? 

Government should really put in place an enabling environment and more so power. Electricity provision in Busia is so poor; you can spend about three months without power. If it is there, it is very intermittent and it can destroy gadgets. (Member timed out)

4.58
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman representative, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for the work well done, but I would like to ask, when selecting these private schools, what criteria are followed because not all these private secondary schools are covered? So, we need to know the criteria for selection of those private schools under USE.

Secondly, the committee suggested an increment of up to Shs 150,000 per student from Shs 47,000; that is an increment of 300 per cent. I really wonder if we are being realistic. I do not know if we should first push for Shs 47,000 in good time, but it is important that we review the memorandum of understanding with education.

I would like to say something on patriotism. I have seen in some schools some students with some green uniforms. I have been wondering how they select those students. It is very bad on the part of teachers. If you want to be all inclusive and not just politicise education, we must review this as fast as possible especially for these patriotic clubs; it should be all inclusive and you have to review the curriculum. It is important that we take this very seriously because it is education that will propel the country ahead; otherwise, we will keep on going backwards without taking education seriously. Thank you.

5.00
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for considering this petition. I am sure it touches almost all of us in our different constituencies.

I have a few issues to add to what the committee presented. I would like to first ask the Minister to consider community schools as part of these private schools. There are schools that have been started by communities and religious organisations; these schools are being treated as private schools but originally these were community owned schools and some of them have applied to the ministry to be taken over. I have a particular school called Oluku SS. It is actually implementing USE but they have applied to be grant-aided by Government. They are ready to offer the school with all the assets so that it becomes a Government owned school, but for the last five years we have tried in vain. I think this is the right time the minister gives us an assurance.

There is also an issue, which I think is of national character, concerning the admission in universities where the Government provided for the district quota. We have a variation in this system. First, Government came out clearly that every subcounty is supposed to have a secondary school and a vocational school, I think at county level, but these have not come to pass. We want to know the position of the ministry in regard to this. 

Particularly on the district quota, we now have many one-county districts and fewer, less that 20 or 30, districts which have got more than five counties, Arua is one of them. When it comes to district quota provisions, we all have the same number of students being sponsored at district quota –(Interjection)- Maybe you will give the clarifications, but if at all there is any variation, it very minimal. So and we are appealing that maybe the ministry could consider the district quota at county level so that districts like Arua, Kasese, which have got more than five counties that almost qualify to be districts in their own stature, could also send equal numbers. I thank you. 

5.03
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia Bugwe South, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to appreciate the report from the Committee on Education and Sports concerning this petition. I second the resolutions that have been drawn from the interactions.

However, Madam Speaker, I just want to bring to the attention of the whole House that despite the committee having got a petition from private schools, the issue also applies to a lot of schools government schools that are suffering the same way. This is not only happening in secondary schools but even in primary schools. Government has not made a full payment of UPE funds to government primary schools. There have been a lot of complaints; I have data. 

The other day I was interacting with all head teachers of primary schools in my constituency - the 86 primary school I have – and each head teacher who spoke said that Government would pay for maybe a quarter of the number of children who are admitted in Government schools. These are primary schools and we expect to have quality education being provided at this level. This is why we say that as much as the petition is touching on secondary schools, it goes deeper to primary schools where the foundation of the quality education is built.

The ministry really needs to come up and advise us as to why they have never paid or they are not giving full payment to most of these schools. I have schools like Busia Hall, which has around 1400 students and the other term they paid for only 400 students. Nagabita Primary School has 1200 pupils and they paid for only 600. There is Buyengo with 1600 pupils and they paid for only 800. I have all the data.

I am also trying to establish something from the minister because we have a policy that once an area becomes a subcounty, that area automatically qualifies to have a secondary school. However, we have had scenarios where we go and register all these secondary schools first as private schools and then we begin agitating for those secondary schools to become government schools. Give us the time limit on when the government can automatically take up these schools without us going through the hurdles of registering them and then beginning to beg the ministry for them to be taken over by Government – (Member timed out_)

5.05
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker, and I would like to thank the committee for the report. My issue is basically on the cost of the Universal Primary Education schools. The fees are very abnormal and we want the ministry to come up with some regulations on what should be paid in UPE schools as opposed to private schools.

On the subsidies that are given to the public schools, in my district I have a big complaint about USE schools and the public schools. I want to give an example of Gombe Senior Secondary School, where one can hardly find a child from Butambala. When it comes to subsidies in my area, the computers are given to Gombe Senior Secondary School yet we have USE schools like Ngando Senior Secondary School, Bundise and they are not getting any computers. The students in Gombe pay computer fees. Why can’t the ministry extend work with UCC under the RCDF to make sure that even these private USE schools are given free computers?

Uganda Communications Commission under RCDF is mandated to empower schools with ICT laboratories and computers. When they appeared before the Committee on ICT where I am a member, they acknowledged that they had installed over 86 laboratories in public schools but when we go to our districts and constituencies, we can hardly find these computers. When we find them, they are either not maintained or not even installed. As Members have said, some lack solar panels and yet the policy is that where the school has no electricity, UCC has to install solar panels and connect the ICT laboratories. (Member timed out)

5.08
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. I want to re-echo the issue of coding. It is a serious matte; communities have willingly come to establish schools but we are not showing interest, as has been raised by my colleague, hon. Atiku.

Adjumani District is a rare district. By that I mean demonstrations are not regular. However, because of this case, on 27th March there was a demonstration and the Third Deputy Prime Minister got embarrassed. I tried to follow up this issue but our ministry is not accessible for persons with disability. I went there twice but we could not go up as the lifts are not functional. So, it is a terrible state. When you try to use phones, they rarely pick our calls. We need a lot of action on that.

Regarding recommendations by the committee, they have emphasised the issue of arrears not being paid but there is no recommendation about it. Financial commitments are serious commitments because they have a lot of implications. So, I would also like to add that the arrears incurred by the private schools, which were promised by Government, should be paid.

On page 9, it is indicated that 61 per cent of the services are provided by the private sector. This causes a lot of worry. With all the challenges reflected here and considering that they are the ones who are providing the major services, this has a lot of implications on the quality of education and the product that we get in the country. (Member timed out_)

5.10
MR ODOO TAYEBWA (FDC, Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker, and I thank the committee for this wonderful report. 

I want to draw your attention to page 7 of this report where it says that computer lessons have been made compulsory at A’ Level. It is very illogical to find that a government starts a subject without preparing for it. I want to assure you that in my constituency, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, they have not delivered a single computer to any A’ Level school. I challenge the minister here to avail us a list of the schools that they have supplied computers to. It is terrible and shaming to find that you have started the subject but there are no computers and yet these subjects are compulsory at A’ Level. You cannot take someone to a garden to dig for you and you do not give that person a hoe; it is not possible.

Two, there are no computer laboratories and you know computers are very sensitive. They should be in good rooms, which are very clean and which do not have dust. But you have not provided laboratories, you have not provided computers and the teachers and computer technicians are not there yet you say you are introducing a subject. Madam Speaker, the minister should inform us how these computer studies are going to be carried out.

When you look at the Shs 47,500 that is being paid for a USE student, it is not enough. Some schools have even applied to leave the USE programme and the minister knows this. A school in my constituency applied to leave USE because it has not helped our children and even the money does not come and it is a problem. These schools incur huge debts- (Member timed out)

5.13
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought I had declared my interest at the beginning of the Ninth Parliament not to sit in front as a shadow minister because of my long legs. I feared that they would cross over and I would be accused of crossing to NRM. 

Madam Speaker, I want to concentrate mainly on the issue of patriotism classes but of course I want to appreciate the work that my honourable sister, Ssinabulya, is doing. I will not forget to thank the Ninth Parliament for separating education from health because this has given a lot more time for this kind of work and observations to be made. It has also made the work of Parliament a little easier in identifying the key issues that affect it and to give more attention to the issues that affect education.

In the beginning, there was a lot of heat over the issue of patriotism at its introduction. Most of the fears of Members of Parliament about having this taught in schools are actually what the committee has highlighted. You can now see that the committee is reporting that there is a very big mix-up of politics and patriotism. Actually, so many of us thought patriotism needed not to be taught in classes; we would have to live as patriots as leaders before the rest of Ugandans would know the importance of being a patriot. 

I see these patriotic classes so closely related to political education that was sometime back introduced in the curriculum of education in this country. I would really want to suggest that patriotism classes be merged with political education. (Member timed out)

5.16
MS ANNE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the petitioners and the committee that has worked on this report. I want to support the recommendations of the committee. However, I want to observe that Shs 47,000 per student is really very little. Also, I want to understand – I do not know whether this is happening in all districts, but in Moyo District you realise that when Government sends this Shs 47,000, the private schools add more money. That makes it very difficult for students assumed to be USE students because they pay extra funds. So, I support the recommendation that the Ministry of Education and Sports reviews its memoranda of understanding with the private schools and they should discuss how much the private schools should add to what Government contributes to their students in those various schools.

The petitioners also asked about the unfair treatment of the private schools. They cited the difference of Shs 6000 in the Government contribution. I would like to observe that this is expected because before Government comes in, private schools will have started something. It is a business, so they are already a step ahead compared to government schools. So, this difference should not be a very big issue.

We should also understand that Government has not fulfilled its promise of having a USE school in every subcounty. In Moyo District, for example, Moyo Town Council does not have a single USE school. Government is only supporting the private schools which are there. Government needs to realise the fact that the students who go to those private schools are not private as such; they are Ugandans who need the full support of Government.

On the issue of the contribution to be revised to about Shs 150,000 per student, I think that is not realistic because prices of most items have gone up. Also, I call upon Members of Parliament to help the Ministry of Education in ensuring that funds meant for schools are sent to them timely because –(Member timed out).

5.19
MS MARGARET MAKHOHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me take this opportunity to appreciate the committee for the good work done. It is indeed an enriching report, more so because it concerns the education sector in our country.

On page 3, the committee has noted that there are always late releases of funds to schools. Since the minister in charge is present, they can explain to us the reasons contributing to that. It is important for us to know that late releases of money will not help the manager carry out smooth running of schools. They could be having a problem as a ministry and probably they need the intervention of Parliament. If that is the case, then we can legislate on it to bail out our schools. It is very unrealistic to increase that money to Shs 150,000 when we are already failing to meet the Shs 47,000. So, I do not support the proposed increment.

On the A’ Level schools having sciences or some subjects being compulsory, I would like to say that it is not true that all people have the ability to do sciences. To some of our children who do not have that ability, this is very big problem and –(Member timed out)

5.21
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The concerns of the petitioners have been mainly on the little amount of Shs 47,000 which is given as capitation grant and the late releases, with arrears sometimes not being given to them at all. 

I want to say that this is all about budget implementation, where you find some sectors not being given priority and so they do not get money at all.  To the Minister of Education and Sports, why is it that after we have made a commitment at the end of the financial year, we realise that the budget has not been implemented to cover critical matters like this one? 

Government got into a memorandum of understanding with private schools because they realised they did not have capacity to absorb all the students under the USE programme. Therefore, I think there is need for us to commit ourselves to fulfilling our obligations. Government has also failed on other obligations, for example on counterpart funding to donors, which has affected the operations of our partners. This matter must be taken seriously, Madam Speaker.

Shs 47,000 for a student in a private school is not enough. I want this Parliament to note that this is just Government support to the students in private schools. At the end of the day, after paying this Shs 47,000, the students in boarding schools have got to meet the cost of boarding facilities and feeding, yet this money is little. In the circumstances, I would like to request Government to increase this money to between Shs 80,000 or Shs 100,000 so that their budget is released –(Member timed out)

5.24
MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for presenting such a good report. I would like to say that the report is timely because it has come at a time when we are handling the budgeting process. Since as Parliament we execute the function of appropriating the budget, there is need for us to make a commitment to support the Ministry of Education and Sports’ budget when it presents its budget on the Floor of Parliament. I am saying this because according to the report, the challenges are very overwhelming. 

Actually, there are places the committee did not reach; for instance, in the islands there are places that cannot be reached. I represent a constituency which has islands which do not have a single secondary school and there is no private investor who can establish a secondary school in the islands. These are challenges that require Government input. But who is Government? Parliament is part of Government. So, Parliament must make a commitment. 

As Members of Parliament, we should come in to support the Ministry of Education and identify our priorities. If in the coming budget we resolve to support the Ministry of Education, then give it the necessary funding to make sure that all these challenges are addressed. But if we talk about helping private schools yet even Government schools also need help, then we will not make any progress if we cannot commit ourselves as Members of Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, on the unfair distribution of funds in private schools, especially those implementing USE, the unfairness comes in because of the limited funds that we have. We must ask ourselves, “Where is our priority?” I read in the papers today that Government is planning to cut on the budget for the Ministry of Health. All this is caused by the limited funding that we have. (Member timed out)

5.26
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to appreciate the report from the committee but with some observations. 

On page 6, in comparison to the recommendations on page 9, I think it is high time we looked at deleting subjects which cannot create jobs. If we have deleted political education, then let us do away with it. Developed countries prioritise subjects. Let us not be seen to be protecting people just because they went to school to read political education. Some of such subjects causing mismatch combinations at senior 5 and 6 do not transform into any career. 

Madam Speaker, I would like us to do away with political education. I am a teacher and I know that teachers are innovative and teachers are flexible.  The teachers of political education can be accommodated in the patriotism clubs being created by Government. We would make sure that the teacher heading the patriotism class studied political education because they know a lot about it. 

Secondly, we should de-politicise patriotism classes and make sure we use them for the students to learn about their heritage, to know about their country and even compel schools to prepare at least one trip for domestic tourism for these students to learn about their country. We would learn a lot about the different cultures so that we appreciate diversity other than Batoro fighting Bakiga, the Bakiga fighting the Banyoro and so forth. We should make sure that these students embrace diversity so that in their adult age, they would be ready to accommodate each other and live together as Ugandans. 

Madam Speaker, this is the time we should assist NCDC to start deleting subjects which do not amount to anything as far as career is concerned. Why should we have an A’ level student offering a combination like PIG, which is Physics, Islamic Education and Geography? I do not hate any of those subjects, but what does it amount to? This is a mismatch, whether they pass or not. We have seen them pass with distinction but we fail to advise them on the next stage. 

Madam Speaker, NCDC, Parliament and especially the Committee on Education and the Ministry of Education should sit and look at the subjects our children are offering and make sure that we have a group of subjects that will transform this country into a developed country. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, because of the importance of the subject, I added an extra one hour. But let me ask the minister to quickly wind up. 

5.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Muyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The committee did a wonderful job and I want to thank them for the good paper. I also want to thank the honourable Members of Parliament for the interest and the good ideas they have generated from within the report. It is very clear that you have a lot of interest in our sector and we do appreciate that. 

As I said, the report is very good. As a ministry, we have already gone very far in implementing many of the recommendations the committee has come up with. I would like to mention a few. About the late release of the funds, I want to assure this House that that issue is now history. Money is being released on time. This term, for example, money reached schools in early February and that was the time when schools opened. The same thing is going to happen come second term. I just pray that nothing happens to change that. 

Members wanted to know why the delay, but in the interest of time, I do not want to go into the details. When it comes to the review of the Education Act - We are seriously reviewing the Education Act and the issues raised in here are some of those we are taking into consideration, among many others. 

On the curriculum review, Members are already aware that we started reviewing the curriculum; we started with primary and we are also reviewing lower secondary. Quite a lot of things have taken place. Things like political education, physical education, vocationalisation, and what hon. Kabahenda was talking about on deleting some subjects that cause a mismatch, are all being catered for under the new curriculum review. All we ask for is support from the House when the policy statement of our docket comes on the Floor. 

On the memorandum of understanding, we are trying to consider how we shall go about it. But computer – (Interruption)

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. The clarification I seek from you is on the direct releases of funds for the Kampala schools. I know that for the rural schools, you release money direct to their accounts. But for Kampala schools, I know that money goes to KCCA and then it can stay there for months before it reaches the schools. I want to ask why you have not done the same with the Kampala schools as you do for rural schools. 

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, the position is that now money goes directly to school accounts but for Kampala schools, it goes through KCCA account. This caused us a few problems and we are studying it. I think very soon we shall come up with a position that will enable our schools within Kampala not to suffer the way they are suffering. 

Many people have talked about computers. The ministry has a very good plan to make sure that our schools have connected computers. We are being helped by Uganda Communications Commission. As you are all aware –(Interruptions) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you vacate the Chamber with your telephone?

DR MUYINGO: As you are all aware, this is something we cannot do within one day; this has been phased. We have started with Government schools. We have not covered the entire country but the plan is in place. Where there is no electricity, we have made arrangements to provide solar panels. 

My brother, hon. Wafula Oguttu, said that we are not co-ordinated. This is not true, Madam Speaker. The Ministry of Education is working hand in hand with the Ministry of ICT. Officers from the ministry sit down with officers from the ICT ministry and they agree on how they are going to move. Of course, there are areas where computers have been sent but they have not been able to secure money for the solar system. It happens even in our families where you are able to buy sugar and salt comes later. But the commitment is there and we are going to do it in phases. 

When it comes to the unit cost, these children in private schools are all Ugandans and they are our children and I am sure Government would want everybody to get as much as we need. However, the limiting factor, as it is on the computers, is the resources, the amount of money you give to the ministry. If, in the budget you are about to pass, you give me all the money to increase to whatever is needed, then we shall give it out, but the resource envelope is what is limiting us. 

I think vocationalisation has also been accommodated in the new curriculum adjustments. Many colleagues have been talking about USE schools in every subcounty and there about 118 subcounties that have not got these USE schools –(Interjections)- sub counties; I will check the figures. But, Madam Speaker, as I said, Government has a plan to have a USE school in each and every sub county. The limiting factor is the financial resources. 

On grant-aiding, the policy is in place. It costs about Shs 115 million to grant-aid one school. Whenever we prepare our budgetary requirements, we include some money but when the Ministry of Finance comes back after the many meetings, there is always no money for grant-aiding but we do sympathise. There are usually some areas that are doing well. That is why we have picked on private schools to come to our rescue. 

Somebody asked about the criteria. Universal secondary education first of all was meant to be provided in government-aided schools. However, in areas where we do not completely have a government school to provide USE facilities, we asked our stakeholders, the investors in private schools, to come to our rescue. Of course, we visit, assess and then ask you for USE facilities. 

Hon. Ssimbwa said that head counting is a waste of money and time. I think this is not true. Head counting has greatly helped our ministry to check the very many losses that Government would have suffered under this programme – the ghost teachers, ghost students, name it. He says that less money is sent after the exercise. I think, hon. Ssimbwa, you need to crosscheck your data here because money has been sent after this headcount and according to the figures that have come from the field. However, what is possible, and I think this could be the reason –(Interjection) 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

DR MUYINGO: One last thing about career guidance; it is very important at this stage that our children are properly guided. The ministry has a very big department in charge of career guidance. We have prepared a lot of materials; we are putting a lot of emphasis on career guidance in schools. We need your support too. If you happen to be passing by our ministry, go to our department and pick these materials and also join in the exercise of career guidance. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will ask the Committee on Government Assurances to follow up the commitments made by the minister and keep us updated. 

THE PUBLIC ORDER MANAGEMENT BILL, 2011

5.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, the last time we deliberated on the Public Order Management Bill, we were at committee stage. So, I would like to move a motion that we move to committee stage.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the minister is right; we were at committee stage but you recall that there was a report he had and he was supposed to distribute copies and pass it to Members but he has not done so. That is where we left off last time. He had come up with a lot of definitions and a lot of changes; you had really changed the entire Bill and you had your own new law. So, where are those documents because you were the one responsible?

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Speaker, I recall you adjourned on two outstanding issues - agreeing on the definition of regulate and on public meetings. I was going to present that during the committee stage. So, I would like to move that we move to committee stage and then I can circulate the copies. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us move to committee stage.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we do not have quorum. (Laughter) 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PUBLIC ORDER MANAGEMENT BILL, 2011

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chairperson, the copies are here –

MR NADALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the minister is right; the copies are here but the Public Order Management Bill is a Bill for everybody and I think it would be better that some of this information should have been given to us long ago. 

We are about 28 members here and, Madam Chairperson, to pass the law we need one third. Now the minister is distributing the report; don’t you think it would be better for us to read them and internalise them and we give to other members and then we can proceed? I know we are time pressed but, Madam Chairperson, look at it. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: The problem is that when you go with them, you will misplace them and then you will say next week that you did not get them.

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chairperson, we were deliberating on clause 3. That is where we were asked to come with a clearer definition. On page 2 of the document we are circulating, that is the new attempt we have come up with on the elaboration of clause 3 and it reads, “The underlying principle of managing public order is to regulate the exercise of the freedom to assemble and to demonstrate together with others peacefully and unarmed and to petition in accordance with Article 29(1) (d) and Article 43 of the Constitution.” The justification is: to clearly provide for the purpose of the Bill and the constitutional spirit in which the Bill is being promoted.

Specifically, we were asked to define what “regulate” means, and this is what we have come up with: “‘Regulate’ means to adjust conduct or behaviour to the requirements of the Constitution.” Justification: to clarify the meaning of “regulate” within the context of Article 29(1) (d) and 43 of the Constitution. This definition was got in consultation with the Attorney-General and they got it from Black’s Law Dictionary.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Chair, the minister wants to delete the entire clause and substitute it with another new item. I think it would be better if he went and harmonised this with the committee’s view. The chairperson of the committee is nowhere to be seen. This shows that the minister has not attempted to meet the committee. 

Given the numbers, I want to move that the minister should take this to the committee and harmonise and then bring it to all of us. If you look at it, there are many amendments - new things that the minister is inserting - and it would be of interest to the committee to study it further.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chair, have you looked at the proposed amendments by the minister?

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you so much, Madam Chair. First of all, I would like to apologise. I have just learnt that the item was coming on and I had to come back. I deeply apologise, Madam Chair. Having said that, may I ask for two minutes to consult my chief whip?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we stand over for a night?

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chair, we did co-ordinate with the members of the committee; the chair was not around and he delegated his vice-chairman, hon. Odoi, with whom we co-ordinated on these definitions. Hon. Odoi is here; I think he can speak for himself.

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Chairperson and Members, I would really request, on behalf of Government, that we stand over this for a night and we discuss it on Tuesday next week.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we then direct the committee, if there is anything you have not yet done with the minister, to use this time to finalise.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I would like to agree that as a committee we shall be briefed and on Tuesday we should be prepared to come and present the amendments. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, do not throw away your copies; read and come back with them.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Chair, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House was not able to deliberate on the amendments and adjourned for a night. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)


PRESENTATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS REGULATIONS 2011

THE SPEAKER: I have given an ultimatum to the committee on the money laundering issue. It must come before we close the session.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Kasule): Honourable members, this is a report – (Interruption).

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the copies are not here. I think my brother, Ssebunya, was not ready.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, the copies are here; big as they are, they are here.

MR KASULE: Honourable members, as they distribute the regulations, now we have the committee report, which he must also distribute, but he is alone so I do not know how he is going to do it. At the moment, let us be attentive and listen to the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Regulations, 2012.

Rt Hon. Speaker, the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Regulations were on 6 September 2012 laid before Parliament for approval as provided for under Section 96 of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act. The Committee on Finance has, in accordance with rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure, scrutinised the regulations and now presents a report to the House.

The methodology is brief. The object of the regulations: Overall, the object of the revised regulations is to align the regulations to the amendment made to the Act by the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (Amendment) Act, 2010 and specifically to:

a) 	Ensure efficiency of the public procurement process by reducing the procurement lead times. 
b) 	Ensure that the regulations are user friendly by splitting them into 11 sets.
c) 	Ensure that the regulations on procurement of consultancy services have been made more comprehensive to ensure value for money. 
d) 	To provide for the modalities for the use of force account, which would enable Government to use its own resources for undertaking specific works.
e) 	To provide for regulations for procurement of medicines for the National Medical Stores and other procuring and disposing entities that procure medicines. 
f) 	To provide for simplified regulations for the procuring and disposing entities outside Uganda.
g) 	To promote local and small enterprises through preference and reservation schemes.

Honourable members, the big book includes the regulations and I pray that you keep these books as they have amendments. We shall go to the committee stage and amend those regulations as recommended by the committee.

Honourable members, these are the observations that we made from the 11 regulations- (Interruption)

MR SSIMBWA: Rt Hon. Speaker, we are not following what our colleague is reading because we do not have that copy of the report neither do we have a copy of the regulations.

MR SEBUNYA: You have a copy of the regulations. As I was reading, I thought you were going to get the report-

THE SPEAKER: You do not have the report?

MR SSIMBWA: Madam Speaker, we are talking about the report, which he is reading.

MR SEBUNYA: Honourable members, I beg that you cease fire; the report is here. 

THE SPEAKER: Listen for today then you can study.

MR SEBUNYA: Honourable members, these are the observations made by the committee: 
The amendments seek to ensure that the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Regulations are user friendly and are therefore divided into 11 sets for ease of reference.

Regulation No. 1 is the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Regulations. These regulations provide for powers and functions of the Authority. I am on page 2.

Regulation No. 2 (4.1.2) is the public procurement and disposal of public assets, which considers the procuring and disposing entities. These regulations provide for the roles of different structures within the Procuring and Disposing Entities (PDEs), that is, accounting officers, contract committees and the procuring and disposing entity.

Regulation No.3 is public procurement and disposal of public assets, which considers the rules and methods for procurement of supplies, works and non-consultancy services. These regulations provide for initiation of procurement requirements, methods of procurement, procurement rules and processes, solicitation documents, bidding for supplies, works and non-consultancy services.

Regulation No.4 is the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (Evaluation) Regulations, which considers the evaluation process. 

Regulation No. 5 is on consultancy services. Regulation No.6 considers disposal of public assets. Regulation No.7 considers procurement of medicines. Regulation No.8 considers procuring and disposing entities outside Uganda. Regulation No. 9 considers contracts. Regulation No. 10 is on administrative reviews. Regulation No. 11 considers force account mechanisms.

The committee observes that to reduce on delays that are currently typical of the procurement processes, these regulations seek to improve on timelines set within the regulations; for example, the timeline given for the authority to respond to:
a) 	Deviation from use of standard documents;
b) 	Accreditation of alternative public procurement and disposal forms;
c) 	Conduct of evaluation; 
d) 	Approvals and response required by the authority.

However, the committee recommends that these timelines need further improvement to remove delays in the procurement process and will propose amendments to this effect.

Observation No. 3 is on regulation No. 5, the rules and methods for procurement of supplies, works and non-consultancy services. It provides that an accounting officer should only award a contract if the bid price is lower or in tandem with the prevailing market price. The committee observes that this is a good practice. However, in case of price change there will be endless retendering. Price changes take place in a very short period of time and continuous retendering will greatly stifle business. 

The committee recommends, therefore, that the regulation should allow for re-assessment of contracts using the prevailing market price as a result of passage of time. When the re-assessment determines the market price is no longer valid and is higher than the best evaluated bidder and the original assessment, the accounting officer should be allowed to sign the contract.

The Authority should issue appropriate guidelines to accounting officers on how to determine the market price.

Observation No.4 is on procurement of medicines. The committee observed that section 40(a) of the Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2003 mandates the Authority to provide special regulations for the procurement of medicines. However, the committee notes that the supplies are not clearly defined in the revised regulations. The committee proposes that amendments be made to ensure that medical supplies are clearly identified and procurement of medicines is not subject to delays and bureaucracies characteristic of the procurement process currently.

Observation No.5 is on transfer of procurement officers within the Public Service. The committee observed that major scandals involving misuse of public funds involve procurement officers. It is important that similar to the policy of internal auditors, procurement officers should not be stationed in one ministry. They should be centrally appointed and rotated every two years. This is intended to discourage compromise, which breeds from familiarisation with service providers.

Observation No. 6 is on bid securing declaration and bid securities. The committee notes that regulations now provide for bid securing declarations to be used under the restricted and requested for quotations or proposals - those are smaller procurements. This is an alternative to a requirement for a bid security used in open bidding. 

The Authority should issue guidelines on key documents to be read out at such an opening to ensure no bidder colludes with the procuring and disposing unit staff to smuggle in documents much later after the opening. The committee further notes that the original bids should not be kept by the procurement officers but by the accounting officers.

Revision of the Standard Bidding Documents 

Under the evaluation regulations, the committee observes that to ensure transparency and fairness of the evaluation of bids, the entire evaluation criteria should be replicated in the standard bidding documents and disclosed to all bidders.

Regulation of Force on Account

Regulation No. 3 on the force on account regulation provides for the determination of direct, indirect and overhead costs, which includes costs for personnel and equipment.

The committee observes that staff and equipment are a cost yet these should not be. The committee recommends that the provision is likely to encourage accounting officers to inflate costs so as to defeat the application of force on account mechanism. The Authority should issue guidelines on the costing on direct, indirect and overhead costs.

Contract Management

Under the regulation on contracts, the committee observes that hiring of third-party consultants as contract managers is becoming very costly to Government. It is noted that Government should build capacity to manage these contracts internally. The procurement and disposing entities should be mandated to prove value for money and proper justification for outsourcing the contract management roles.

Disposal Regulation
The committee notes that disposal regulations provide for a donation as the last resort method of disposal. Under regulation No. 11, public officers are now restricted and cannot use this method because of likely abuse. However, the committee notes that there is need for a clear Government policy on disposal towards sitting tenants and current users. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the regulations are in 11 pieces. I think members would want to look at them in relation to the report. So, I propose that we defer debate on this matter until Tuesday so that you have enough time to look at the regulations themselves and the possible amendments. 

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, I am grateful that we have considered the report. However, PPDA was only able to print about 80 copies of these voluminous rules. In the circumstances, I plead with members not to take these voluminous copies home or that they do not leave them at home if they carry them out of here. That will help us save on the few copies. 

Madam Speaker, I also beg that on Tuesday, we begin with these rules; we need to consider them as a House to help people know what takes place at the procurement unit.

THE SPEAKER: Can I also add my appeal that you do not throw the copies away. Please come back with them on Tuesday; we gave you a bag, you can carry it in that small bag.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I can see the acting Leader of Government Business smiling, but apart from that, I think PPDA should make enough copies for all members. We are about 375 members and we need such number of copies of these regulations. I want to plead with members to read these regulations from first to the last page. If you do not, your hands will be tied and you know where much of the corruption is; it occurs at procurement. So, I kindly beg you to read. 

Madam Speaker, I think we need more copies before we debate these regulations. I wish you could do more over the weekend. Actually, if possible the Leader of Government Business should organise a workshop to handle this.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, these regulations are holding up a lot of activities in the economy. So, it is really important that we deal with and conclude them. So, please read through the document over the weekend so that we can conclude them next week.

Is there anybody from the Pan African Parliament? What? They have a session? Okay, honourable members, it seems our colleagues are not here to present their two reports on the activities of the Pan African Parliament. So, I hereby adjourn the House to Tuesday next week at 2 O’clock. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 6.12 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 7 May at 2.00pm.)
