
Thursday, 16 May 2013

Parliament met at 2.43 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As I said yesterday, there is a lot of work. We should have started at exactly 2.00 O’clock. I encourage you to see the Speaker before the time when the Speaker is supposed to come to the House. That is part of what caused the delay. When you are dressed and ready to leave for the House, Members keep coming in with issues and that causes delay. So, honourable members, please, observe that. 

If you want to see the Speaker, the Speaker is always there from morning. You can come early enough so that the time allotted for plenary is observed. I apologise for today, in particular. 

Honourable members, you are aware that today is a day indicated for private Members to have some little activity. So, I will allow the first few minutes of this afternoon for those who came to the Speaker to make some short submissions. 

2.46
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I move under Rule 50 of our Rules of Procedure to raise a matter of national importance. Uganda’s focus now is on the energy sector in an attempt to rejuvenate industrialisation, thus leading to job creation and in doing so we believe to create a middle class citizenry. 

Mbarara Municipality has been lucky to have the only steel rolling mill in Mbarara town. This mill employs more than 300 workers from the municipality and it is also consuming all the scrap from western Uganda. The factory I am talking about is called BMTF, along Kakoba Road and it has been functioning for the last 17 years. 

When UEB was supplying power, this factory never had any power cuts. But when Umeme took over power supply to Ugandans, they started cutting off power to this factory and finally, this factory has not been working for the last two months. Imagine 300 youths without jobs in a municipality like Mbarara; the issue of iron-bar hit-men will go up. 

Secondly, when Umeme was cutting off power from this factory, they did not negotiate. I am told Umeme was imported into this country, they do not negotiate; theirs is a business. Actually, last week, their staff were locked out of Kitagata Hospital when they came to cut off electricity from the hospital with patients on oxygen. 

Mr Speaker, I am reliably informed that the salaries of the managers of Umeme are bigger than even your salary, yet you are the Speaker of the whole of this country. Even ministers cannot earn that money but managers of Umeme are very rich because of the money they milk from Ugandans. 

So, I want clarification from the Minister of Energy and the Minister for Investment. This investor in Mbarara has threatened to close the factory and go to Tanzania. I know that Tanzania, at one time, privatised water and power supply. When the Government of Tanzania threatened to send them away because they were killing their industries, they put back water supply. 

So, let the Minister of Energy explain to this House the arrangement that our Government made with Umeme to increase the tariffs and to cut off vital areas in this country and yet, we want to industrialise the country. Right now, the moment you cut off electricity supply to BMTF, when the man has already been producing, it means he has to lose about Shs 7 million because he has to start afresh.

Mr Speaker, I beg this House and the Minister of Energy; is there any way you can reverse the agreement you made with Umeme? Did you sell this country? UEB did not do what Umeme is doing and the money is being siphoned from this country to other countries; our industries are collapsing. 

I am very happy to make this submission when H.E the Vice-President of Uganda is listening to me. What has gone wrong? Help us. My factory is not working - I want you to help me. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. The point is clear. 

2.50
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. He has raised something very important. That factory neighbours Ntungomo District and we also benefit from it. It is unfortunate that it has been closed. I remember vividly that in NRC, we passed a resolution that those people who have their money, especially local investors, should go to the rural areas and invest there. The agreement was that on utilities like electricity and water, they should be charged 50 percent. 

I am wondering what happened to that resolution because NRC made a decision.

When Umeme took over, that was not considered; no wonder that factory is closed now. I think that factory takes about 4 megawatts of power and the whole of Mbarara is 5 megawatts. That means it consumes a lot of power. And the agreement was that when any rural factory consumes a lot of power, then it should pay less and those which consume less should pay more. The minister needs to explain that.

Another issue on which I want clarification is, the Speaker set up a select committee on Umeme - that was a long time ago. One time, the committee was even put on the Order Paper and none of the Members was in the House. We have heard rumours that some of these Members were given “something”. We need to be explained to, what is happening to the select committee, which was to look into Umeme?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you owe it to this House to respect it and its Members. You do not bring allegations of that nature to the Floor of Parliament unless you have proof. You know the rules, so, please, withdraw.

MS KABASHARIRA: Mr Speaker, I withdraw the statement but it has been heard. We need that report to come in whichever form so that it can clear these allegations that we have in our minds because Umeme affects all of us. We need to be protected and it can only be this Parliament. If we lament and the people outside lament, what will be the use of Parliament? 

Mr Speaker also -(Interruption)

MR SSEMUGABA: Thank you for giving way, hon. Kabasharira. Mr Speaker, the Ad hoc Committee on Energy presented a report to this Parliament but it needs your indulgence to put it on the Order Paper so that we discuss it. There are a lot of recommendations within that report, which can save this country from further calamities.

MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you for the information. I hope it is taken and that will help us.

Mr Speaker, I also wanted to raise something on Umeme giving shares to NSSF or NSSF buying shares from Umeme. We need clarification on this. It was raised and it died a natural death - people taking our workers’ money. Umeme is a dead deal. It is killing us and not helping us and then NSSF also gives shares - how did this come about? How can we be helped for our workers’ money not to just be taken by anybody anyhow? Thank you. (Mr Tashobya rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, let us finish with this issue. This is still on -

MR TASHOBYA: On Umeme.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Umeme is not on the Floor now; it is Mbarara factory - 

2.55
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to add my voice to a matter raised by hon. Dr Bitekyerezo in regard to the factory in Mbarara. My colleague, hon. Kabasharira, has talked about its usefulness to the people of Mbarara who neighbour Ntungamo and I want to say, not only are we talking about employment but also the cost of building because most of our people get building materials from Mbarara. It would have an adverse effect on us if Government did not address the matter of that factory.

The question of Umeme should even be looked at as a matter of urgency because right now, I have a gentleman in my home called Mr Babigumira. He is opening up a factory in his area near Nyamunuka. We are talking about industrialisation and value addition. The man has done what it takes to have a factory working but he cannot get power. 

You go to institutions; some institutions, even Government institutions like polytechnics, which need power to operate and run programmes, cannot get power. So, the Minister for Energy should come and tell the country where Umeme is taking us. How is Umeme supporting industrialisation? How are we supporting our environment if we cannot supply power to the people who are even willing to pay for that power, let alone Government institutions? 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sometimes, I wonder what is happening with this country of ours. In Kasese, we have more than three power generation plants. Kasese Cobalt generates its own power; Kilembe Mines generates its own power and there is also Turonda Power, which generates power. I want to bring it to the attention of this House that Kasese Cobalt and Kilembe Mines generate excess power. At one point- the hon. Minister for Defence will bear me witness- Kasese Cobalt wanted to give power to some people in Kasese town and Umeme refused. 

I am saying this because it is a shorter distance from Kasese to Mbarara and I do not know why there cannot be efforts to make sure that power can be tapped from Kasese and it comes to Mbarara. What is the problem? And especially –(Interruption) I take the information. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information on information? (Laughter) Hon. Member, actually you have given your information. Let the Member finish.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, I need to conclude my point.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You were giving information; you were not debating. 

MR NZOGHU: I did not want to be selfish to my colleague but I want to conclude my submission, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is now a submission? 

MR NZOGHU: In information form. There is one time, last month, when some Umeme staff came to my home very early in the morning before 8.00 O’clock and I just saw them going to the metre but the person left without even giving a comment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is no longer information. 

MR TASHOBYA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As I conclude, we really want help from the minister responsible for Umeme. If Umeme cannot replace transformers, for example, in Ihunga Polytechnic, which is a Government institution; if Umeme cannot supply power to factories and industries, then where are the priorities of Umeme? I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will need to close this with the hon. Member for Bukooli Central.

3.00
MR PHILIP WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is sad to hear from hon. Bitekyerezo that a factory has closed. We should not be closing a factory processing steel in our country at this time because we need steel. The government supports a lot of foreigners to set up business in our country; gives them free land, and access to land. Government should be giving more support to indigenous capitalists more than these foreigners. So, we should call upon the government to ensure that this factory reopens. It is a similar case as Sembule Steel Mills in Kampala; it is also going through a lot of problems. It has been presented here in this House. We do not know what Government has done. 

In the Bugiri area, which is one of the areas supplying most of the rice to this country, the processors are always switching off their equipment. They cannot process continuously because of Umeme. There is load shedding in the Bugiri-Busia area. It has never stopped the load shedding system, which was there previously. People there do not know what the problem is or why the Bugiri area must always be experiencing load shedding.

Maybe, the minister will clarify why Bugiri and Iganga-Busia areas are not part of the Umeme grid that we know. We know how Umeme was set up; it was phony. The report, which was brought here, had a lot of exposé on Umeme but it has been shelved to our dismay. We call upon your Office, Mr Speaker, that this report is brought to this House and we debate it because among the recommendations was the disbanding of Umeme because of the way it came in. You will be surprised that a whole committee set up to inquire on an institution like this brings a report and someone somewhere sits on it and does not want us to discuss it –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Wafula Oguttu. Mr Speaker, that report is listed on our Order Paper as number 16. I was a Member of that committee and we did present a report to this House. What remains is for it to be debated and we adopt it. All these issues that Members are raising here are contained in that report and one of the recommendations in that report is nationalising Umeme. So-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, Umeme is a private company and a concessionaire. The company that you are talking about is the electricity distribution company.

MR OKUPA: Sorry, Mr Speaker, but the report was from the ad hoc committee investigating the electricity sub sector and in that report, we wanted to nationalise the energy sector.

So, Mr Speaker, if that report can be brought forward and we adopt it, I think it will address a number of issues because it is not only limited to the issues, which Members are raising here. I think that is what we should call upon and we adopt that report. Thank you.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much. I am winding up, Mr Speaker. I think we should call upon the government to consider setting up a fund for industrialisation from which people can borrow, set up industries and pay back. Otherwise, this - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, I want to close this debate. Hon. Wafula Oguttu, finish then the minister will respond.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My last submission was calling upon the government to start off an industrial fund from which we can go to borrow funds to develop our industry, and be a genuine middle class and not this bureaucratic primitive accumulators we have who steal Government resources and call themselves middle class. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Minister -

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS (Mr John Byabagambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As much as I share his views of the government putting up a fund for the local industrialists to borrow from, we must appreciate that the government has been supporting even local investors. The information I wanted to give him, which has now turned out to be a contribution is on the iron factory they are talking about in Mbarara. I remember very well that Government supported that factory using the money from Privatisation Unit. Why he did not proceed - I do not think it is Umeme; I do not think it is electricity.

You talk about Sembule. It is Government of Uganda who gave a guarantee to Sembule to get money from PTA and they borrowed that money. Sembule could not proceed from where they started, reason being that they lacked financial and managerial discipline, which the government -(Interjections) - Let me conclude.

I happened to be in the private sector and I have to tell you the truth that some of us applied and the government supported us. Those who were willing to work, who were hardworking and disciplined continued and we made it but for those who did not make it - 

I think we should not look at the question of electricity only. Yes, I know electricity plays a very big factor and that some of the factories have closed because of lack of energy. I agree, we used to have a shortage of energy but at the same time, our power is expensive. Truthfully, Government of Uganda has tried its best to support even the local industrialists but they need to style up. If they fail to style up, they will not take off however much money you give them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members, we will hold it there. A substantial debate on this matter will come when that report is brought. There are three other issues to be raised by Members. Hon. Minister -

3.08
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank Members for the critical issues they have raised in regard to the Mwebesa Steel factory in Mbarara. I will pass on this information to the Minister for Energy so that she can be able to establish exactly why Umeme is not in a position to supply power to this important steel mill in Mbarara and so that she can be in a position to intervene between the two: Umeme and the Mwebesa Steel factory so that we can get it back to life. I am going to do this.

Regarding the many issues that have been raised in regard to Umeme, hon. Okupa was right. There was a report tabled here by hon. Oboth Oboth and in the business to follow item number 16, this is shown. I am sure the debate will come up so that many issues are attended to by Government. Where decisions are required, as Government, we will be in a position to respond so that we can be able to put the sector right and so that industries receive reliable power supply and to continue operating in the manner that they are supposed to.

Regarding the important matter that was raised by hon. Wafula Oguttu of providing support particularly affordable credit to industries, hon. Byabagambi has provided some useful information but I will also be in a position to raise this with both the Minister for Industry and Minister for Finance. I am sure at that stage, they will be in a position to provide us with information regarding the operations of Uganda Development Bank and other financing arrangements, which Government has come up with to support the indigenous private sector and other industrialists in the country. I thank you.

3.11
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter of national importance I wanted to bring to the attention of this House is about the National Sports Competitions League of primary schools all over the country, which usually take place every year.

First and foremost, I want to ask this House to join me in congratulating teachers and pupils of Agago District for performing excellently and emerging number one in the just concluded exercise that was concluded on Sunday.

Mr Speaker, you remember last year, the same thing happened when there was a music festival competition at the National Theatre. Agago District emerged number one. So, I congratulate my people; we are very proud of them because this is an indication that Agago is an overall winner in everything.

Allow me, in a special way, to thank the district leadership because it is not easy for districts to bring participants for national competitions due to lack of funding because the Ministry of Education does not provide enough funds for sports in schools and districts. So, districts have to labour to ensure that they squeeze moneys from within other sectors to facilitate such activities. I also thank the teachers and pupils who made it happen.

I request the Ministry of Education to accord the people of this country the attention they deserve in terms of sports. It is very difficult for children, especially at primary level, to excel in sports if there is inadequate funding. This House appropriates money every year under the Ministry of Education, specifically for the sports vote. But schools and districts do not receive sufficient funds. Even the little that is sent to the districts cannot enable them to bring their schools for national competitions.

It was unfortunate that this function that was concluded on Sunday - for a whole week, there was no minister who surfaced to encourage the children in Mukono! For sure, a political word of encouragement to the children and their teachers would have gone a long way in motivating them. I appeal to the Ministry of Education to accord sports the time and finances it deserves if we are to promote excellence in sports. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we seem to be completely misapplying this rule because some of these matters are really not urgent. Please, let us stick to urgent matters that qualify under this.

3.16
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, keep it brief.

DR EPETAIT: I am rising on an issue of national importance. This is a matter of the expulsion of four students from Usuk Secondary School, a number of who are in candidate classes. Now that students are about to get back to school, I am worried that these students are going to miss out.

These students were expelled on the 8th of April, on allegations that they misbehaved by participating in partisan politics, which according to that school’s regulations, is rule number 24. What actually happened is that there was an inter-class football competition at the school. The class that won decided to call themselves the “Football Defending Champions” and they wrote on the blackboard the letters “F.D.C.” And for that reason, they were expelled. But I am wondering how students could summarily be expelled merely for writing those letters on the blackboard. One wonders if the same students would have been expelled had they written the letters U.P.C, D.P. or N.R.M. 

And when you look at the rule on which the school based its decision to expel these students, it says, “The head teacher and the school disciplinary committee may amend the school rules and regulations from time to time depending on the changing circumstances and the amendments will be communicated in writing to all students and parents.” Moreover, this rule 24 mentions nothing to do with partisan politics. 

So, Mr Speaker, I would like to request the Ministry of Education to prevail on the administration because these students’ future is at stake if nothing is done. They are Ekellot Martin, Onyang Joseph, Obwakori Dominic and Okello Alex. I call for urgent attention to this matter. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That is indeed urgent. Does somebody want to make a response to it?

3.19
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Dr Epetait for raising this matter. Obviously, nobody in this country has ever been punished for belonging to a political party. The best I can say for now is that I will take it up with the Minister of Education so that the ministry can investigate this matter and provide the correct position on this matter. Thank you.

3.20
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. On 5th May, my people – the people of Kabukongote- were invaded by Karen Kayonga together with Joviah Saleh, who is a prominent figure in this country. They drove 150 head of cattle to displace the people of Burongo over the land that is measuring four and a half square miles, which they had purportedly bought from Uganda Investment Authority. 

However, this land has 1,750 occupants. And when these people arrived, the residents resisted but the Police together with the Army directed that these cattle be driven into Bigobyamugenyi, which is an important historical archaeological site to this country, purportedly, to make them rest for onward movement. But since then, it is coming to two weeks and they are still there. Last week, the regional police commander together with the district police commander went to the area and indeed, allowed them to be protected by police. 

But another issue of concern is that, these cattle en route were accompanied by men in army uniform that were clearly members of the UPDF and were meant to cause fear to the people and subdue them. The people there are still in a state of uncertainty because these are very powerful people and by trying to evict the occupants forcefully using cattle is a matter of deep regret.  

Secondly, when they attempted to move these cattle to the forest reserve, people resisted because late last year, the Inspector-General of Police had taken there the Police battle wagons to chase all people from the forest reserve and from these archaeological sites. But now, we are witnessing the same Police protecting the same. Once this country loses such national assets, the Bachwezi Archaeological sites may never be regained. And why is Government applying double standards? When the local people go to settle in there, they are forcefully evicted with tear gas, rubber bullets and all that. But once big persons in this country do the same, it is normal; they are protected by the people who are supposed to maintain law and order. Fortunately, the people who are concerned are here.

2.23
THE MINISTER FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Theodore Ssekikubo for raising this matter. It is only coming to our attention right now; it is a matter that we had not been privy to up to now. We have a number of land dispute problems and this one is going to be handled also. You are aware there is a committee headed by a whole minister of state. So, this is going to be brought to the attention of the committee so that it can be expeditiously attended to. 

As regards Bigobyamugenyi, this information is going to be taken up by the Minister for Tourism; I do not know whether you had already brought the matter to her attention. But I am sure once she gets all the facts, she should be in a position to competently deal with the matter. 

Equally so, the matter of the soldiers, people who were in UPDF uniforms, I am sure the Minister of Defence, once availed with all the information, will be able to take up this matter. He has just heard for the first time that there was such an incident and I am sure he would want to be provided with all the information –(Interruption)

MS NAMARA: Thank you, honourable minister for giving way. I seek clarification. Recently, I was watching TV and I saw the Minister of State for Lands saying that other institutions like Police, RDCs and land committees are no longer functional. So, with the magnitude of the land problems – first of all, let me know whether that is a fact. 

And secondly, with the magnitude of the land disputes, how can people get to that committee; where is their office? Do we go to the Ministry of Lands?

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my friend hon. Migereko. I think the matter of defence was already mentioned. This is a very serious matter. Once an issue touches on the uniform of the national army and people carrying guns, then this cannot wait. 

The Minister of Defence is here and he has listened. The Army operates with intelligence – we cannot have a group of people marauding in army uniforms and guns and then you say, “We were not aware of that”. That means people can easily drive into town and takeover your Government when you are not aware. 

So, can the Minister of Defence stand up and assure this country – this matter of people moving around with guns, UPDF uniforms and animals is not only in Ssembabule it is also throughout the country. They have been in Nwoya; they have been in Arua in West Nile. They are all over Masindi. You cannot take the people of Uganda for a ride all the time. I think we deserve an explanation now that the Minister of Defence is present. Let him assure the country on what action he will take. 

MS OSSEGE: Mr Speaker, when you listen to the issue raised by hon. Ssekikubo, I think it is a matter of security. And as far as I am aware, there are very many organs responsible for security right from the village level in this country. How can it be that such a thing takes place in this country and the minister is not yet aware after two weeks? I want to know; are they still functional and are they in charge?

3.29
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): I thank you, Mr Speaker. May be, for avoidance of doubt, I think my colleague the Minister for Lands gave an answer, which I considered adequate. He stated clearly that hon. Ssekikubo has put the matter on record. We have heard it as Government and we are going to follow it up through investigation. 

So, I do not know what additional information, my brother hon. Okumu thinks I can give at this stage. When we hear an allegation, the natural process is that the allegation should be followed up, investigated and then a report given. That is the only way I understand we are going to handle that case. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, we rise on matters of national importance because as we speak now, they are there in the archaeological sites, they are being degraded under the protection of the Army and the Police. And that is on-going, not that it was an occurrence that went away. If we do that, then there would be no relevance of raising matters of national importance.

The gist is to raise awareness and action to remedy the situations undertaken. Other than that, the so-called matters of national importance would be in vain. That is why we raise them; it is a fact that the archaeological sites are degraded and the minister is here. It is a fact that the Environmental Protection Police is guarding these cows and the Minister for Internal Affairs is here busy on his iPad and when we talk of the Army, which is protecting these people, the Minister of Defence is here. 

So, these are matters that can be answered and we have an undertaking by Government rather than everybody shying away because big names are mentioned, nobody appears ready to take the initiative. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the whole essence of bringing these matters is that when they are brought, there are appropriate answers given to them. But an appropriate answer can be given if there is prior information. That is why, when you come with these matters in my Office, I normally try to reach the ministers to inform them that matters like these are coming up, please be there and respond to them; that is if you come to me early. You came to me when I was coming to the House, I did not have the opportunity to inform the ministers. They are getting the information now. 

So, to expect them to respond substantially on the matter you have just raised is expecting a bit much. It would be better for them to have prior information, then they could make phone calls and then come to Parliament with information that we can immediately speak about. That is the only way we can have responses that can inform the country on things we know that they do not know. That is what I always request of Members. Now, they have a perfect excuse, “We are going to investigate”. Is that the information you wanted? 

3.32
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In my constituency, the Central Government took over one of the roads from the district that runs from Muhororo, Bwikara, Kyeterekera to Ndaiga. It was one of the 10,000 kilometres that were taken over. While they were grading the road - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please, be helpful. When you came to me, you said the matter was about a Cholera outbreak –(Laughter)– and that is urgent. Why don’t you raise that one?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I am coming to that, Mr Speaker. They graded only 20 kilometres and left 13 kilometres undone. It is now four years and the road is not done. These 13 kilometres lead to a sub-county called Ndaiga below the escarpment. Recently, there was an outbreak of Cholera - (Laughter)- and it became extremely difficult for the district to reach this particular sub-county. As we talk, it cannot be accessed by people on foot; not even those on a motorcycle or “boda boda.”

I am requesting for an answer from the honourable minister in charge of roads. We have sufficient capacity as a district to respond to these emergencies but this road, which was pledged to my constituents, has made it extremely difficult to deliver, even for me to represent them effectively whenever I want to reach them. 

I would want a commitment as to when he is going to do it because it is overdue and we cannot continue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it going to be health or roads now?

3.35
THE MINISTER FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Mr Speaker, I thank my brother hon. Tinkasiimire for giving us that urgent information. I sincerely sympathise with him and I apologise for you not being able to take emergency requirements to your people. 

However, my ministry had 10,000 kilometres and another 10,000 was added - from 10 to 20 - and the money appropriated here was increased by only Shs 50 billion. I had 10,000 with a certain amount of money, which was not enough. You gave me another 10,000 km and you only added Shs 50 billion, which you can translate into Shs 5 million per kilometre. This money is not enough and so, what we are doing now with the money you are giving me is that we are concentrating on the major corridors to ensure those ones are functional 365 days of the year and then we progressively go and work on others - (Interruption)


MR WAFULU OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I seek some clarification from my colleague, the Minister for Works and Transport. I am the shadow minister for transport. From what he is telling the House, it would appear that the ministry is incapable of maintaining 10,000 kilometres of murram roads throughout the country and that unless we add more money - I do not know how much - the roads cannot be done. 

Meanwhile, somebody must maintain these roads because all these roads throughout the country have not been maintained for the last two years. We need the minister to come and tell the House how these roads are going to be maintained. I have one road in my district, which has not been maintained for three years. It is almost impassable now but it is a Central Government road and the district will not touch it because they say it is a Central Government road and yet the Central Government has no money to maintain it. So, are we going to ask God to come and maintain these roads?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I heard carefully the hon. Minister in charge of roads intimating that he has a backlog of so many kilometres. I am seeking clarification because in the road sector report, he indicates that the 13 kilometres, which we are talking about that go below Ndaiga sub-county were done. I am wondering- we appropriated this money and you indicate it as if it was done. When you appear here and you say the contrary, what are you trying to tell Ugandans?

Secondly, you have said that you are working on major corridor roads. I appreciate your predicament. But for God’s sake, this sub-county has over 15,000 people living down the escarpment and they hardly access Government services because of 13 kilometres and you want them to die? Are they not important to this country? Do they not vote? What are you trying to impute in this matter?

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, hon. Tinkasiimire. I want to assure you that neither my staff nor I have any intention to leave those people to die. We spend a lot of time; we put in a lot of effort to ensure that people are comfortable. I have been stating this many times. I need at least Shs 600 billion to have reasonable maintenance. You yourselves appropriate only Shs 280 billion. What do you want me to do? And let me tell hon. Tinkasiimire –(Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, the honourable minister is now turning guns on Parliament that we under-appropriate to his ministry, well aware that he needs more money that we are the ones in the wrong to appropriate very little to him. The minister needs to know that Parliament is constrained by Article 93 of the Constitution and that what Parliament considers here is what comes from the various sectors and so, it is not proper for him to start pointing guns at Parliament.

Two, wouldn’t it be proper for the minister to come to the House with a record of the kind of roads that they are not going to work on because as of now, many districts are in a black out. Roads have been left; the Members of Parliament are being questioned by constituents as to why their roads have not been worked on. Can you come with a record of what you are not able to work on and what you are able to work on so that the people down there get to know that Ministry of Works has failed to do A, B, C, D rather than leaving Members of Parliament to task to explain your inadequacies?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the second leg of the point raised by the Member for Ngora does not arise. It goes direct to the minister. The first part on the procedural issue; whether the minister can now say it is Parliament - I think we know the roles of the two Arms of Government. We know that the President proposes and Parliament disposes. The President proposes and Parliament appropriates what has been proposed. So, the minister should know that the gun he intends to turn against Parliament might be directed somewhere else because Parliament has never proposed a budget.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I said Parliament appropriates but the envelope we bring here is from Government but you agree with us and say, this is the amount of money we are going to use.

As I was saying, I think we should be appreciative –(Interruption)

MS BAKO: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. The information I wanted to give you is that -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you should help the House when you have three Members rising for information. Which information are you taking?

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, definitely, from the lady in pink. (Laughter)

MS BAKO: Thank you very much, Mr Minister, for giving way. The information I wanted to give you is that: one, you established the National Roads Authority but it is underfunded. Secondly, when it approaches campaign time, you take up roads to please the electorate that you are going to work on those roads as Central Government. 

Therefore, with Government’s inability to expend in the road sector, you are then subjected to torture because the road from Onesi to Madi-Okollo and Ofaka specifically has all its three bridges broken and it is inaccessible even on foot. Mothers cannot access maternal care and referrals are nothing to talk about. Therefore, if it was in your interest, which I believe it is, you would tell the President who is the Minister of Finance that your capacity to take up roads should be in line with your capacity to actually work on the roads.

When you presented your road sector report, the roads that you actually claimed to have taken up in 2009 are not worked on up to now. My humble information, therefore, is, when you sit in Cabinet, tell whoever is the Minister of Finance in this country that it is prudent to allocate adequate resources when you are taking up roads because you are talking about human movement here. Should you always continue -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, is that information?

MS BAKO: Yes, I am about to conclude the information. Therefore, my humble plea is for you to tell whoever is concerned, not to politicise the issue of roads because it is costly.

Secondly, the equipment that you gave the districts to maintain these roads has now gone to do work that they are not supposed to do. They are supposed to do light work and unfortunately, because they have been doing heavy duty work, most of them are breaking down and their ability to maintain district roads has been hindered. So, while we pride in saying, “Well, there is this and that road” take politics off the roads and know that it is human movement, it is access and we will help you.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is additional information -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please. Hon. minister, close.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will just talk about a Member who said we should tell the people - I think it was hon. Wafula Oguttu. If you look in our policy statement, we state which roads we are going to work on. If it is not in the policy statement, then you should know that we are not going to work on that road.

Secondly, we do not politicise road works at all. Our duty here is to offer service to the people irrespective of whether there are elections or not. We just go and work on our roads. 

Regarding machinery, I agree with you that it is –(Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the minister owes this House and this country just a bit of honesty. I remember having a chat with you - probably you have forgotten. We were talking about the Soroti-Mbale road and there came a confession that machines were taken to that road for purposes of votes. These machines were taken on that road in 2011 and the work started late 2012. Why do you come and deceive this country and deny on the Floor of this House? Treat us as partners. Is the honourable minister in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member for Soroti, those are factual matters about a road I have not gone on in the last seven years. How am I supposed to rule on the order?

MR BYANDALA: As I close, Mr Speaker, I want to assure my colleagues and the country that the government is determined to ensure that these roads are worked on, that they become passable and that things can go on well. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, I asked a very straightforward question to the hon. minister that a sub county called Ndaiga is not accessing Government services because of the 13 kilometres, which are not complete. I was very precise. I am wondering where the minister is taking us without giving a concrete answer on when he is going to complete this road, which appears in his road sector report to have been completed, yet it is to the contrary. It is hampering service delivery to the 15,000 people staying in this sub county.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, that was a procedural issue. Can you clarify on that?

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, I thought hon. Tinkasiimire was listening to you when you said that they should come in time, you contact us and we come with precise answers. I cannot tell which day, time, how or when to do this road because I was not given time. If I was given time, I would have come with precise answers, which you would take.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have the district political leaders and farmers of Zombo District represented by hon. Grace Kwiyucwiny and hon. Stanley Omwonya. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

3.53
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Namara sought clarification in regard to the committee on illegal land evictions. I wish to report that this committee has been set up and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is receiving the complaints, which are channeled to the committee. 

Regarding other agencies of Government, this committee is working with other agencies and the representation on the committee tells it all. The Police are represented by a commissioner of police; the presidency is equally represented; the Attorney-General’s Chambers is represented; Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is equally represented and the committee is supposed to act and operate within the confines of our national laws. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us move to the next item.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE DELEGATION FROM THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TO THE ACP-EU JOINT PARLIAMENTARY ASSEMBLY MEETINGS, WHICH WERE HELD IN BRUSSELS-BELGIUM IN APRIL, 2013

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let hon. Bwambale or any other Member of the delegation lay the report on the Table. Let us defer that.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW $ 12 MILLION FROM THE ARAB BANK FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN AFRICA (BADEA) AND ANOTHER $15 MILLION FROM THE ORGANISATION OF PETROLEUM EXPORTING COUNTRIES (OPEC) FUND FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT (OFID) FOR FINANCING THE UPGRADING OF THE MASAKA-BUKAKATA ROAD PROJECT

3.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow $ 12 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa and another $ 15 million from the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries Fund for International Development for financing the upgrading of the Masaka-Bukakata road project. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, it has been seconded by the Minister of State for Works and the Minister of Works.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, the Masaka-Bukakata Road is approximately 41 kilometres and it connects the mainland gateway to and from Kalangala Islands in Kalangala District, starting from the ferry landing site at Kakyanga. 

The terms and conditions of this loan are the usual one and are within what is agreed upon with our development partners. The proposal is for this Parliament to support the terms of the BADEA loan, which amounts to $ 12 million. The loan period is 40 years and repayment period is 30 years. The period of grace is 10 years and the interest rate is one percent per annum. 

In the case of the terms of the OFID loan, the total amount is $ 15 million; loan period is 35 years; repayment period is 30 years and the grace period is five years with the interest rate at 1.25 percent per annum. There is a service charge of one percent per annum. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Well, this matter was received before and referred to the committee. Now, we want the committee to make a report on this matter within 15 minutes – only the summary.

3.59
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Robert Migadde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here to present the committee report, which is being circulated. The report is about the proposal by Government to borrow $ 12 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA) and another $15 million from the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries Fund for International Development for financing the upgrading of the Masaka-Bukakata road project.

The request was presented to this House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and accordingly referred to this committee. 

In the attempt to dispose of this work, we met and held a number of meetings. Among them, we held a meeting with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; the Minister of Works and Transport; the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and the Uganda National Roads Authority. 

The committee studied and made reference to a number of documents, which are outlined in the report. But among them is the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development brief on the loan request.

Mr Speaker, the Masaka-Bukakata Road is approximately 41 kilometres and located in the South-Eastern part of Uganda in Masaka District. This road is the only mainland gateway to and from Kalangala Islands in Kalangala District, starting from the ferry landing site at Kakyanga. 

Due to the poor state of the transport to and from Kalangala District, the economic and social development has been negatively affected. The major economic activities along the project road include bananas, coffee and tea plantations. The road, once constructed, will be vital for promoting economic trade and growth in the area and also for opening up the major palm oil development in Kalangala by BIDCO, a palm oil company that has invested heavily in palm oil plantations. In addition, it will also cater for fishing activities.
Mr Speaker, the loan is well aligned to the country’s strategy as explained in the report but the project objective of the Masaka-Bukakata Road project is to promote national, economic development and the reduction of poverty by increasing access to modern facilities and instituting measure to achieve better road transport safety and work conditions in Kalangala District. 

The minister mentioned a number of loan terms but it is important for us to know the project components: 
    1. Civil works will constitute $25.37 million and this will consist of a number of items among which are cost of site preparation, earth works; pavement works including earth faulting.

    2. This is $1.42 million and will include the review of detailed project designs; preparation of tender documents among others.
 
    3. This will constitute the project management unit, which is $0.21 million. 

Item no.6 is project cost and financing agreement – the Minister of Finance has hinted on them. They are outlined and ably presented in table no.1 and no.2. Table no.1 is “uses of funds and related costs” and table no.2 is “source of funds”. 

Item no.7 is on loan terms and conditions and for the benefit of this House, I will not repeat what the minister has presented in his opening remarks. He presented the terms of the loan, which are outlined there and the terms of the OFID loan, which are also outlined in the report. 

Item no.7 (1) is “loan conditions” the minister has also hinted on them. The implementation arrangements for implementing this project are essentially the same as those being used to implement the transport sector development programme i.e Ministry of Works and Transport and UNRA. 

The executive director of UNRA will be the accounting officer of the project assuming the overall responsibility for accounting for the project funds relating to the project. During project execution, UNRA shall be responsible for a number of activities among which is procuring, engaging and supervising firms; and two, supervision, land acquisition, compensation of affected properties along the project road. 

The committee had a number of observations and recommendations. 

The committee observed that high transport costs are still a major challenge for landlocked Uganda. Uganda’s transport system remains characterised by poor roads, limited compatibility between different modes of transport and poor logistic systems. The high cost of transport is largely due to poor roads that are badly maintained, overloaded and poorly managed. Beyond trade corridors, limited connectivity between areas of production and markets within and outside the country remains a major constraint to producers. 

The committee recommends that Government must address the following:

Road transportation 

Other pending national roads that are part of the trading corridors must be prioritised for rehabilitation and maintenance, which connectivity between producing areas and markets have to be improved to boost agricultural exports. This should entail upgrades of road capacity through addition of lanes, roads, whose poor condition affects the flow of traffic along corridors. 

The upgrading of key feeder roads connecting producers to the corridors from gravel to paved standards. The construction of Masaka-Bukakata Road should act as an eye opener for Government to focus on similar roads leading to other landing sites like Kyetume-Katosi, Lugazi-Buikwe-Kiyindi and Musita-Namayingo Road among others. 

Railway transportation

Government’s plan to rehabilitate and upgrade the existing railway lines to standard regional gauge should be expedited as the country awaits committed action from Government to make railway transportation systems more viable. The development of the railway transportation system will make economic sense to traders and consumers. It will also make long-term economic sense as the most viable basis for regional connectivity. 

Water transportation

Given the huge untapped potential of Lake Victoria, Government should improve transportation on the lake by refurbishing more wagon ferries as an important measure. Measures to support the private sector to develop facilities and other services in the medium to long-term with public procurement of low loans and load-on facilities at Port Bell and Mwanza will ease connectivity between water and other modes of transport. Use of PPPs in financing these interventions should further be explored. 

The committee also observed that this road project has many positive impacts that will lead to increased urbanisation, improved transport services, reduced travel time, reduced public transport cost and improved access to social services that will better the standards of living and above all, boost the local economic development and value addition for the agricultural produce in the project area. 

The committee hereby recommends that UNRA ensures that the negative environment impact as highlighted in the environmental and social impact assessment report of the project be mitigated by incorporating them as far as is practically possible within the design details, specifications and contract documents of the road project. 

Government should make efforts to plan Bukakata Landing Site and the neighbourhood in preparation for increased activities that warrant urbanisation to ensure orderly development. Government should also explore upgrading a second main-land gateway to and from Kalangala Island; that is the land connecting to Bukakata – between Lukaaya and Kaddugala in Kalungu District on the Kampala-Masaka Highway in order to reduce on the travel time for traffic coming from Kampala to Kalangala through Bukakata. 

The committee observed that high environmental and social impact assessment report fees for this project that amounted to approximately Shs 5 billion - due to limited capacities in NEMA most of the environmental social impact assessment are contracted out to private consultancies and hence the high cost. 

The committee hereby recommends that Government should in a long term build the capacities of NEMA in carrying out environmental social impact assessment in order to save the country from exorbitant environmental and social impact assessment fees that are charged by private consultants.

The committee observed that despite the increased funding to the road sector over time, physical output has remained dismal. Projects are not executed in a timely manner raising a lot of anxiety among beneficiaries and living them frustrated. The sector is still grappling with the problem of delayed completion of road construction projects, which is attributed to several factors ranging from inadequate capacity of the local contractors, shortfalls and delayed release of funds - especially Government of Uganda counterpart funds meant for land compensation for right of way acquisition of project-affected persons - fluctuation of fuel prices leading to high construction costs and the lengthy PPDA procurement procedures, among others.

The committee hereby recommends that initiatives towards the reduction of the problem of delayed completion of road construction projects be fast-tracked by Government. 

Capacity building of the procurement unit in addition to the process to amend the PPDA Act with the view of reducing procurement delays should be urgently considered. 

In order to curb road construction delays and lack of absorption of projects, especially those that are donor-funded, Government should strictly ensure that counterpart funding is adequately provided for.

The committee observed that there has been a building backlog on national road maintenance over a period of time. This has necessitated the need for additional funding in the medium to long term for maintenance of the national road network, especially for upgrading of the 10,000 kilometre roads taken over from the districts to national road standards.

The committee thus recommends that Government expedites efforts for outsourcing adequate funds for maintenance of the national road network especially in tackling the very bad spots on the roads to make them motorable. The envisaged legal reforms to allow the collection and direct remittance of road user charges, especially fuel levy, to the Uganda Road Fund account need to be expedited as these will contribute to the availability of additional funds. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You need to summarise. 

MR MIGADDE: Availability of additional funds for maintenance of the national road network. 

The committee also made other similar recommendations and observations and among them is observation 7, where the committee observed the continued lack of coordination between ministries, departments and agencies as evidenced by the erection of new electricity power lines by Umeme that are very close to the proposed road project site, which may call for relocation of the electricity power lines in future. 

The committee recommends coordination among Government agencies and ministries.

The committee observed that under a public/private partnership framework, the government entered into partnership with Kalangala Infrastructure Services for the multi-sectoral development of infrastructure, that is, roads, energy, water etc. in Kalangala. However, the state of the road infrastructure in Kalangala District is still poor. This includes the road connecting Bugoma Landing Site to Kalangala town, which requires to be upgraded.

The committee recommends that Government should, as soon as possible, update Parliament on the operations of Kalangala Infrastructure Services especially in relation to the development of the road network and other infrastructure services.

In conclusion, the committee supports and recommends to this House to approve the request by Government of Uganda to borrow $12 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA) and another $ 15 million from the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) Fund for International Development for financing this project to the upgrading of the Masaka-Bukakata Road.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move. This report is also accompanied by other supporting documents, which I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the full text of the report of the committee.

MR MIGADDE: Mr Speaker, I also beg to lay a number of documents in this file, among them the appraisal document, the financing agreement, the implementation plan, minutes of the committee, a field report, responses by UNRA to MPs’ visit on 21  March 2013, the environmental and social impact assessment and the land property evaluation or compensation report. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those documents that are attached to the report.

MR MIGADDE: Mr Speaker, this is the environmental and social impact statement for Masaka-Bukakata Road via Villa Maria Ssembabule Road. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the environmental impact assessment report.

MR MIGADDE: Mr Speaker, this is the land and property evaluation for compensation final report by UNRA. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the report on compensation.

MR MIGADDE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The purpose of this loan request is known. The committee has done their part. The motion is for us to approve this. Are there any discussions on this? (Members rose_) It is the whole House? It is a serious matter? So, can I propose that we digest this and deal with it tomorrow? Yes, when the time is early enough because I have the Order Paper loaded. Let us defer this discussion to tomorrow and then we have a full discussion. Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW $9.75 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK FOR FINANCING THE CONSOLIDATION AND SCALING UP OF MILLENNIUM VILLAGES PROJECTS (MVP) IN UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us also deal with this item tomorrow. Since they are related, the mood will be the same - fifteen minutes of reporting?  Should we receive the report now? Let the minister move the motion then we need to digest it.

4.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow $9.75 million from the Islamic Development Bank for financing the consolidation and scaling up of the Millennium Villages Projects in Uganda. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Yes, seconded by the Minister of State for Health (General Duties), Minister of State for Internal Affairs and several others. Well, speak to your motion, hon. Minister.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, over the last five years, the Millennium Development Goal Centre of  Columbia University, USA, the   Millennium Promise Alliance and Government of Uganda have implemented various schemes of the Millennium Villages Project using grant funding of up to $12 million from the UNDP. The project ran for a five year period headquartered in Ruhira Trading Centre in Isingiro District and covering the sub-counties of Nyakitunda, Kabuyanda, Kikagati and benefitting over 1,500 people. 

It is now rated as an international best practice and has registered very commendable success. The terms and conditions of the proposed loan are within the terms that are acceptable by this country. The loan amount is $ 9.75 million with a maturity period of 25 years including seven years of grace, service fee not exceeding 2.5 percent of the loan amount and I recommend this for the approval of Parliament. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Minister. The background and justification for the proposed borrowing is already elaborated. Would you like to summarise your observations and recommendations to the House? In 15 minutes, please.

4.23
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Frederick Mbagadhi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before we do that, in the VIP Gallery, this afternoon, we have the Lord Mayor of Kampala Erias Lukwago; Joseph Mujuzi, Councillor Rubaga South and Allan Sewanyana, Councillor Makindye West. They are here to observe the proceedings of Parliament. Kindly join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

MR MBAGADHI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to present a report of the Committee of National Economy on the request by Government to borrow $ 9.75 million from the Islamic Development Bank for financing the consolidated and scaling up of the Millennium Villages Project in Uganda.

In the interest of time, I will pick up the most salient issues. It is actually good that this report is going to be debated tomorrow. So, Members will have enough time to digest the report.

On page 1, we have the introduction. We are talking of the amount that has to be borrowed, which is $ 9.75 million from the Islamic Development Bank for financing the consolidation and scaling up of the Millennium Villages Project in Uganda.

On page 2, we have the methodology. The committee met all the major stakeholders: the ministry officials and the management of the Millennium Villages Project. The committee also made reference to a number of documents and at an appropriate time, I will request you, Mr Speaker, to allow me to lay these documents on Table.

On page 2, we have the background. This project is a unique one and I really think that for the hon. Members to appreciate the kind of project we are talking of, it would be prudent for me to take you through the background and then possibly I will rush over to the observations and recommendations.

In the year 2000, Uganda endorsed the UN Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and subsequent targets as part of the overall Global Poverty Eradication Agenda and to have them eradicated by the year 2015. In order to achieve these MDGs, developing countries, including Uganda, had to make sufficient investments in social and economic sectors.

The Sustainable Villages programme to which the Millennium Villages Project falls is a $ 121.2 million programme supporting six countries in three phases. Phase one of the programme has been implemented in Chad and Sudan and phase two in Mozambique and Kazakhstan Republic. Uganda and Djibouti have been selected for Phase III.

The Millennium Villages Project is an integrated holistic approach to rural development aimed at empowering local communities to get themselves out of poverty and achieve the UN Millennium Development Goals. It is located in 12 countries across Africa so the first phase of the Millennium Villages Project was jointly implemented by the United Nations Development Programme, the Arch Institute of Colombia University, Millennium Promise Alliance, which is an American NGO and Isingiro District Local Government and community members.

Mr Speaker, specifically, the Millennium Villages Project started in April 2006 and ended in June 2011. It operated in two sub counties, that is, Nyakitunda and Kabuyanda and one town council which is Kabuyanda.

In four, we have the Millennium Villages Project linkages with the country strategy. Actually, the proposed MVP is consistent with the development agenda set by the UN to attain the MDGs but at the same time, this project is quite consistent with the National Development Plan of 2010-2015.

On page 4, we have the Millennium Villages Project coverage and in this one, the MVP phase two will be implemented and scaled up in the district of Isingiro with background assessments to be undertaken in the districts of Gomba, Oyam, Bukedea, Nakaseke and Amuria.

The scaling up and deepening of the process on the on-going activities that were initiated in Phase I and Phase II of this project will further enhance the achievement of the project development objective.

Please, note that for the other five districts of Gomba, Oyam, Bukedea, Nakaseke and Amuria, which have been mentioned, there will be a comprehensive background assessment and design for the eventual start-up of the Integrated Rural Development Model with special focus on water for production and domestic use.

On page 7, we have the specific objective of the project, which is to improve the health, education and livelihoods of the selected poor communities in Uganda through achieving the target key indicators of the MDGs and those indicators are down there.

On page 6, we have the project components. In 9.1, we have component one, which is increased agricultural production and enhanced nutrition, which is expected to consume $ 980,000. 

Component number two, which is on page 7, is business development and microfinance allocation, which is expected to consume $ 1.4 million. This component will develop and strengthen farmer and business groups and co-operatives.

Secondly, it is expected that this component will promote access to financial services and public/private partnerships for farmers and farmers’ businesses.

In 9.3, component number three, promoting universal access, retention and quality education. This component is expected to consume $ 1.17 million.

Component number four, that is 9.4, strengthening health service delivery systems for improving access to basic health care. This component is expected to consume $ 1.93 million.

On page 8, we have component number five: infrastructural development and innovation promotion. This component is expected to consume $ 1.17 million and basically, this component is expected to support access to all weather motorable roads and secondly, to support connections to energy sources and access to energy saving technologies.

Component number six, which is 9.6, we have water for domestic consumption and sanitation. This component is expected to consume $ 780,000. 

On page 9, we have component seven, which is the design and technical support from MDG Centre; Audit and Oversight and Project Implementation Unit. This component is expected to consume $ 1.17 million.

Down here, we have the project costs and financing. The total cost of Phase II of the MVP is estimated at $ 9.75 million as earlier on alluded to. It is expected to be implemented over a period of three years, that is, from the year 2013-2015.

On page 10, we have table one, which clearly illustrates the IDB fund allocation to the project components. We have seven components there but in addition, we have two other components, which are the item of audit and contingencies.

Table 2 illustrates the disbursement plan of the IDB funds. It has been stated that this project is expected to be implemented in three years’ time. In that table, we have year one as 2013 up to year three which is 2015. We have the components and the grand total down at the bottom.

On page 11, we have table 3, where we have the contribution by various stakeholders and in it we have the IDB loan, the Government of Uganda, NGO partners and the contribution from the community. We also have the loan terms and conditions, which are the usual ones. Mr Speaker and honourable members, you can take time to peruse through them.

Moving onto page 12, we have the project implementation. The Ministry of Local Government will be the executing agency for the MVP; the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Local Government will be responsible for the project funds’ disbursement and accounting. Actual implementation will be undertaken at the district and sub county level within the framework of the decentralised administration. 

On page 13 we have the observations and recommendations. 

The committee observed the unique, integrated and holistic nature of the Millennium Villages Project which provides key lessons for Government on how to harness resources for maximum impact. The MVP activities are visible on the ground and they had caused significant impact on the issues of accessibility to water, health service delivery, access and quality of primary education, increased agricultural productivity, improving roads and energy infrastructure and income enhancement. The MVP reveals the benefits of investing in an integrated multi-sectoral approach to rural development that created synergies and multiple benefits for villagers.

Going by the observation, the committee recommends that Government takes the lead in driving and ensuring the integration of the MVP practices into its development plan. Government should also ensure that the MVP practices are sustained and scaled up at the local and national level by tapping into the existing multi-disciplinary and highly motivated technical support created during the implementation of phase 1 of the MVP. This will enable the rural community development become a reality across the country. The government should also embark on a process of developing an integrated costing of what it will take to roll out the MVP rural development model across the entire country. This should be followed by the development of a policy direction from Government on how the roll out across the country will be structured. 

The committee also observed the heavy involvement of the community and the Isingiro local government in planning, co-funding, implementation and monitoring of the MVP interventions due to the project’s emphasis on creation and capacity building of local institutions. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government embarks on initiatives of developing and strengthening community institutions to manage development interventions. Vibrant local groups of entrepreneurs should be created and supported so that there is business to support the development process in rural areas.

Thirdly, the committee observed that all taxes, charges, fees, duties and cost overruns related to this project will be borne by the government. Of course, this is the contribution that we expect from Government just like other stakeholders have to contribute to the project. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that in order to curb the delays in the implementation of the project, Government should ensure that provisions of counterpart funding for this project are adequately provided for.

The committee noted and appreciated the need for school feeding to keep primary school pupils in school, as evidenced in their improved performance and increased enrolment in primary school during the implementation of the MVP in the project areas. These achievements were accounted for in great part by the introduction of the project’s school feeding programme as better fed children were more attentive and learned better and their cognitive ability was enhanced.

And on this note, surely Government should borrow a leaf from the book of the feeding model. Hence the committee recommends that Government should introduce school feeding programmes in primary schools as evidenced in developed countries where such programmes have been implemented and they have led to increased primary school enrolment, better attendance and reduced drop-out rates.

On page 15, the committee further observed that when women are organised in produce and marketing groups and trained in business development, they become empowered and increase their incomes. The MVP facilitated the formation and capacity building of businesses and cooperatives and linked them to prime markets like the World Food Programme. The project has also facilitated the formation and capacity building of SACCOs to provide finance for local investment and encourage savings. 

The committee thus recommends that Government expedites the formulation of a national cooperative development policy and implementation of strategy to empower and guide cooperatives in the country.

The committee observed that in order for the MVP to continue working towards the achievement of all health-related MDGs, the project introduced a sequenced process of health infrastructure strengthening through the community health workers programme that has seen community health workers working tirelessly in order to bring essential medical care into homes within their communities. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government scales up the community health worker principle through the training and equipping community health workers in all districts in order to improve household health in local community.

The committee further observed that there was increased access to water and sanitation in the MVP areas. The project constructed a piped water scheme serving about 15,000 people. It also constructed over 20 springs and shallow wells and installed water harvesting tanks in schools and public buildings. 

The committee thus recommends that Government increases access to safe water in rural areas through the construction, maintenance and operation of water supply systems in rural areas.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chairman, please, wind up.

MR MBAGADHI: Mr Speaker, in conclusion, the committee noted that the MVP offers a bold innovative model for helping rural communities lift themselves out of poverty. The MVP evaluated whether by fighting poverty at the village level, through community-led development, rural communities can achieve the MDGs. 

The committee, therefore, recommends to this House to approve the request by Government to borrow a sum of $ 9.75 million from the Islamic Development Bank for the financing of the consolidation and scaling up of the MVP in Uganda.

Before I leave, I have some documents that I request to lay on Table. With me, I have a copy of the report of the Committee on National Economy that has been presented to this House; it is dated May 2013. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Please, lay the full report of the committee.

MR MBAGADHI: Mr Speaker, I also beg to lay on Table the brief to Parliament which was presented to this House sometime back. I beg to lay. I also have the loan agreement between the Republic of Uganda and the Islamic Development Bank. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR MBAGADHI: I also have a document - that is the project appraisal document – of the MVP Phase I, dated February 2013. I beg to lay.

Mr Speaker, I also have a copy of the issues that were raised by Members and responses, which were written by the Millennium Villages Project management. I beg to lay. 

Mr Speaker, I also beg to lay on Table a copy of the testimonies of success stories of the Millennium Villages Project, which I have in a document dated 2011. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture all those documents attached to the report. 

MR MBAGADHI: Lastly, I have a detailed document on the Millennium Villages Overview entailing all the activities that were undertaken during the implementation of the Millennium Villages Project Phase I. I beg to lay. 

I also have a copy of the minutes of the Committee of National Economy dated 22 April, 2013. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and thank you very much for the presentation. 

As we dealt with the first one, at least now it is received. Parliament is now fully briefed about the importance and recommendations of the committee on both loan requests; we defer the debate to tomorrow and then we finalise on that. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE PETITION BY THE LORD MAYOR OF KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY, MAYORS OF DIVISION URBAN COUNCILS AND AUTHORITY COUNCILLORS SEEKING FOR THE INTERVENTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PROBE INTO MATTERS PERTAINING TO THE MISMANAGEMENT OF KCCA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, this matter is on the Order Paper. I have just received a letter signed by hon. Nambooze MP Mukono Municipality on this particular item and the letter is also dated 16 May 2013. The subject is what is in the item. It says: 

“Rule 194 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament provide for a Member with dissenting views to write a minority report. I wish to inform you, Rt Hon Speaker, that I got information that the report of the committee was on the Order Paper today 16 May, 2013 at 3.45 p.m. yet, I was not aware of any meetings that sat to consider the draft report. I, therefore, did not have an opportunity to have a copy of the draft report or study the content therein to enable me generate a minority report. This is to humbly request you, Rt Hon. Speaker, to stay the presentation, consideration and adoption of the report so that I and possibly other Members with whom we share similar views are accorded time to study and come up with a minority report”. 

Hon. Members, a minority report is not a critique of the majority report; it is part of the report. A minority report states the area of disagreement, which you should have presented to the committee and the committee disagreed with you or out-numbered you in your proposal. That is when it qualifies to be a minority report. You should be a minority group, defeated by numbers; that is when it qualifies to be a minority report. You have a view, but because you are a minority, you are defeated by numbers and so you are given the right to present a minority report. 

So, you do not study the full report and then write a minority report. You simply show the areas in which you disagree with the report; you point them out in your own report which forms part of the committee report. 

The other request is that they were not aware of the meeting that signed it. I have seen a copy of this, which I received also today. I see it signed by 10 Members out of 17 Members; that meets the rule of quorum required by this House. I do not see any justification to defer the debate. The petitioners are in this Parliament; the petition was by the Lord Mayor and it was presented to this House. And there are other councillors who are also in Parliament waiting to find out what Parliament has decided on their petition. I do not really see any basis for deferring this matter. 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that a minority report is not a critique of the majority report. However, this matter was brought to the attention of the House by hon. Betty Nambooze who unfortunately is not around. Maybe, you would first get to know –(Interjections)– she is out on an official trip. We would first get to know –(Interjections)– I have risen on a point of procedure and procedure takes precedence to a point of order – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, sometimes, we do not understand these rules. When a point of order and a point of procedure are raised at the same time, the point of procedure takes precedence. When a point of procedure has taken precedence and a matter of order arises, it does not preclude another Member from raising a point of order. That is the rule, please. Let us listen to the order before you can finalise with your point of procedure. 

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In our Rules of Procedure, Rule 194(1)2 is very clear. You have ably explained that a Member with dissenting views from the opinion of the majority of the committee may state in writing the reasons for his or her dissent and statements of reason shall be appended to the report of the committee. 

I am part of the leadership of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government and last week, hon. Betty Nambooze informed us that she was proceeding on a trip to Mozambique up to Friday this week. The Member who is rising to request for a minority report in support of hon. Nambooze surely is aware of the procedure for writing a minority report. So, is the honourable member in order to attempt to waste the time of this House when you have already given your guidance? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this matter came before the House and was referred to a committee. The Member who presented the petition to the House – actually, they were two Members: hon. Nambooze and hon. Kasibante who is present in the House. But it is not their petition; the rules say, after we receive a petition from members of the public, who are not members of the House, a Member is authorised to bring the petition to the House. And that is exactly what happened. But it does not give them ownership of the petition; the owners of the petition are people, who by the rules and Constitution cannot sit in the House. But for today, they are all in the gallery to listen to what Parliament will say on their petition. So, honourable member, please, raise your procedure and we deal with this. 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, arising from the communication of hon. Nambooze who presented the petition here, it would appear like the committee conducted investigations on that petition and that the Member who raised the petition never got the opportunity to appear before the committee. That is what the content of her letter says –(Interruption)

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, I am sorry to come in. You have ably explained this. Hon. Nambooze was just a conduit. This was not her petition. Whether she is here or not, we can go ahead. If it was hon. Nambooze’s, yes. But this is a petition by people, unfortunately, who cannot come here. So, is the Member in order to keep on insisting after your ruling, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have seen on page 2 of this report, “In its work, the committee interviewed the following: the petitioners; the Executive Director, KCCA; Minister, Kampala; Members of Parliament from Kampala City; former Town Clerk; Director Otada; Councillors of  Kampala City Council Authority; Kampala City Traders Association; National Tax Payers Protection Organisation.” These are the people the committee interfaced with. There is no basis for not discussing this report- at least receiving it. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Citing the same Rule 194 that hon. Magyezi used, and arising from the communication of hon. Nambooze, she is saying that she never had the opportunity to know what transpired. She only wants to be relevant to this House. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for her to know what is going on, on the Floor of the House before she becomes irrelevant? Because she said she had not read the draft; she has not read the final report. It is in her letter, which you read.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rule is very clear. A member dissenting from the opinion of a majority of a committee may state in writing the reasons for his or her or their dissent and the statement of reasons shall be appended to the report of the committee. This does not mean that the committee must act anticipating a dissent. 

The committee acted and the Member was not there. They have prepared a report. How can we, in anticipation, say they should have waited for a dissenting opinion which they were not notified about? It is not for this House to incorporate dissenting opinions in the report. It is for the committee when their attention is drawn to it so that they can bring it to the committee and it is brought. We have presented several reports here with minority reports and we even say, “I now present this report but there are minority reports, which I now ask the dissenting Members to present,” then you would have been party to the report; your dissent would have been on record; your dissent would have been in the minutes that you have dissented. Dissent is not, as I said earlier, a critique of the report. (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Procedure, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPAEAKER: No, I have ruled on that same procedure I am not going to rule again. 

4.57
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (Ms Florence Kintu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I hereby present a report of the Committee of Public Service and Local Governments on the petition of the Lord Mayor - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have just ruled on this procedure. Hon. Member for Lwemiyaga, you can wear your face the way you want. I have just ruled on procedure about the issue that has been drawn to my attention by an hon. Member. I have raised it to the House and I have explained why it cannot stop the discussion of this report. I have said that. What more should I rule on now?  

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, in hon. Nambooze’s letter which you have just read to us, she is complaining that she is not aware her committee convened any meetings to consider this report- [Ms Mutyabule: “Information”]- information on what I have raised? Why don’t you do yourself a favour and first listen? 

MS MUTYABULE: I want to inform you.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, that is the first issue that hon. Nambooze is raising. She is actually raising doubt as to whether the committee presenting the report ever sat.  Our Rules of Procedure - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Hon. Member, we have a report signed by 10 people out of a membership of 17. The Members are here. Can we have the chairperson to explain who signed this report? 

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, if you allow me to use the microphone -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the issue you are raising is about whether they met. The chairperson is here. 

MS KINTU: Mr Speaker, this report is signed by Kintu Florence, Kalungu District; hon. Magyezi Raphael, Igara West; hon. Bakeine Mabel, Bugangaizi East; hon. Alum Santa Ogwang, Oyam District; hon. Besisira Ignatius, Buyaga East; hon. Kenneth Kiyingi Bbossa, Mawokota South; hon. Matte Joseph, Buwendera County; hon. Mubiito John Bosco, Budiope West; hon. Mutyabule Florence, Namutumba District; and hon. Nanyondo Birungi Carol, Kalangala District.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you meet?

MS KINTU: We have been meeting; we have minutes of our meetings and Members have been participating in these meetings, Mr Speaker.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This time you could probably have read my mind differently because I was rising on Rule 193. Rule 193(1) reads, “The members of the committee making the report shall be collectively responsible for the decisions contained therein and shall not-“

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which rule is it? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Rule 193 –(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which rule is it? Hon. Members, please, hold on. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I am reading Rule 193(1) and it reads, “The members of the committee…”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that is not what Rule 193 reads. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, it is Rule 193(2) –(Interjections)–

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is Rule 193(2)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Rule 193(2) reads, “The members of the committee making the report shall be collectively responsible for the decisions contained therein and shall not debate the report on the Floor of the House. 

In case of a complaint as to the authenticity of the report, the Speaker shall halt the debate on the report and refer the matter to the Clerk for investigation who shall report back to the Speaker before the next sitting of the House.”

Mr Speaker, you have read to us a complaint by a Member that at the final consideration of the draft, she was not informed and she is not aware of what transpired. It is right that using the rules, once such a complaint arises, it is better that it is authenticated otherwise it touches on the essence of committees. It should not be that this House encourages Members to sit down to conspire and sign and leave out other relevant Members of the committee.

It is for that reason, Mr Speaker, that once a matter – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the rule you have just stated “In case of a complaint as to the authenticity of the report”- How can you complain about authenticity when you are not even there? Authenticity is about whether the report is genuine or not. Is the report the one we agreed upon or not? That is what authenticity is. So, in this case, the person complaining cannot even challenge the authenticity of this report. If one of these Members who signed - for example, I have one Member from the Opposition; hon. Santa Alum, UPC who has signed. If I got from her that she did not sign, that she did not attend the meeting so her signature was forged, that would be raising the issue of authenticity. That is the distinction. But the Members who were there and are present have confirmed that they had this meeting and they have signed this report. So there is nothing about the authenticity of this report. It is not an issue.

Nobody is saying this is not a genuine report of the committee. The Member who is raising this did not attend the meeting so how can you say it is not authentic? Just because you did not attend the meeting? No, please. Let us allow the presentation of the report, receive it and see how to move. Please, we are spending time for nothing.

MS KINTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. I would like to present a report of the Committee of Public Service and Local Government on the petition by the Lord Mayor of Kampala Capital City Authority, Mayors of Division Urban Councils and Authority Councillors seeking for the intervention of Parliament to probe into matters pertaining to the mismanagement of Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA). 

On 11 December 2012, the petitioners through hon. Betty Nambooze, Member of Parliament Mukono Municipality and hon. Kasibante Moses, Member of Parliament Rubaga North presented a petition seeking the intervention of Parliament to probe or cause a probe into matters pertaining to the mismanagement of Kampala Capital City Authority. 

The petition was sent, by the Rt Hon. Speaker, to the Committee of Public Service and Local Government. 

Terms of Reference of this committee
The committee had the following terms of reference:
    i. Probe into the matters of alleged mismanagement of KCCA as spelt out in the petition.
    ii. Investigate the alleged deliberate misinterpretation, abuse and refusal to adhere to the provisions of the KCCA Act, 2010 by the Executive Director, KCCA, resulting into maladministration, poor service delivery and anarchy in the capital city.
    iii. Make recommendations as to appropriate remedies for the problems of the capital city.
    iv. Handle any other matters related thereto.

Methodology

In its work, the committee interviewed the following people:
    i. The petitioners
    ii. The Executive Director, KCCA and senior management team
    iii. The Minister of Kampala and the former Minister of Kampala
    iv. Members of Parliament from Kampala Capital City
    v. Former Town Clerk of Kampala City
    vi. The Director, OTADA Co. Ltd
    vii. Councillors of Kampala Capital City Authority 
    viii. Kampala City Traders Association
    ix. The National Taxpayers Protection Organisation

The committee studied the relevant documents and written submissions on the matter. These included: the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda; the Kampala Capital City Authority Act, 2010; the Local Governments Act, 1997 (as amended); Report of the Auditor General on Kampala City Council 2011/12; Court ruling by Justice Eldad Mwangusya in the case of Lukwago Erias v. Jennifer Musisi; evidence tendered by various witnesses.

The committee visited some areas in Kampala city for on-spot checks on the provision and management of services on the ground. The following places were visited: KCCA house on Mabua Road, which was the former official residence of the Mayor of Kampala City; KCCA house on Sezibwa road, which was the former residence of the Town Clerk of Kampala City; KCCA Mortuary at Mulago Hospital; Kafumbe Mukasa road in Kisenyi; Kiteezi landfill area, which is the dumping ground and treatment area for the garbage.

Background 

Status of Kampala Capital City Authority

Kampala was a district local government, like any other district of Uganda, until the law was amended in 2010, which significantly changed its status. In 2010, the Kampala Capital City Authority Act was enacted. In 2011, a new management was appointed under the Executive Director (ED) replacing the former town clerk. In the elections of 2011, a new political team was elected led by the Lord Mayor, replacing the former mayor. Kampala Capital City Authority is now a body corporate under the Central Government.

Conflicts among top leaders

Ever since the change of political and technical leaders at KCCA, there have been problems among the political leaders themselves and between the Lord Mayor and the ED, to the extent that the council and committees have not met over a long period of time. 

Attempts to resolve the impasse have not been successful and the two heads: Lord Mayor and ED have even gone to court to seek redress. This too did not resolve the matter. The Lord Mayor, mayors of divisional councils and some authority councillors decided to take matters to Parliament and submitted a formal petition through hon. Betty Nambooze, MP Mukono Municipality and hon. Kasibante Moses, MP Rubaga North. Six (6) of the thirty (30) authority councillors signed the petition.

Grounds of the petition

In the petition, the Lord Mayor, His Worship Erias Lukwago and others raised a number of accusations against the ED, Ms Jennifer Musisi. These were:
        a) Misinterpretation of KCCA Act; wrongful interpretation of the roles of the various organs of the authority and refusal to finance a workshop for councillors to improve their capacity and understanding of the law.

        b) Failure to implement decisions of the authority, including refusal to attend meetings of the authority hence working outside the mandate and approval of the authority, implementing proposals without an approved budget.

        c) Lack of accountability and mismanagement of various functions including: failure to raise adequate revenue, mismanagement of the job stimulus package; mismanagement of funds for drainage resulting in floods in various parts of the city; mismanagement of solid waste disposal generally, and in particular the landfill at Kiteezi resulting in problems of garbage in the various parts of the city and riots by residents of Kiteezi; mismanagement of funds for roads resulting in potholes and poor road construction and maintenance of roads in the capital city; mismanagement of funds for street lighting resulting in darkness in some areas in the city; failure to rehabilitate the KCCA mortuary and to provide ambulance services. 

        d) Mishandling of human resource management function including self-award of exorbitant salary; irregular appointment of some people to man critical posts in the city and abuse of office, as shown in the case in which a team of low-cadre staff were sent to attend a high level workshop abroad.

        e) Subjecting the public to degrading treatment at the Mayor’s Gardens, and maintaining oppressive militias and torture chambers or safe houses.

        f) Monopolising responsibilities for planning, policy formulation, budgeting, staffing and contracts management, as evidenced by the failure to constitute respective organs such as the City Public Accounts Committee and Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority.

        g) Desecration of Kampala by vandalising old age monuments, renaming them and erecting new ones without the permission of the authority; unilaterally changing the vision, mission, core values and logo of Kampala City under the project of rebranding the city, without approval of the authority.

        h) Hostility towards major social-cultural events in the city and failure to donate to traditional ceremonies of cultural leaders in Uganda.

Mr Speaker, the petitioners’ prayers were that:

    i. A select committee of Parliament should be established to probe into matters of mismanagement of the city with a view to finding a lasting solution to the problems of Kampala and bringing the culprits to book.

    ii. Parliament should order for a stay of implementation of all matters of policy that have not been passed by the authority, including the rebranding of Kampala Capital City.

    iii. Parliament should prescribe any other remedies as it may deem fit.

Findings, Observations and Recommendations

Organisation Structure

    (a) The “Authority” at KCCA.
    (b) 
The committee was informed that there was misinterpretation of “Authority” by the different stakeholders. Whereas some people thought it was the city council, others thought it was the Lord Mayor, yet others thought it should be the Executive Director. This raised the question, “Who is the boss at KCCA?” Who is/has the authority?

The committee observes that whereas the “Authority” in section 5(1) refers to the new entity called Kampala Capital City Authority, under section 5(3) “Authority” is used to refer to the governing body of the capital city, headed by the Lord Mayor, whose composition is then defined in section 6.
 
Clearly, the governing body, for example, the board, council, or executive committee of an organisation cannot be the organisation itself. So too, the head of the governing body cannot be the Authority. Similarly, the Executive Director who according to section 17(1) is the chief executive of the Authority cannot be the Authority itself. But as the Lord Mayor and chief executive, the two have authority to dispense. The Lord Mayor’s authority derives from the people - the voters – from whom all authority of state emanates; whereas the executive director’s authority derives from the President – the appointing authority who heads the central government, under which KCCA is governed. This creates a dangerous situation of two heads at the same level of authority of the organisation.
 
Under the Local Governments Act there is clear distinction between the local government, the council, the chairperson or mayor and the administration. The reporting lines between these organs are known. In the case of KCCA Act, the organisation and the governing body are both “Authority” and one has to always watch out in the interpretation of specific sections to try to interpret correctly the “Authority” referred to. For example, section 52(1) says: “Appropriation of funds by the Authority shall not be out of the funds of the Authority unless approved in a budget by the Authority.” (Laughter)

The committee recommends that the law be amended to avoid ambiguity. Provide a nomenclature for the governing body that is different from the name of the organisation. The reporting lines between the governing body and the administration should also be streamlined.

(b)	Functions of Key Actors

The committee was informed that role definition between the Authority, the Lord Mayor and the executive director was not clear. The functions of the different stakeholders were intertwined.

The committee observes that the Kampala Capital City Act, 2010 fuses the overall functions of KCCA as an organisation, with the policy-functions of the governing body, those of the Lord Mayor and the administrative functions of management and the executive director. Whereas Schedule 3 of the Act gives the functions and services for which Kampala Capital City Authority (the organisation) in responsible for, section 7 is dedicated to the functions of the Authority (the governing body) such as “initiate and formulate policy”, “set service delivery standards”, “determine taxation levels”, the same section 7 also includes purely administrative functions such as “to install and maintain street lights”, “construct and maintain drains” and “to register births and deaths” as functions of the governing body of KCCA.  In section 5(3) administering the capital city is given as a function of the Authority (governing body), which in 11(a) is headed by the Lord Mayor; yet in 19(1) the head of administration of the city is the executive director. In section 11(e) it is the responsibility of the Lord Mayor “to develop strategies and programmes for the development of the capital city” and yet section 7(k) makes it the mandate of the Authority “to carry out physical planning and development control”, yet section 19(j) also assigns the executive director the responsibility “to ensure proper physical planning and development control in the urban councils”, the totality of which constitutes the capital city. This unfortunate lack of clarity in the law sets the stage for serious conflict.

The committee recommends that the law be amended to clearly distinguish the roles of the various organs of Kampala Capital City Authority.

(c)	Political Governance Structure

The committee was informed that the governance structure of the city – the Lord Mayor, mayors, councillors - retained characteristics of the local governments, yet the city had changed to a corporate organisation (an Authority) under the central government.

The committee observes that the change from a local government to a corporate entity under the central government was not given full effect when it came to the governance structure. The KCCA Act, 2010 fell short of defining properly the type of policy body required under the new structure. It attempted to maintain the former category of a mayor or district chairperson, while trying to make the new office act as that of a head of a parastatal or even the board of an independent private company. Whereas the capital city is now under the central government, the law created a political head who is like any other district chairperson, but with totalitarian power. It left the possibility open for a political head of the city who is not under the government in power in terms of political direction and control. The Lord Mayor and councillors, who may be elected on the basis of political and development agenda different from the manifesto of the ruling party, remain politicians, with focus on strategies to win the next election or stay in power. The Lord Mayor is given extensive political leverage without the necessary checks and balances of a modern democracy. The Lord Mayor has the Deputy Lord Mayor as the only cabinet or executive committee member. The Lord Mayor, being the head of the executive of two people is also the head of the legislature (Speaker). This scenario is a recipe for dictatorship and politicking, rather than leadership focused on city development. 

The committee recommends that the law be amended to streamline the political governance of the Authority in line with Article 5(4) of the Constitution.

(e) 	Failure to Constitute Key Organs of the Authority

The committee was informed that the executive director in collusion with the Minister for Kampala had frustrated efforts to appoint key organs that are necessary to run the city and metropolitan services.

The committee observes that the Authority is not fully constituted. Under section 6(g), the Authority should include one councillor representing each of the following professional bodies:
    a. Uganda Institute of Professional Engineers
    b. Uganda society of Architects
    c. Uganda Medical Association
    d. Uganda Law Society 
    e. 
These are supposed to bring their professional expertise and experience to bear on the decisions of council. They have not been appointed.

There is supposed to be a Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority (MPPA), as provided under Part IV of the Act. This is the body entrusted with developing physical development plans and addressing all planning issues of the capital city and the metropolitan area, including the districts of Mukono, Mpigi and Wakiso, among other duties. Sec 22(c) assigns the duty of planning major transportation, infrastructure and other utilities in the metropolitan area to this body. No wonder that last year the districts of Mukono and Wakiso petitioned Parliament against unilateral decisions of KCCA regarding the Pioneer Easy Bus contract that extends to their areas of jurisdiction.

Section 58 provides for a City Public Accounts Committee (PAC) appointed by the Authority, on recommendation of the Lord Mayor and with approval of the Minister for Kampala. Although the Lord Mayor identified persons for the city PAC, the minister did not approve them and they were not appointed by the Authority. The absence of PAC denies KCCA services of the body that should handle accountability issues in the capital city.

The committee recommends that the minister should exercise his powers under section 79 of the KCCA Act to ensure that organs of the Authority are appointed as by law established. Implementation of this recommendation should be part of the annual report of the minister to Parliament as required under section 79(e) of the Act.

Management of the Divisions

The committee was informed that the divisions were not functional, because they did not have any powers or budgets of their own. The Authority had taken over management of the divisions and this had crippled their operations.

The committee observes that Part VI of the Act establishes lower urban councils, including division urban councils, ward urban councils, village urban councils and street committees. The Authority is supposed to devolve functions, powers and responsibilities to the division urban councils, as indicated in the third schedule Part B and Part C. Unfortunately, powers, functions and responsibilities which were supposed to be devolved to them have remained with the Authority. They have no funds/budget to implement on their own, because everything is done by the Authority. This is in total disregard of the law.

The committee recommends that Government expedites re-organisation and restructuring of the city, including the division urban councils, to conform to section 4(2) of the KCCA Act, under which division urban councils ceased to be local governments. The new structure should be that of a corporate entity under the Central Government, while protecting the sovereignty and franchise of the people of Kampala, as provided by the Constitution Article 1(4). The branches of the Authority should be made fully functional.

Local Revenue Collection

The committee was informed that the Executive Director had failed to put in place a strong and coherent system to ensure efficient tax collection and administration, hence KCCA had failed to realise its full revenue potential.

The committee observes that the local revenue of the city was on the increase in the last two years by an annual growth rate of about 30 percent as a result of new strategies by management. This was contrary to the assertion in the petition. The committee further notes that section 7(c) makes it the mandate of the Authority to determine taxation levels and as such the new tax measures should be made with the approval of the Authority, and that section 7(p) puts responsibility on the Authority to assist in mobilising the residents to pay taxes. 

The committee notes with concern the recent loss of over Sh1 billion per month in tax revenue from taxis arising from the court ruling, which surprisingly was supported by the Lord Mayor and some of the Authority councillors.

The committee recommends that this allegation should be dropped. The Executive Director and Management are commended for their efforts to revamp the revenue generation capacity of KCCA. The committee advises, nonetheless, that management should always seek approval of the Authority for any new tax measures. The Authority should develop a comprehensive revenue collection and management policy to guide management.

Irregular Recruitment and Salary payments

The committee was informed that there had been irregular recruitment of some people who did not have the requisite qualifications to handle affairs of the city. They drew hefty salaries and allowances. The committee was also told that the Executive Director fixed herself an exorbitant salary of Sh42.3 million and other allowances per month and that the 10 directors were paid highly at Shs 22 million per month each plus other allowances, well beyond the public service scales. According to the petitioners, there were irregular payments of overtime allowances to the transitional team, including the Executive Director. Some members of the transitional team received double payment of salaries from URA and KCCA, both being government agencies, while others were hired as consultants when they were incompetent and inexperienced.

The committee observes that the law, section 25, makes adequate provisions for recruitment and handling of staff of the Authority. The guidelines therein should be followed for all staff. Whereas in the transition period, management had to do sole sourcing for technical people; the situation at the moment requires everybody to go through the established recruitment procedure. The committee also observes that KCCA is an Authority and salary structures of a number of authorities and commissions do not conform to public service scales.

The committee recommends that the Public Service Commission re-examines all the staff of KCCA and weeds out people who do not qualify for the given posts in accordance with the specifications of each job. The committee further recommends that Government should expedite establishment of the National Salary Review Commission to review and harmonise salaries of all public officers. 

Abuse of office

The committee was informed that the ED abused her office when she assigned low quality and irregularly recruited staff, roles that involved representing the Authority at international fora. A case in point was that of a one Naggayi Sanuula, whose education level was below primary five, yet she led a delegation to Rwanda to share experiences with leaders of Kigali on city beautification – (Laughter)

The Committee observes that Naggayi Sanuula is a casual labourer in-charge of cleaning the city. Sweeping and cleaning streets may not require classroom degrees or diplomas, but skills for team work, cleanliness, and commitment to duty. Exposure to good practices elsewhere builds the capacity of the workforce. Kigali is a clean city and a good case to learn from. Management explained that the delegation to Rwanda was not led by Ms Naggayi but by the Deputy Town Clerk Central Division, Mr Agaba Kafureka.

The committee recommends that this allegation be dropped. Management is commended for keeping the city clean and urges them to keep it up and to improve even further.

Oppression, Militias and Safe Houses 
The committee was informed that the Executive Director had appointed security guards at the Mayor’s Gardens at KCCA and KCCA Headquarters, and law enforcement officers in the city, whose methods were oppressive to the public. She was accused of hiring militias and maintaining safe houses at Plot 1 Sezibwa Road and Plot 2 Mabua Road to torture people with brutal force. 

The committee observes that the current threats by terrorists worldwide requires all organisations to be security conscious. Security checks are at times inconveniencing to the public but they are mandatory. Security officers, however, should not violate people’s rights to privacy and human dignity under the pretext of checking or law enforcement. The committee received complaints from some members of the public about unacceptable work methods of the law enforcement officers of KCCA. There were cases of lack of gender sensitivity, use of excessive force and non-return of confiscated properties. 

Dr Tumwebaze Kezekia, for example, together with several medical staff (Miss Dorcus Achan and Miss Sheila Maneno) and patients (Mr Mugisha John Mary and others) of Rainbow City Hospital in Namuwongo were violently arrested, roughed up, thrown on a pickup and jailed by KCCA law enforcement officers on 4 March 2013 on suspicion that the hospital lacked a permit to operate. They were later released after realising that the hospital actually had been licensed by Ministry of Health, but after torturing them. 

The committee visited the houses on Sezibwa Road and Mabua Road. Although the houses were poorly kept and used as stores for the confiscated properties of vendors, impounded taxis and all sorts of materials, there was no evidence that they were used as torture chambers or safe houses.

Recommendation 9: The committee recommends that the allegation of safe houses be dropped due to lack of evidence. The committee, however, advises KCCA management to review the operations and training of their law enforcement officers and strengthen their supervision to make sure they are gender sensitive and humane in their work. The committee recommends that Uganda Human Rights Commission investigates and takes appropriate action on cases of human rights abuse by KCCA law enforcement officers.

Desecration of Monuments

The committee was informed that the Executive Director had violated the face of Kampala by vandalising old age monuments like the Queen’s Clock Tower at Queensway. Instead, monuments without symbolic value had been introduced in the city, like Warid Towers at Kibuye roundabout and at Jinja Road Wampewo roundabout, and others were given new names without approval of the Authority. 

The committee observes that the face of KCCA was changing for the better. Some of the old monuments like the Clock Tower had lost their structural integrity. The clock had long stopped working because it lacked spare parts. Generally, the public was appreciative of the developments and the effort to make Kampala modern. Moreover, management was generating some revenue out of some of these undertakings.   

Recommendation 10: The committee commends the effort of the Executive Director and management to improve the face of Kampala. The committee, however, cautions management of KCCA to always seek approval of the Authority and make adequate consultations before tampering with existing monuments, some of which may be of significant historic and cultural value.

Rebranding of Kampala Capital City Authority

The committee was informed that under the project of rebranding the city, the vision, mission and logo of Kampala were changed without approval of the Authority and without adequate consultation with stakeholders, including Cabinet and Parliament.

The committee observes that rebranding is a modern concept aimed at improving the marketability and competitiveness of an organisation or its products. It is necessary to make KCCA operate in a business-like manner. Nonetheless, rebranding should take into account the preserved core values and emblems of the organisation. Consultations must be made with the stakeholders. 

The implication of the KCCA Act Schedule III 1(r), 24, is to the effect that the Authority should be involved in determining the regalia and general outlook of the organisation to the public. However, the committee notes that the rebranding has gone far. It has been widely recognised by the Government, banks, development partners and the general public.

Recommendation 11: The committee recommends that the rebranding of KCCA be upheld. The committee advises, nonetheless, that in future management should seek formal approval of the Authority and carry out adequate consultations with stakeholders on all policy matters.

Land Administration and Management
The committee was informed that the KCCA Land Board was suspended in June 2012 and yet KCCA management had gone ahead to administer land and to allocate land in the city without approval of the land board. Management, for example, allocated land on Nkrumah Road, formerly accommodating the KCCA Health Centre, to a private developer without approval of the land board. 

The committee was also informed that management had colluded with the Minister to change the law governing the City Land Board such that the new board would have the powers to review the decisions of the defunct KCC Land Board and to have members of the land board of KCCA appointed by the Minister on recommendation of the Executive Director.

The committee observes that amending the law is a responsibility of Parliament and cannot be done unilaterally by the Minister. The land board ought to be independent. It should not be appointed on the recommendation of the Executive Director. It must not apply the law retrospectively and should respect the decisions of its predecessor land boards.

Recommendation 12: The committee recommends that the Minister tables in Parliament the Bill to provide for the land board for KCCA, in any case not later than 60 days from the date of this resolution, taking into consideration concerns raised by the residents of the city and the observations of the committee. 

Failure to Provide for Training of Councillors 

The committee was informed that whereas the Lord Mayor had organised a workshop at Imperial Botanical Hotel to sensitise the councillors on their roles and to discuss the KCCA Act with experienced lawyers and technocrats, the Executive Director and Minister of Kampala frustrated the workshop.

The committee observes that training of the human resource, both political leaders and technocrats, is important and continuous. Funds for the workshop for councillors had been provided for in the budget. The facilitators who had been invited, Prof. George Kanyeihamba, Mr Ladislaus Rwakafuuzi, Mr James Sebugenyi and others, were suitable for the job. The Minister had authorised the workshop to go ahead, only to change instructions at the very last minute. 

Recommendation 13: The committee recommends that in future, such embarrassments should be avoided. Management should have co-operated with the Lord Mayor to have this workshop conducted. The Minister, hon. Muruli Mukasa, who gave conflicting instructions, should take responsibility for the failed workshop.

Support to Social Events and Cultural Institutions

The committee was informed that the Executive Director had refused to support key social events and to donate to cultural ceremonies of traditional leaders in Buganda and other kingdoms in Uganda. This alienated Kampala from other areas.

The committee observes that support to social and cultural events is part and parcel of the corporate social responsibility of KCCA. However, not all items in the budget must be implemented, especially in times of revenue shortfall. The Executive Director explained to the council the problems KCCA was facing with financing the budget and advised that the Authority should focus on priority expenditure items amidst a situation of inadequate resources.

Recommendation 14: The committee recommends that this allegation be dropped. Kampala City Council Authority should be given time to settle down and fulfil its core mandate and then later, with time, it can finance other non-core activities.

Accountability Issues

i) Shs 58 billion from Divisions
  
The committee was informed that Shs 58 billion was found on the frozen accounts of the defunct KCC by the new management of KCCA. It was not accounted for. 

ii) Job Stimulus Package 

The committee was informed that Shs 16.5 billion meant for a job stimulus package for youth in Kampala was mismanaged, leading to demonstrations by the youth who were the intended beneficiaries. 

iii) Solid Waste Management 

The committee was informed that Shs 17 billion for solid waste management was wastefully spent on recurrent costs and without the approval of the Authority. No refuse collection trucks were purchased. 

iv) Kitezi Landfill 

The committee was informed that the condition of Kitezi landfill was deplorable, despite Shs 2.4 billion spent every year to maintain the landfill. The committee visited Kitezi and found out that the contractor, M/S Otada Construction Company, had abandoned the site because of unfavourable conditions by management. A new contractor was subsequently hired at a higher cost than the previous one.

v) Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance 

The committee was informed that Shs 45 billion for rehabilitation and maintenance of various roads in the city was mismanaged. Only a few sections of roads in the Central Business District (CBD) were resealed; even then, they were done poorly. Also, the strategic five-year plan for road construction and maintenance being implemented had never been approved by the Authority. 

The committee visited Kafumbe Mukasa Road and found it in a most deplorable state. The committee later learnt that the contract for Kafumbe Mukasa Road had been awarded and that work would soon begin. 

vi) City Drainage 

The committee was informed that Shs 5.4 billion for drainage was released to rehabilitate ten black spots in Kampala, but this was not done, resulting in floods in the city. The committee was also informed that Shs 1.2 billion for improvement of Nakivubo Channel was not accounted for. 

vii) Street Lighting 

The committee was informed that Shs 5 billion for upgrading street lights from thermal to solar energy lights to cover 25 km was not accounted for and there were no such lights installed in the city.

viii) KCCA Mortuary and Ambulance Services
 
The committee was informed that although money was released for the purchase of five ambulances and rehabilitation of the city mortuary, no ambulance was bought and the renovation of the mortuary was not done. The committee visited the city mortuary and found it dysfunctional. Actually, it was terrible. There were no ambulances and management explained that they had rejected the type of ambulances brought by the supplier and that the contract for the rehabilitation of the city mortuary was still being processed. 

The committee observes that most of the above allegations required specialised financial accounting experts to review books of accounts and financial statements of KCCA. The committee was unable to verify the claims of lack of accountability in the above cases. 

Recommendation 15: The committee recommends that a forensic audit be carried out on KCCA in general, to cover the activities of both the technical management and political leadership of the city. Where mismanagement was done by the former management and political leaders of KCC, they should also be brought to book in accordance with the law. This means the current and the former.
 
Meetings of the Authority and Committees

The committee was informed that the meetings of the Authority and committees had been frustrated by lack of quorum mainly instigated by the ED. The Lord Mayor had resorted to special meetings, which too were not attended. The ED was not attending Authority meetings to give technical guidance. Much of the work of management was therefore done without approval of the Authority. The ED explained that convening meetings was the responsibility of the Lord Mayor and even then, should be done in accordance with the prescribed procedures. 

The committee observes that the Authority has had only one formal ordinary meeting of the council since its inception. Note that the law requires the Authority to meet at least once in every three months (Schedule 4.1). The committees have also not met since October 2012. Even where the council and its committees are purported to have met, there were no signed minutes of such meetings of the council and committees. This contravenes Schedule 4(3) of the KCCA Act. The blame game for this continues between the Lord Mayor, councillors and the ED. It has even engulfed the Minister. 

Recommendation 16: The committee recommends that the Minister should use his powers under Section 79 of the KCCA Act to prevail over the Authority and ensure that meetings of the Authority and committees are held as provided for in the law. At subsequent meetings, the minutes of the previous meeting should be read, confirmed and signed. Resolutions should be extracted and registered for action by management.

Leadership Crisis

The committee was informed that there was a leadership crisis at City Hall. The situation has degenerated into open abuses, bickering, disrespect and violence. There is daily exchange of abusive letters between different officers. Some officers fear for their lives and have to be guarded 24 hours. The committee was further informed that the impasse in the leadership of the city had defeated all attempts at an amicable solution. Sessions to reconcile the parties, even in courts of law, did not produce any tangible results. 

The committee observes that the leadership crisis at KCCA has far reaching implications. Some of these are:

a) 	The council has failed to meet to put in place policies for running the city. The failure to exercise policy function is a breach of the key mandate of the Authority, given under Section 7(1) (a) of the KCCA Act.

b) 	The Authority has operated without approved budgets and has failed to abide by the budget cycle. Without a budget approved by the Authority, the basis of all expenditures is questionable and is a violation of Section 52(1) of the KCCA Act. They are just spending money without authority or no budgets or anything.

c) 	The Authority has failed to exercise its legislative function; no Bill for an ordinance has been initiated or passed since the councillors took office. This is a failure of a key function of the Authority under Section 8 of the KCCA Act. 

d) The Authority’s standing committees are non-functional. There are no signed minutes of any committee meeting or reports hence the directorates are not supervised, contrary to Section 16(3) of the KCCA Act.

e) 	Resolutions of the Authority are not traceable and are not valid. When management is left to simply do what they think is right in their judgment, then there is no point blaming management for not implementing council resolutions as the resolutions are non-existent.

f) 	The Authority has failed to hold regular meetings. Only one meeting was held. This is contrary to Schedule 4(1) of the KCCA Act. Council has even failed to hold special meetings on schedule. There are no signed minutes of council meetings. Councillors have packed and gone on permanent recess. Council is literally in abeyance. Governance systems have collapsed; the city is in a state of confusion as far as political leadership, which is entrusted with executive and legislative functions, is concerned.

g) 	Despite failure to perform their mandatory functions, councillors have continued to draw huge salaries and allowances. The committee notes with concern that KCCA has spent Shs 26.9 billion on the Authority councillors in terms of salaries and allowances in the last two years.

h) 	The Authority’s misconduct embarrasses the central Government. This is because the Authority governs the capital city on behalf of the central Government as provided under Section 5(3) of the KCCA Act. They have turned Kampala into an ungovernable place, drenched in a state of anarchy and unending conflict.

Recommendation 16(a): The committee recommends that the President of the Republic of Uganda exercises his constitutional responsibility under Article 99(1) of the Constitution, which provides that, “The executive authority of Uganda is vested in the President and shall be exercised in accordance with this Constitution and the laws of Uganda.” 

As head of the central Government, the President is obliged by the Constitution to take charge of affairs of the capital city, since the Constitution provides that: “Kampala located in Buganda shall be the capital city for Uganda and shall be administered by the Central Government.” – (Interjections) - The President may exercise this responsibility –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members! Let us listen to the rest of the report then we debate. Please.

MS KINTU: The President may exercise this responsibility either directly or through officers subordinate to him as provided by Article 99(4) of the Constitution.

Recommendation 16(b): The committee recommends that the President’s takeover of KCCA executive and legislative functions – (Interjections) - takes immediate effect and shall be for a period not exceeding six months. Parliament may approve a longer term on request by the President if at the expiry of the six months the prevailing circumstances still make it impossible for the Authority to resume administration of the city.
 
Strengthening Policy and Management of KCCA

The committee observes that the current leadership crisis at KCCA has been mostly due to glaring gaps in the KCCA Act – I need your protection, Mr Speaker – as well as inconsistency of the policy and management structures with the corporate status of KCCA.

Recommendation 17: The committee recommends that reforms be undertaken to amend the KCCA Act and to strengthen the policy and management structures of KCCA, particularly the following:
    • Constitute a manageable, competent governing board of the city, subordinate to the President and with clear terms of reference.
    • Review the functions and structural relationships of the governing body and the administrative organs.
    • Strengthen the office of Minister for Kampala; make it a full Cabinet post on its own, not shared with other responsibilities. 
    • Restructure the governance and management of the Authority and its branches/divisions to conform to KCCA’s new corporate status.
    • Review the processes to protect the franchise of the people of Kampala without curtailing service delivery and good governance of the city.

Conclusion

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, the committee is of the view that the prayer of the petitioners has been handled as requested. There is no need for a select committee of Parliament to repeat the work that has been done exhaustively by this committee. 

The committee wishes to thank the Speaker and Members of Parliament for the trust, tremendous support and encouragement. We thank the petitioners who brought this matter to Parliament and the witnesses for their time and co-operation, as well as the media and the general public for the interest shown in this matter. 

Kampala City Council Authority is a young organisation in its current nature. It needs to be protected from unnecessary wrangles that bog down the efforts to develop Kampala into a modern city cherished by all its residents and visitors. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on a matter of a petition presented by the Lord Mayor to this House through members of this House. The committee has studied the prayers of the petitioners and it has come out with conclusions and recommendations on some of the matters, which we should now discuss.

Honourable members, this is the spirit with which the Ninth Parliament has been doing things; we take petitions because people have gained confidence in Parliament and are always bringing their petitions here. The earlier we handle them, the better. We have a long list of other petitions that have not been handled, including that of the salaries of the former staff of Kyambogo, which I reiterated the other day should be handled expeditiously. This will enable us retain public confidence; the quicker we handle petitions, the more the public will be confident that we can handle their issues.

Honourable members, we can now debate this matter. Can we agree on a timeframe for our discussion? 

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, we have received a report and under rule 103, we are required to commence debate after three days. The intention was to allow Parliament, I suppose, to internalise and debate from a point of knowledge. I am, therefore, wondering whether it will not be procedurally right, like actually we have done with the earlier reports presented today, for us to go and internalise the report and then come back to debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please read the rule you have just cited.

MR SSEMUJJU: Rule 193(4): “Debate on a report of a Committee on a Bill shall take place at least three days after it has been laid on the Table by the Chairperson...” –(Interjections)- Go for the intention; do not behave like you are robots. What was the intention here? (Laughter) We are correcting mistakes that you made here by shouting “Aye” and you are continuing to do the same.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, restrain yourselves; the comments you made last were not necessary, for the record. I think these are specific rules and their purposes are known. Fortunately, here it says, “Debate on a report of a Committee on a Bill shall take place at least three days after it has been laid on the Table by the chairperson or the deputy chairperson or a member nominated by the Committee or by the Speaker.” 

That is what the rule says and it relates to a Bill. This is not a Bill but a public petition. So if you want to debate it, you can go ahead. 

Honourable members, you should not access the microphone before you have been allowed. Like I earlier said, the recording of the Hansard becomes complicated when they are receiving all these voices from the microphones. Let me have the Opposition Whip.

THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Winifred Kiiza): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee chairperson and her committee for the nice report they have presented. (Applause) However, I wish to request that we study this report first so that we can have a fruitful debate. Please allow us to sleep over it and discuss it tomorrow. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as much as this matter does not fall within rule 193(4), as I have already explained, the proposal from the Opposition Chief Whip is that the debate is deferred to tomorrow. Can we take a decision on this?

MR MAJEGERE: Mr Speaker, given the fact that the previous Parliament made mistakes – (Interjection) - I am trying to justify the statement I am making. They made mistakes because they were in a hurry. For us not to make similar mistakes but rather assist KCCA and Government, we need to go back, get more information and come back here when we are well informed.(Mr Tinkasiimire rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is not a matter that you need to give information; you just rise to make your contribution. I do not see any justification for giving information. Honourable member, wind up so that we give others the opportunity to respond. The question is: should we defer debate? Now, you want to give information on that also! (Laughter)

MR MAJEGERE: Mr Speaker, as I wind up, I want to second the chief whip of the Opposition that we defer this debate so that we go back, revise this report thoroughly and we come back when we are well informed and can take an informed decision. 

THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, I rise to support hon. Winnie Kiiza in her reasonable proposition that this is a very important report, it is a long report, and we had not had the opportunity to look at it and it deserves study and thorough debate. Therefore, I support the proposition that we give it time, that we debate on Tuesday next week –(Interjections)– I speak as the Leader of Government Business and hon. Semujju may not know that. 

Government obviously still has very urgent business to handle in the coming days. As you know, we have not received the Budget Committee report. I hope we will finish the Public Order Management Bill today, but there are also issues that you had wisely advised, Mr Speaker, that we debate tomorrow, on the question of the loan. So we still have a lot of business to do. Thank you.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two procedural issues to raise. The first one relates to the Rules of Procedure, rule 208 - minutes of proceedings to be brought up with reports of committees. It says, “The minutes of the proceedings of a committee shall be brought up and laid on the Table of the House together with the report of the committee by the chairperson or deputy chairperson or any member of the committee nominated by the committee when reporting to the House.” This being a very important matter touching on the Constitution, I beg that you invoke this rule and let the chairperson lay on the Table the minutes of the proceedings of the committee. 

The second issue I want to raise is that this is a very important report and some of us do not have the report. When I asked, they said they were not enough for all the Members. So, can we ask the clerk to produce enough copies so that we all have enough copies and study it –(Interruptions)–(Laughter) I thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we can all see that men take their function seriously. (Laughter) Now, on the issue of the minutes, Madam Chair, would you like to lay the minutes on the Table?

MS FLORENCE KINTU: Mr Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table the minutes of the proceedings that the committee had during the hearing on the mismanagement of affairs of KCCA. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is so captured. Honourable members, the procedural point that was raised was that rule 208 be complied with. I have asked the chairperson to comply with that rule. I have just received on record a copy of the minutes. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The chairperson has actually laid on the Table a file; minutes contain at least dates. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have got your point. Even in one of the loan requests, we received the minutes like that. What do you want, for minutes to be laid one by one? No, let us not start redefining the rules. The rule says, “The minutes of the proceedings of a Committee shall be brought up and laid on the Table of the House, together with the report of the Committee, by the chairperson or deputy chairperson or any Member of the committee nominated by the committee, when reporting to the House.” 

Honourable members, the reason why these documents are laid before the House is so that they become property of the House. Once they are property of the House, any Member can get a copy of them any time you want. Now that they are there, you can get a copy. We are going to start this debate on Tuesday and then you can come and raise those issues if you like. But the rules only require that the minutes be laid and they have so been laid and you have access to them. Let us go to the next item.

Honourable members, can we have some order! Can we resume our seats. We have two Bills that are now at committee stage and we have processed both of them midway, that is No. 7 and No.8. The one that came to committee stage first was No. 8. I think we should go to No. 8 first, in the order of how they came to committee stage.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PUBLIC ORDER MANAGEMENT BILL, 2011

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you will recall that yesterday clause 7 just survived us narrowly; we almost passed it but we reached a point where we were not able to progress. So, can we have those last recommendations on clause 7 before we adjourned the House yesterday so that we see how to move. 

Clause 7

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The next proposal for amendment was to immediately insert –(Interruption)–

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we had not concluded on clause 7(2). You will recall that we were dealing with the case of where there is no form. Supposing you go to the Police Station and there is no form, we had proposed that somebody could put it in writing. 

Mr Chairman, if you look at sub clause (1), it says, “An organiser shall give notice in writing…” That issue of the form does not exist because under sub clause (1) we have already said it will be in writing. That means the person writes. So, I do not know why we are bringing in the form and yet in sub clause (1) we have said they will give notice in writing. 

Mr Chairman, I want to propose that the heading of sub clause (2), which mentions Form A, should be deleted because under sub clause (1) we have said it will be in writing.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Chairman, if you look at the Schedule of the Bill, Form A, that is the notification which is supposed to be given and it is also going to be done in writing. That form is going to be filled in writing, if you look at page 16 of the original Bill. The new amendment, which the committee has proposed and which we have accepted, says that it will be filled in triplicate so that the organisers can have a copy. 

The additional requirement of putting this in writing is going to be problematic. People will be writing in different styles and some writing may not be legible. The form is a standard format, and it is uniformity which we are looking for. The Government should take responsibility to make sure that Form A is always available for people who want to notify the Police. That is the assurance I want to give. But to require everybody to keep writing in case Form A is not available is going to be problematic. That is my position.

MS AOL: We brought up this idea of writing letters because of the experiences on the ground with forms in very many institutions of Government. If it is very difficult for you to accept people who would like to request to put it in writing, is it possible for the officers concerned to write something? These days if you go to register your case, they have a special format they use; they write and present you with a paper. Is it okay if they write, in case you do not get this form? 

We cannot completely say that these forms will always be available when the experience on the ground is that with government institutions, it is very difficult to get the forms. We have people who go for health issues or when they are injured and then it is them who try and go and photocopy forms. So, can you ensure that –(Information)-

MR OLANYA: Thank you very much, hon. Aol. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform hon. Aol that we have a certain form with the Police called Form 3 for the children for medical examination in case of rape, etc. I remember one day we took a case to a police station in Amuru but we failed to get the form. We then came to Gulu, the main police station, and we looked for the forms and they were not there. Therefore, honourable minister, I really feel it is quite difficult if you are saying you will make sure the forms are there. Practically, it is very difficult with the Government institutions, especially with the police stations.

MS AOL: That was information for me. Thank you for the information, honourable colleague. The Minister should assure us, because we do not want our people to get lost. It is very difficult to sometimes get these forms at the police stations or at other government institutions. So, give us alternatives; do not stick on that one.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, would there be a need for anybody to write if the form was there?

THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Hillary Onek): Thank you, Mr Chairman. Yesterday, I said yes to writing, but what I did not realise was that we cannot legislate outside the norms. The forms must be there and we must legislate for the forms. Anywhere in administration, there are flexibilities that are exercised by those who are managing. When the Police is taking a statement, for example, if the forms are not there, they get paper and fold it and use it to write the statement. So, those are administrative decisions, which can be made when there is a shortage of this nature, but we cannot make it a legal requirement. 

The legal requirement is to have the forms at every police station. In the absence of the forms, the police officer will exercise their discretion to see how to manage but that cannot be a legislative matter. Thank you.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want us to legislate as Ugandans, well aware of the conditions that pervade our society. The most critical form for capital offences like defilement, as a Member has stated, are usually the Police forms known as PF3. I want the minister to be honest with us; when you find a PF3 form, you have to carry it some distance and photocopy it. When you do not find it, we have been relegated to getting exercise books, pulling out the staples and folding the sheet longitudinally, and the minister is aware of this.

May I, therefore, propose that if the minister is interested in form rather than substance, can we say “a form or in writing”, so that where the form really is not available this should not impede? Someone making the request can put that request in writing but we can capture both, either in a form or in writing because the writing-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But that was the proposal, actually.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I do not see any harm. Why is the minister saying, “as Government, we work on forms”? Yes, honourable minister, you are right but is it practical on the ground? Why don’t you legislate for something that will be sustainable? In which case, I would propose that you take both. 

Statements are written, they are never filled in forms, honourable Minister of Internal Affairs. Statements made to the Police are usually in writing; so what is incongruous with us saying “a form or in writing”? The Police may not have the forms but you, the applicant, has the right to have your exercise book or any other paper and make your application or request in writing. I would propose, Mr Chairman, that we capture both as it does no harm. We will not be breaking any law and we can then proceed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there are just two situations and they have been captured well. Regarding the question of the medical form PF3, what is the provision in the law? Isn’t it that it should be in the prescribed form PF3? But where it is not available, people have been writing in exercise books. That is the point the minister was making.

Now, the question which I raised is: if you are going to guarantee that the forms will be there, will there be anybody writing? If the forms are going to be there, then what is the harm of saying that if they are not there, then you write? Please, get my point. What is the harm in saying that they should also be in writing but for you, make sure that the forms are there so that there is no need for anybody to just write? Let us not go into things that are going to bog us down. What would be the harm in that?

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, I do not think we are talking about harm being done or not being done. The point I raised yesterday, as a lawyer, is that I think you would be setting a legislative precedent because what we provide for are forms and in very many cases, forms are provided for. In very many cases, legislation provides for forms. I have not, in the time I have been around, seen anywhere a provision being made for alternatives to the forms provided in the law. We should –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to give the chairman of the committee information. To begin with, you have approved that the organiser shall give a notice in writing, not in filling. Now you come to (2) and say, “shall be in a form”. That means if there is no form, which is mandatory, you have nowhere to go.

The experience I want to give you is that we have had our embassies running out of stock of visa stickers and even stamps and yet money is paid for them. If we can run out of these things where we get money, what about this one, which does not involve money? 

First, you made a mistake and approved writing. Writing does not mean filling. If you had wanted, you would have said, “the organiser shall give notice by filling the form” but you said “in writing”. Writing means you get a piece of paper, write and sign. You also said, “in writing, signed...”. 

In the second one, when you are trying to qualify it, you should now come and say that if the writing cannot be done, then you fill a form. This is because in the first one, you have agreed to write.

MR TASHOBYA: Well, Mr Chairman, I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for the information that he has given me. However, I would like to inform him as well that you can also actually sign a form. Signing does not mean you sign a letter; you can sign a form.

Mr Chairman, the issue I was trying to raise is –(Interruption)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Chairman, I would like the chairman of the committee to assist me in understanding the content of the letter, the writing. I would like to assume that the information given in writing is the information captured in the form. I would like you to marry both of them. If I am writing for permission, the information you require me to fill in the form is the one I write to you and sign. Therefore, you can act on my letter even if your form does not exist.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I think what I am proposing will capture what all of us arguing on this point want to capture. We could insert another sub clause after (2) and say, “in the absence of Form A referred to in sub section (2), the organiser shall give notice in writing containing substantially the information required under Form A.” Of course, the process will require that that information is also provided in duplicate.

DR LULUME BAYIGGA: Mr Chairman, the assumption the learned Attorney-General is making is that all people organising meetings are literate. That is the assumption that is being made or-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, that takes us back because the paragraph we have passed says, “shall be in writing”. If you cannot write, somebody will write for you. Please, do not take us back on that. We have already passed “shall be in writing”. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the moment we agree upon what the learned Attorney-General has said, then it ceases to be “shall”. It will instead read, “The notice referred to in subsection (1) will be in Form A in Schedule 2 and will include…” This is because down there he refers to “if Form A is not there” but he has said “shall”, which means it ceases to be-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, “shall” and then you qualify it. It is normal drafting, my brother, honourable. When you say “shall be like this”, then you create exceptions to the “shall”. They operate to qualify the “shall”. So it is still acceptable. Learned Attorney-General, please put it properly so that I can put the question to it. 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I do concede to the proposal by the Attorney-General.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you. Please re-state it for the record so that I can put the question to it.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, the proposal is for the insertion of a new sub clause, sub clause (3), which should read, “In the absence of Form A referred to in subsection (2), the organiser shall give notice in writing containing substantially the information required under Form A.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Where we have reached, it is now a very simple thing. Attorney-General, please re-state it without “substantially” because it does not matter. 

MR RUHINDI: “…containing the information required under Form A.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is it. Is it clear to you? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, as you are aware, sub clause (2) says, “notwithstanding sub clause (1)”. I want to propose – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Which one are we looking at?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Sub clause (1) mentions the three days’ notice. However, you recall that hon. Anywarach raised an important issue about an organised meeting, which is not spontaneous and is an emergency. Now, my proposal is that we insert the phrase, “Notwithstanding subsection (1), the organiser or his or her agent shall give notice to hold a public meeting in 24 hours where the meeting arises due to an emergency.” The reason is that it is organised and not spontaneous.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Anywarach, are you responding, since you have been quoted on this? Should we have a general discussion on this?

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, I remember when we gave the proposal yesterday, you suggested, and the committee chairperson said, that we should place that amendment under spontaneous meetings. However, after thinking about it, almost trans-night, I realised that we shall lose the point. This is an urgent meeting, probably organised by people who want to demonstrate, and you are planning to settle the matter either for the general good of the people or in the interest of peace. That is why we came up with this one. 

My suggestion is as follows: “Notwithstanding section 7(1), any organiser shall give notice of a public meeting where the matter constituting the reason for the meeting is urgent in nature and is of public interest.” We should not include the timeframe. I gave the situation in Parombo in my constituency where people were planning for a demonstration regarding the money not paid by a cotton buyer. We were called to explain to people that it was not Government’s role since the concerned people were private buyers. Eventually, the money was paid. So, for meetings of that sort, I think this amendment is necessary. 

MS BETTY AMONGI: Mr Chairman, I support that proposal because even under our Rules of Procedure, we have catered for matters of urgent importance; what was the rationale for this? The rationale was that something can happen in a Member’s constituency, which cannot wait for the usual three days that is required before one can move a motion. Look at the example of the Kasese floods; something happens at night and you would want to raise it the following day. 

If I am to give an example of what has been happening around the country, which necessitates demonstrations. Today I was reading in the press about a pregnant woman in West Nile who went to a health centre III and needed an ambulance. She was denied one because the staff were allegedly going for training using the ambulance. The family, therefore, had to put the woman on a truck carrying charcoal in order to take her to the regional referral hospital. 

People later came up in support of the woman and to denounce the action of the health workers. The regional health officer had to make a statement before commencing investigations. Many of such issues of women dying because of a health worker’s action or inaction and people have demonstrated in places like Jinja, Mbale and others – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is clear.

MS AMONGI: With that, I want to bring out circumstances that can lead to an emergency meeting, which should be provided for under this law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister and committee chairperson, this kind of meeting does not require a three-day notice.

MR TASHOBYA: Honourable members, I would like to say that I understand the concerns raised by the honourable member across. However, I would like to draw your attention to the original Bill, which provided that a notice should be issued seven days early. Considering the issues you are now raising, and even some of the matters that came out of the debate we had, we came to a compromise of a three-day notice so as to avoid people losing interest in the issues they wish to raise. 

What hon. Anywarach was talking about regarding the meeting he held, those were important issues he was going to address. It is good that the meeting was successful but supposing there was a security breakdown, the good he had wanted to promote may have been counterbalanced by the dangers of having a large number of people without the necessary security. So, I think the compromise we had yesterday by reducing the days from seven to three, and also the spontaneous meetings we agreed on, were aimed at taking into account some of those concerns. 

Mr Chairman, the main point I am raising is the danger. God forbid that there was a breakdown among the crowd he had gathered, we would have to look at that aspect as well in relation to the good he was trying to protect.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to appeal to the committee chairperson that when we are in this business of legislating, we do not have to be unnecessarily magnanimous or to appear so. To say that because the Bill was providing for seven, we have agreed to put seven; that is not your role. It is absolutely not! Just look at the rationale of the proposal. If it has merits, you can uphold the seven. 

The argument is that there could be those spontaneous occasions; where in this case is the sacrosanctness of the three, the seven or the one? It does not add up. Members are raising the rationale. In fact, there are many times where you may not have organised, but situations arise that you have to be there and you have to contain the situation. 

I can tell you, Mr Speaker and honourable members, that in that issue I raised here, people were saying, “Let us go and eat those cows”. You know the consequences of that. The people were ready to eat Kellen’s cows and feast on them. So, a leader had to come in and say, “No, do not do that”. It is in such circumstances, the Members are proposing, and I think the chairman should agree, that these are exceptional circumstances that do not require notice but call on you as a leader. You either run away and the situation gets out of hand or you take up your leadership role. (Interruption)

MS KIIZA: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. Mr Chairman, I want to give a scenario that happened in Kasese recently. When we were hit by floods and people gathered in camps, people had to get out of the camps because they were not used to that situation and were going into what they perceived to be public land. The police swung into action to remove the people from this land but they went and regrouped somewhere. The Minister, Dr Crispus Kiyonga, had to call the people for an emergency meeting and he did not have to inform the Police; he met them without police notice and he corrected the situation. He met them because there was a crisis. 

If we are to pass the law with these hard restrictions that you must get authority from the Police, sought three days earlier, he would not have corrected that situation and possibly, people would have died in that situation. So, we are saying there should be flexibility within the law to allow members of the community to handle certain situations as they come, even if you give just a minute’s notice. He had to save a situation that was running out of hand without necessarily informing the Police over a long period of time. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let us be together on this. The point is not to dispense with a notice; I think that is where the honourable Member for Lwemiyaga was going away from what was proposed. It is not about not giving notice; it is about giving notice in a shorter time.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, I was improving on that. I asked, what is the sacrosanctness of the seven, three and one? In other words, for practical purposes, we do not need it. I remember seeing the honourable Minister for Defence sweating while meeting these people – (Interruption)

MR ROBERT KASULE: Mr Chairman, we spent the whole afternoon yesterday and we debated days to the extent that people lost energy. Everybody left this Parliament to go home and sleep because of the calories we had used. Is the honourable member in order to take us back, now that yesterday he was not around? Do we have to debate the same issues as if we have never talked about it?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, this is a situation which has been presented from the Leader of the Opposition and the Member for Padyere and it has been argued. All the Members who were not here yesterday needed his information, which we have given them now. If he continues on that line of trying to take us back, certainly he would be crossing the line. 

So, honourable member, it was agreed that there should be notice. The notice that was agreed upon yesterday was that it should be three days. What the Member is proposing is to provide for emergency situations where you give notice in a shorter time than three days, not that there should be no notice. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: I would like to concur with your guidance, Mr Speaker, and I appreciate the exceptional circumstances of emergency. I think it is a matter that we can move forward on. Thank you. 

MR BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, as we legislate for meetings, it is normal to legislate for emergency meetings. I am sure that my colleague, hon. Amama Mbabazi, and I have days in our parties where we give notice for a meeting but again also cater for emergency meetings of the party. 

In this case, certain things can happen. Let me give an example. In my constituency, there is SACCO – (Interjections) – I am not saying that we do not give notice, but for public interest, for example, where you go to the Police – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, the principle is established; no amount of illustration will explain it better. The principle is that there are situations that require emergency response where three days may not suffice. It does not matter how many instances you sight from your constituencies. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I shared informally with hon. Joshua Anywarach; the challenge I have is to begin macro managing this arrangement and making it problematic. We cannot solve, and I do not think it is the purpose to solve, all the challenges we have in our society through public meetings. There are many mechanisms of handling emergency situations. 

The challenge I have is that the moment you introduce this provision, you will have to go ahead and define emergency meetings. When you do so, you are likely to land into a problem of institutionalising or creating a framework of determining the power to determine what amounts to an emergency meeting. We will then land into the Muwanga Kivumbi case of subjectivity and giving excessive discretionary powers to that body to determine that this is an emergency meeting and this is not. 

I think we should be mindful of the fact that we are not going to solve and we normally do not solve many of our problems in society through public meetings. If it is an emergency in Bududa, we know the institutions to run to and handle that situation. You can even go and inform them through some ways and means that this matter is being handled in such a manner. Otherwise, we are going to land into very serious problems with that provision.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, even in the case that has been cited by hon. Betty Amongi, or even for emergency issues that we bring to the House that we do not have to give notice of three days to the Speaker, there is an institution that processes it. You do not just come to the House and start raising this. That discretion is given to the Speaker and it is in the Speaker’s judgement that this matter qualifies, just like the honourable members did today; we had a discussion with them and then I said, “let us go and you raise it in the House”. 

What the Attorney-General is saying is that you will introduce something that the Constitutional Court has introduced already in terms of legislation, that you are bound to bring in this question of subjectivity again, which according to the case of Muwanga Kivumbi was dealt with. You are going to give some authority to somebody to subjectively deal with the thing - Is it urgent? If he says it is not urgent when it is urgent, what happens? That is what the Attorney-General is saying. If you have understood it that way, we can process any other contribution. 

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Chairman, I listened to the learned Attorney-General very attentively and I followed. We are talking about notification and I do not think it is about seeking permission per se. Therefore, the issue of subjectivity does not arise because it does not call for allowing or disallowing, in respect of the Muwanga Kivumbi case. 

I want to put it across that determination of what is an emergency is intrinsic to those people who want to undertake the meeting; it cannot be extrinsic to call for that subjectivity. Therefore, I would like to buy the argument of having the three days as it had been passed, but with a provision for a shorter time for notification. Thank you, Mr Chairman. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Chairman, I have seen, mainly during the campaign period, largely many of the meetings we hold are not regulated. You will appreciate the circumstances under which sometimes you may have to call for an emergency meeting, like when you have heard that there is a plan to stuff ballots in a particular sub-county and it is coming to 6 o’clock and the following day is voting day. Do you sit back? How do you handle such a situation? I know you are a politician and you will be the first one to break that rule. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, for purposes of the Hansard, you have to state the person you are referring to otherwise they might read that you are talking to the Speaker. (Laughter)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Yes, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, you refer directly to- 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I am directly referring to the committee chair and I am certain – [Mr Tashobya: “Information.”] - For sure, I am more informed on this matter. [Mr Tashobya: “Order.”] Okay, I take the information. (Laughter)

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, I will give the information. Let me inform my friend, hon. Tinkasiimire, that the Bill we are debating now is about public meetings. I would like to inform him that meetings and rallies during election time are governed by the relevant laws, not this one. So, what we are debating now would not be relevant to the situation you are describing. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: That is very useful information, Mr Chairman. Does he want to impute that during election time some laws of the land shall be suspended?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, other laws will be in place. There will be other laws governing that period. That is what he is saying.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, the spirit behind the attempt to move this amendment is embedded in the fact - We have a saying in our language, which loosely translated would say, “Troubles in the grave are best known to the corpse.” I rose up because I encountered that situation but thank God, we had a very cordial relationship with the DPC and he swung into action very fast.

My final plea is, if a situation like the second one that I explained to the Attorney-General arose, where people wanted to go and lynch a person who was released by the Police – he was suspected to have killed someone - but the Police needed to go and finish their investigation. That wasn’t in my constituency but all of us rushed, in the interest of peace for the Alur people, to go and calm the situation. Should we have to wait for when the Police will arrest those people for organising a public meeting without permission when actually things are getting out of hand or we should run and quell the situation? Do we do any wrong by giving notice to the Police for such urgent meetings?

MR BABA: Mr Chairman, that is why we provided for the spontaneous meetings, meetings which are unplanned, unscheduled, unintended, to cater for this kind of thing and not require notification.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chair, the reason why I inform the Police is also for my security. So, in case they give me security-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member for Padyere, the situation you have described is spontaneous; so, that discretion has taken away your original proposition. Whatever happened was spontaneous because people were moving and they had to be stopped. They had not planned to move. Something happened that excited everybody and people were on the move - “Let’s go, let’s go, let’s go”; something like that. That is spontaneous. 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, I thank you for your guidance. However, my going there with the numbers of opinion leaders and so on is already, I would say, if I can borrow some words from law, like action aforethought. It is already a planned thing that within three hours we are going to address –(Interjections)- I am giving an example. That is why I initially gave the example of the people who wanted to demonstrate against Government for the Shs 350 million cotton money. We had to rush and address the people. Should we take three days in order to ask for permission to do that for the benefit of the greater good?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The question that would be operating is: had you planned to meet them? If you had not planned to meet them but a situation has arisen that you must meet them, then that is spontaneous. That is what the minister is saying. If you had not planned to meet them but something has happened that now you must actually meet them, then it is spontaneous. You have not planned for it and that is what the minister is saying is the distinction being made. So, let us understand it in that context and see whether there is anything to qualify under this apart from something that has happened and cannot be avoided and which must be handled spontaneously.

MR BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I was bringing an example from my constituency where we had a micro finance SACCO. It had been alleged that the officers of that microfinance had misappropriated funds and some people planned to go and attack the officers who were manning that SACCO. We are legislating as Members of Parliament who are leaders in our constituencies. I had to go down there. The depositors were almost moving to attack the officers who were manning the microfinance. Now in that situation where you see that they are going to cut down plantations, what do you do?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What it is saying is that in that case, you do not need to give notice because it is a spontaneous meeting. That is what they are proposing. In that case, you do not need to give anybody notice, you just go and deal with the situation because it is spontaneous. That is what is being proposed. 

Members, are we together on this? You see, they have given you the leeway. If the matter is so urgent that you did not plan to do it, you went to bed not thinking you were going to have a meeting, you wake up in the morning and there is a meeting at 9.00 a.m. that is spontaneous. You have not planned it so you do not give anybody notice. That is what it is saying in the section.

MR BAKA: Mr Chairman, honourable colleagues are debating as if there must be notice for every other meeting. If you are talking of 20 or 30 members in a constituency, call them to your home or office.

THE DEPUTY CHARPERSON: Now you are diverting us, honourable. The point is, if the meeting is such that it cannot be planned, then it is spontaneous and you do not have to give notice. Please, do not take us away from this focus.

Are we agreed on this? That is the provision that is there. Hon. Gilbert Olanya, all of a sudden there are situations or issues in Amuru, in Kilak, that are important and that necessitate that you must drive from Kampala at breakneck speed and talk to people; you do not need notice because it is spontaneous. In fact, you are safer when they say it is spontaneous than when you have to go-

MR OLANYA: Mr Chairman, I understand from the way you are explaining. Assuming you went to rescue a situation and it turns violent where people start rioting, don’t you think the law will catch up with you?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No. You see, it is not your problem. If it is spontaneous, then everybody has to go there; the Police has to respond and you are responding in your capacity. The obligation is not on you as it is not your meeting. That is what they are saying. It is not your meeting because you have not planned it.

MR AYENA-ODONG: Mr Chairman, you are treading on a very dangerous assumption that the word “spontaneous” is understood by all. I think we should understand the word “spontaneous” as a happening in the spur of the moment. Something has happened and then there is a sudden and spontaneous reaction to it. You are solving a problem that has happened suddenly and you are acting in the spur of the moment. You did not contemplate or plan for it and therefore there must be an immediate reaction to it. If a bomb drops into this building now, for example –(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, that is not a good example.
 
MR AYENA-ODONG: God forbid. I am told that if it ever happened, we might be lucky to go to heaven, but I suppose I do not want to go to heaven that way anyway. 

I was giving an example that something of great magnitude may happen. You know, spontaneity sometimes has a relationship with the magnitude of the happening. Something big happens that attracts a big following, a big public, and a spontaneous reaction has got to happen. People act in the spur of the moment; it has happened now, we must do something about it now. That is where we are getting problems. Mr Chairman, do you want to emphasise this so that you help us to go forward?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the emphasis you have given is sufficient. (Laughter) Members, can we agree on all the changes on 7? Can we now go through the issues because that matter, as is being explained, can be taken care of properly? Can we allow the chairperson to go through this other one so that we deal with one clause today? There are just one or two amendments and they are not very complicated now.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. They are not complicated. Immediately after sub clause (2) of clause 7, we propose to insert a new sub clause (3), which is about what we have been debating now and which reads as follows: “The written notice shall be filled in triplicate and upon immediate completion of part 9 thereof, copies shall be given to the applicant and the proprietor of the venue where the public meeting shall be held.” 

Mr Chairman, the justification is: to clarify on the procedure after the notice has been served. This is a matter we have been debating and I suppose it should have no problem. 

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, you remember we agreed on “written” and this is capturing “filled”, which presupposes the form only. So, if I can move an amendment to say, “The written notice shall be filled or written in triplicate...” This is because if you say “filled” only then it presupposes a form. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Suppose you say, “any notice”? This would capture both. Any notice under that should be given in triplicate so that you do not start-

MS AMONGI: Okay.

MR TASHOBYA: I do concede, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: State it properly. It is your amendment. Mr Chairman, they have just improved on your amendment so instead of saying the form, just say the notice should be given in triplicate.

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, “The notice to be given under this section shall be in triplicate and upon immediate completion of part 9 thereof, copies shall be given to the applicant and the proprietor of the venue where the public meeting shall be held.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay? I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that immediately after sub clause (3), the following sub clauses should be inserted: 
“(4) Where a public meeting is held, each of the persons organising it is guilty of an offence if- 
(a) The requirements of this section as to notice have not been satisfied; or 
(b) The date when it is held, the time when it starts, or its route, differs from the date, time or route specified in the notice.

(5)  It is a defence for the accused to prove that he or she did not know of, and neither suspected nor had reason to suspect, the failure to satisfy the requirements or (as the case may be) the difference of date, time and route.

(6) To the extent that an alleged offence turns on a difference of date, time or route, it is a defence for the accused to prove that the difference arose from circumstances beyond his control or from something done with the agreement of an authorised officer or by his direction.”

The justification is: for clarity. 

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Chairman, I would like to go along with the new proposed additions in (4) and (6), but I have a problem with (5). Mr Chairman, you and many other Members here are lawyers and you know that ignorance should not be legislated into defence. To say that it is a defence for the accused to prove that he or she did not know; how can we really legislate that? Even hon. Kivumbi Muwanga knows that ignorance should not be legislated into defence. I have a problem with this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, sometimes that phrase is misunderstood. The phrase, “Ignorance of the law is no defence”, operates on the presumption of publication in the Gazette. In other words, it is presumed from the date the law is published in the Gazette that everybody is aware. That is the presumption that operates in a Gazette publication. Once it is published in the Gazette, everybody knows and therefore you cannot say, “I did not know that there was such a law.” 

In this context, it does not apply. Here you are saying it is not a gazetted provision of the law; it is simply saying, “I did not actually know that I was supposed to pass here.” So, you are not legislating the defence of the ignorance of the law. This is not a case of ignorance of the law. It does not qualify within the presumption of the Gazette.

MR JAMES BABA: I have the greatest respect for the Chairman and since he is an eminent lawyer, I concede. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think this clarifies a lot of issues.

MR AYENA-ODONG: Mr Chairman, I have a small problem with the grammar – (Interjection) – Yes, the English. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Which particular one?

MR AYENA-ODONG: Part (5), which reads: “It is a defence for the accused to prove that he or she did not know of, and neither suspected…” I think that is not good English. I would put it this way: “It is a defence for the accused to prove that he or she did not know of, suspect nor had reason to suspect...” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is “suspected”.

MR AYENA-ODONG: No. “…did not know of, suspect -”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is “suspected” because the thing has passed. 

MR AYENA-ODONG: That “did not know of” goes with “suspect” as well; you cannot say “suspected”. We did a bit of J.A Bright. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, no, no. You see, if you put a comma, then that is a standalone. I happen to be a well trained draftsperson on this subject. If you put a comma there, it splits. The “did not” does not run beyond the comma. That is the rule of interpretation, unless you are going to state, “…did not know or did not suspect…” It has to be that clear. That is why “suspected” would be proper. “…did not know, did not suspect and had no reason to suspect…”

MR AYENA-ODONG: Absolutely! On that ground, I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So that J.A. Bright might be applying to you. (Laughter) So, that is the improvement on that area. Now, there is (4), (5) and (6). With the clarification and the conceding of the Minister, it is now about any improvement after we have taken the one from Oyam. 

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, I have an issue with (4)(b). It states that, “Where a public meeting is held, each of the persons organising it is guilty of an offence if the date when it is held, the time when it starts, or its route, differs from the date, time or route specified in the notice.” 

Mr Chairman, there are situations where you will notify the authorising officer, you agree on the route and then midway the route, during the procession, they re-direct you to change the route and yet your people know a particular route. What happens? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is why that defence exists in part (6). It will not operate against you because you will say, “We agreed with the authorised officer to change course.”

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, under those circumstances, if you, the organiser, did not actually have that route and it is the authorised officer, through his agent, who is changing the route and it is you being held for not following the route; why don’t - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is now why this is your defence. All you have to say is that, “No, it was the traffic officer who directed us to go this way.” That would be your defence, in other words.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have something to add on (b), which is, “…provided that the time limits shall not apply to town hall meetings.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, we passed that framework in the other clause.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: This is about meetings and time. Someone could choose to campaign in town hall meetings only. So, we should not be limited by time in a town hall campaign meeting.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That qualification cannot come here; it should have come in the main clause.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Chairman, it fits nicely here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, it may fit nicely in terms of pronunciation but it would not fit here, hon. Oguttu. So can I put the question on the amendment of the committee? Oh; there is another amendment to delete sub clause (3). Committee chairman, you were proposing to delete sub clause (3) because you have re-defined it.

MR TASHOBYA: Yes, Mr Chairman. I think this one is already taken – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, we actually did it yesterday. Now we take it that the new amendment is the insertion of (4), (5) and (6), with a modification on paragraph (5) to perfect that grammar in order to improve on it. I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I know what hon. Wafula Oguttu wants. You remember when we were working on sub clause (2), you said we should go down so that the committee chairperson moves. Now, he has an amendment – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is why I was coming back to him. We have now finished with the committee’s amendment. He had been standing for a long time to propose something; that is why I am now asking him to make his proposal. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Do we want to do away with subclauses (4), (5) and (6) of the committee?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We have already finished with subclauses (4), (5) and (6) of the committee.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But there are subclauses (4) and (5) in the Bill. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Sub clauses (4) and (5) of the Bill? We have not dealt with those ones yet; we are still dealing with the committee’s amendments. We have not dealt with clause 7 in its entirety. Now, hon. Oguttu, you had an amendment you wanted to propose.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: I would like to insert after sub clause (2)(b) the following: “The time limit shall not apply to town hall meetings”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: They may not have typical town halls in the villages, but they may have what we call community halls in some enclosed area. It is clear.

MR ROBERT KASULE: Mr Chairman, just as you said, some may have town halls and others community halls, and in Buganda, we have Ekitawuluzi; is there a need for us to define what he is proposing to avoid ambiguity? 

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: Mr Speaker, I have a problem with that position. If we specifically define town hall meetings, the kind of town hall meetings I have seen in this country are those in an enclosure which have always spilled over to the outside area. So when we say town hall meetings should not be in conformity with 7(2) (b), we will get problems. We have seen people say they will have enclosed meetings but at the end of the day, the so called enclosed meetings spill over and they become public meetings. So, I do not see why a town hall meeting should not be confined to this time limit. I do not see where the wrong is.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is the qualification you want to put due to the location of the meeting or is it because you do not want to give notice? Would you prefer not to give notice?

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, I would like to give notice, but I may decide to launch my campaign at 9 o’clock when everybody is at home and I would like it to be covered on television. So, if you limit me to 7 o’clock then I cannot have such a launch because I will be time barred. Usually, in electronic campaigns, you target a large audience when people are at home. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, the qualification is not on notice, it is on the time. We have closed time between 7.00 a.m. to 7.00 p.m. but now they are seeking to exclude that time for purposes of town hall meetings to be held 9.00 p.m. and so on.

MR ONEK: I think the worry here is whether that meeting, being enclosed, will not again spill out. If it spills out, then it will be a different meeting from the hall meeting. 

Secondly, we are talking about launching campaigns, but I think campaigns are covered under different laws and they give their time limit. What we are discussing here are public meetings; they can be political or otherwise, but outside the campaign period. Campaign period is covered by the electoral laws. 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Chair –(Laughter) – I wanted to see if you are alert. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, you might have to remove the glasses. (Laughter)

MR KAKOOZA: I withdraw that. I would have no problem extending the time from 7.00a.m to 9.00 p.m. but in some areas which have town halls, people may plan to do dubious things in the darkness and the Police may not have the capacity to control them. If it turns out to be rowdy, how do you control it? (Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Is it in order for the honourable colleague to bring back what we disposed of yesterday, to reopen it now? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, the debate has started because the honourable Member for Bukooli Central, hon. Wafula Oguttu, wants to exclude town hall meetings from the application of the restriction in time so that they can have them at night, maybe from 9.00 p.m. to midnight or maybe 3.00 a.m. So, I think the Member was making a contribution on that.

MR KAKOOZA: The proposed date and time of a public meeting, which shall be between 7.00 a.m. and 7.00 p.m., I think is okay. In towns without power, people can sit down after closing their shops to do dubious things. So, how do you deal with that kind of condition? I need clarification on that. 

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. By their nature, town hall meetings, or community meetings for those of us who come from villages, are by invitation and the population you address is well known to you. So, you can take charge of such meetings by their definition. Therefore, the issue on spilling over does not arise. 

The issue about rowdiness usually arises in meetings, which are organised in public places or in the public arena - outside. But by their definition, the people who are invited for town hall or community meetings are known to the organisers of the meeting and therefore they can take charge. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Maybe we can ask one question that could help us: Is such a meeting a public meeting? If it is, then we have to deal with it. 

MR AYOO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like the minister to clarify here on the issue raised by hon. Wafula Oguttu. Supposing you want to launch a book in a public hall and the programme is supposed to start at 7.30 p.m. or 8 O’clock, definitely that will become a public meeting on public affairs. What would happen when we are supposed to stop at 7.00p.m.? That is where we need to be clear on such meetings. Thank you.

MR AYENA-ODONG: Mr Chairman, we take a lot of cue from the definition of a public meeting. Let us refer to clause 6: “‘Public meeting’ means a gathering, assembly, concourse, procession or demonstration of three or more persons...” The important part, Mr Chairman, is as defined. Therefore would a meeting in a town hall be a public meeting? If it is not a public meeting, I would, with due respect, think that this addition would be redundant because it is catered for.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Wait. When I put that question to the Minister, he said that was a public meeting.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, thank you very much. I think here three things come out very clearly. You have a place, it is the town hall and it is a public place. Two, permission to have the meeting was sought for. Three, because of the peculiarity of the area, - we are talking of a town area - you are seeking for an extension of time. So, it is actually on time. Whether the meeting from inside spills over or not, it is already a public place, it is agreed; as an organiser, I gave information, so the Police ought to have known that there would be a spill over. Mine is now on the issue of time because of the nature of towns. 

I would think you want audience for your meeting and most people in towns are free after work, after their businesses and so on. These people even have lights in the public halls. I would think we should consider the nature of these areas and give them the benefit of doubt. After all, notice would have already been given and the Police would be aware, except on the question of time. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposed date and time of the public meeting shall be between 7.00 a.m. and 7.00 p.m.; does that regulate the duration of the meeting? If my meeting is starting at 7 o’clock- 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Perhaps let us try to go to the basis of this proposal. What are we curing by saying the meetings should be between 7 a.m. and 7 p.m.? What are we interested in here? It is the light of day- (Interjections)- Yes, light of the day such that maybe when you organise a meeting during the day, when it is visible, certain things that may endanger the people there will be seen when it is in the open and action can be taken to prevent harm- (Interjections)- Yes, terrorism. However, there are also some terrorist bombs which have exploded during the day, for example recently in Boston. 

To take care of the bigger risk in an open space in darkness, maybe we can say that if this meeting takes place in a place which is enclosed, it is easier to protect the people in an enclosed place even at night. Therefore, this part should be broken into two. One part should say that a meeting during the day must run in the time specified. But if it happens that the meeting will be at night, just like hon. Ayoo said, you would have known very well that this meeting was intended to be at night by design and it was going to be in a hall by design therefore, the issue of looking for sunshine does not arise. You do not need sunshine. You have to provide-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member for Obongi, there is a proposal from Bukooli Central that certain meetings should be excluded from this timeframe of 7.00 a.m. to 7.00 p.m. The kind of meetings he is talking about are those ones which are in town halls, community halls or places like those. That is what he is proposing. 

MR FUNGAROO: Mr Chairman, I submit that I support this proposal that we should have certain meetings, especially those in halls, allowed to –

MS MUTYABULE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. A town hall is a public place and the people who are going to meet there form a public meeting. I would like to propose that the town hall meeting should be regulated by the 7.00 a.m. to 7.00 p.m. timeframe. If you want to hold a meeting at night, that can be done at home or at a hotel. 

If it is an event, definitely it does not come abruptly. You inform the concerned people and they will know that in that meeting there is going to be a show, you are going maybe to preside over as an MP and so on. That one is known well in time. If we allow these night meetings and put them in the law, we are going to create a lot of problems. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to give my friend information. I am a member of ICPAU, that is, the Institution of Certified Public Accountants of Uganda. These are professional accountants. Our meetings always start after 5.00 p.m. –(Interjections)– I want to give you information. Our meetings start after 5.00 p.m. and always go up to about midnight, and these are public meetings for qualified accountants –(Interjections)– Hon. Byandala, I am advising you to learn to listen. This is not KCCA where they are painting roads –(Interruption)–

MR BYANDALA: Order!

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You did not have to access the microphone to say, “Order”, but you can raise the point of order.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, I am surprised that hon. Nandala-Mafabi appears to be getting tired. I was not even talking; I was just listening. It looks like my name just attracts him. So, I advise him to please –(Interjections)– I am talking. I advise him not to disrupt meetings by bringing in my name unnecessarily. Is it in order for hon. Nandala-Mafabi to suddenly drag my name into his speeches?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The debate that is before this House has nothing to do with the proposal that concerns the Ministry of Works. There is no motion that raises a matter concerning roads and public works. Any reference to the Minister of Works, which is not in line with the debate on the Floor of the House, would not be proper. It is out of order.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, thank you for the wise ruling. What I was trying to say is that people who are not members of some of these associations may not comprehend what we are talking about –(Interjections)- I have said “some”. You may comprehend, but some may not. 

One of our colleagues raised a very good issue and said, supposing you are launching a book and you need people to come from their places of work? Members, we want to inform - (Hon. Member rose) - I am not the one guiding.

MS ASAMO: Mr Chairman, I may be getting confused because yesterday we said that if it is a meeting of people of that organisation, people of a certain calibre, and we named political parties, institutions and civil society, they can meet as the law does not apply to them. I am again beginning to get confused as to what we are talking about. Are we going forwards and backwards? We said, like my brother hon. Nandala-

MS ALASO: Order!

MS ASAMO: Are you ordering me? For what?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, the point being made by the Member for people with disabilities, Eastern Uganda, is actually correct. Meetings of professional bodies are excluded from this. Even the time does not apply to them. Maybe the Attorney-General can remind us because I thought we passed that clause saying that those professional bodies do not qualify for this. Maybe we are not remembering correctly and the Attorney-General can remind us.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, this arose from the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs; on page 4 of the small report, they brought it up and we have already passed this anyway. They say, “For the avoidance of doubt, a meeting convened by a group, body or leader in a group or body at- 
(a) the ordinary place of business of that body, group or leader; or 
(b) any other place, which is not a public place,
 in the course of lawful business of the group, body or leader, is not a public meeting under this section, unless that meeting spills over into a public place”. 

We then defined public body: “…includes government or any department of government, a local government, a body established by the Constitution or an Act of Parliament, a registered political party or political organisation or registered trade union.” We have already passed all this, Mr Chairman.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, from the initial point of your guidance, it looks like you are giving us leeway that if there is a public body or a political leadership office, they can go past 7.00 p.m. Now here we are saying whether you are a public body or not, you must stop at 7.00 p.m. 

Time is far separated from the power to have the meeting. If that is not the case, let us bring a situation where someone is launching a politically sensitive book and has been given permission to launch that book in a town hall. Is such a person, who has been given permission for such a public meeting, still allowed to go beyond 7.00 p.m.? Is that what we are saying?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Learned Attorney-General, let us resolve this. Can you help us with this? Let us resolve this issue then we can move to other issues.

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, the provision, which we passed, and which was read by the Attorney-General, states, “For the avoidance of doubt, a meeting convened by a group, body or leader in a group or body at- 
(a) the ordinary place of business of that body, group or leader; or 
(b) any other place which is not a public place…” 

When you go to the definition of a public place, it says, “‘Public place’ means- 
(a) a highway or any road within the meaning of the Traffic and Road Safety Act Cap. 361; and 
(b) a place which at the material time the public, or a section of the public has access, on payment of a fee or otherwise, as of right or by virtue of express or implied permission as defined under the Penal Code Act...”

So, in the circumstance, what the honourable member has moved in the context of the definition of a public place would still not have been catered for. This is because this particular provision we passed states that you conduct business either in your ordinary place of business or a place which is not a public place. If I go to Sheraton, for example, like on Friday we went for Ford Foundation and people who saw it saw that the Vice-President was the guest of honour. We were invited to celebrate 50 years of Ford Foundation and all the civil society were there. It began at about 2.00 p.m. and went on up to about 10.00 p.m., and that is a public place according to this definition.

If you go for a Rotary Club meeting- I remember I went to a Rotary Club meeting at 7.00 p.m. where the Minister of State for Lands was a guest of honour and that is a public place. So in that circumstance, this provision would not help for what the honourable member has stated.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable, please, can you explain these things clearly? Let me have the Member for-

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Mr Chairman, I think the proposal brought by the MP for Bukooli Central applies. I do not think we should really focus so much on terrorism and insecurity. Uganda is becoming freer and safer. There will be a meeting after 7.00 p.m. and it may be a public meeting where you have called so many people but it is in your town hall. You would like to hold this meeting later because the people you have invited may be working and you are inviting them after work. 

His concern is the time. Can we provide for after 7.00 p.m.? The flexibility that I can call a meeting starting at 5.00 p.m. and ending at 9.00 p.m. or 10.00 p.m. - We should provide that option of giving persons that chance to hold that meeting then security issues will come later on.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let me allow the honourable Member for Namutumba to finish then I have the Member who has been rising and I have not picked her.

MRS MUTYABULE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. As I conclude, I would like to appreciate the information given to me by the Leader of the Opposition. The best thing is that I belong to the Rotary Movement; my husband is a Rotarian and we belong to the Rotary Club of Jinja. We always meet at Crested Crane Hotel and we have been doing that for so many years and everybody knows that we meet there and we can go up to 2.00 a.m. That is the place designated for the Rotary Club of Jinja. 

What we are talking about now is the town hall.  With the hotel and places where professional bodies like that one of the Leader of the Opposition go, they are always known. They are not like town hall meetings. If you want to go to a town hall meeting like when the Rotary Club of Jinja wants to organise the mayor’s ball in town hall, we inform the Police in time and we take like a month organising it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is okay but what they are now saying is that it should end at 7.00 p.m. Let me balance this debate, honourable members. Members who have not spoken have risen and so they must speak. Let me have Kiboga.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. When honourable Wafula Oguttu brought this amendment, I understood it in a way that he is supposed to cater for a constituency or an area whereby people are busy during the day and therefore calling them from 7.00 a.m. to 7.00 p.m. will be difficult because they will not attend since they are busy. In such a circumstance, he is proposing that we allow a meeting in a town hall or municipal hall so that those busy people, who have been busy during the day, can get the opportunity to get the information the leader wants to deliver to them. This is what I understood. 

It is true that we have municipalities, city divisions, town councils where we are always told, “Madam, if you want to meet these people, come at 6.30 p.m.” So we want to be comforted that such a situation is catered for in what we have passed. If it is not catered for, shall we assume that holding meetings in such areas will be impossible and therefore we do away with them? 

My worry, Mr Chairman, as I conclude – (Interjection) - I have not been speaking; I have been listening. My worry is stretching that up to community hall level. For those constituencies in rural areas, we have community halls in the villages and parishes abandoned because people are in their gardens. So, the community hall does not qualify here. I would propose that we stop at the town council because the community hall might be abused. However, the gist of the matter in his amendment is to cater for areas which are busy and – (Interruption) 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you for giving way, my honourable colleague. In Obongi, if you organise a meeting beginning from around 7.00 a.m. up to 2.00 p.m., you are likely not to have people attending because they are busy in their gardens. They will even tell you to schedule it at 5.00 p.m. after garden work. In Obongi, we are currently building a community hall to take care of night meetings. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are you taking information from the Attorney-General?

MS NANKABIRWA: No, I am concluding. Hon. Lulume told this House that such meetings are always on invitation, which I refute. If such a meeting is in a community hall in the village, people just hear about it and they come. You cannot control it. For the town and municipality, yes, you can issue invitations and you will know that maybe 100 people will attend it. But at the village, you cannot just issue invitations; people will come. 

I appreciate honourable Wafula Oguttu’s proposed amendment to cater for towns where people are busy. If it has not been catered for, I would suggest that we cater for it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let us take this information from the Attorney-General because it might help us.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, looking at the clock and our faces, and I cannot go beyond that into the brains and how we all feel about discussing this complex matter at a time like this, I leave the rest to you, Mr Chairman. (Laughter) 

However, However, I think the point we are missing is that we passed the definition of a public meeting and we pegged the purpose of the public meeting into this. We calibrated the purpose of the meeting into this definition – public interest. By the way, when we come to the definition section, there was another definition which was not put forward, of defining public interest. Certainly, when you are launching a book, in my opinion that kind of activity does not fall within the definition of a public meeting – (Interjections) - Let me give my reasons. Listen to me and we listen to each other. This is why I was saying that we may need to adjourn now. 

An activity which encourages, or by its nature people will still come to the venue, makes it a public place. Look at the definition more carefully and even the definition being proposed by the committee. I do not think, for instance, if you are launching a book, people everywhere will keep on flocking in. You see, a public meeting by nature, because you are discussing matters of public interest, will not necessarily have even the people you had invited. Because of the nature of the activity, people will keep coming in. So I think we should carefully look at the definition of “public meeting”. When we do, the activities you are talking about will certainly not fall in this.

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We deliberated on this matter at length yesterday and I believe that there are strong reasons why we limited the time to between 7.00 a.m. and 7.00 p.m. I do not see any value we add in excluding the so-called town hall meetings, which we have not even defined. 

When my colleague brought in the issue of television and targeting particular audiences at an appropriate time, I think this one even dilutes his argument because in television, you can actually record and telecast your function at any appropriate time you want; you can even repeat it 1000 times. That should not be reason why we should change this cardinal principle of operating during day. Why should our friend want to operate at night? There might be some ulterior motives in this. Let us operate during the day. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, it is 8.00 p.m. We had hoped that at least we would pass clause 7. We have harmonised most of the aspects except for this one aspect, which is remaining. It is the issue of trying to see whether town hall meetings or similar meetings can be excluded from the time limitation of 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. I am not talking about things we have not yet discussed; I am talking about what has remained. I think this is the time to draw this to a close. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

8.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker, presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Public Order Management Bill, 2011” and considered clause 7 but did not take any decision. 

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much. You have made a big effort. Even if the report says we did not take a decision, I think we made major decisions on clause 7 and it was our expectation that we should have finalised but we were not able to. However, the spirit is good; we were able to move and take some meaningful decisions forward. That has been helpful and I thank all the Members who have participated. 

We had proposed that we come tomorrow, but it has come to my attention that the Speaker of the House has asked me to lead the Parliamentary Commission for a meeting at 11 o’clock tomorrow and the Speaker is not available to chair the House tomorrow. So, the most appropriate time for us to adjourn to would be Tuesday next week. 

You recall that I had to extend the time for discussion on the framework paper for the budget to tomorrow. It was supposed to be 15th but I extended it to tomorrow. I am going to use the same powers that I used to extent it to 15th because by tomorrow, the issue of the Parliamentary Commission has to be resolved. Part of the meeting I am going for tomorrow is to lead to that resolution to enable the Budget Committee finalise with its proposals so that we can take decision on this. 

So by the same powers, I further extend the date provided under Section 8 of the Budget Act to enable the Budget Committee comply with the Budget Act and make sure that all the recommendations from all the committees are incorporated in the report that comes to the Speaker and is forwarded to the President. I accordingly extend the period provided in the Budget Act to 22nd May. House therefore adjourned to Tuesday, 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 8.08 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 21 May 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 
