Friday, 9 May 2014

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to start by thanking you very much for giving up your day off. I welcome you to this special sitting to pay tribute to the late hon. Eli Nathan Bisamunyu, who passed away on 6 May 2014 at Mulago Hospital. 

I recall with fond memories that the late hon. Bisamunyu, despite his frail state, was among the 20 or so pre-independence and first National Assembly honourable members who responded to the invitation of Parliament to attend the Parliamentary Week commemorating the 50th Anniversary of Uganda. He was here in the gallery and he participated in the celebrations. He was honoured at a function hosted by Parliament at Munyonyo Resort Hotel in December 2012. 

It is again with sadness that we note that this generation is leaving us at a fast rate. It is exactly a month ago that Parliament honoured another of its colleagues, the late Stanislaus K. E. Okurut. We, as Ugandans, are left poorer as we will miss their counsel and wisdom. On behalf of Parliament and on my own behalf, we offer our most sincere condolences to the family of the late hon. Bisamunyu. 

Mr Bisamunyu was a pioneer in many respects; for instance, he was among the founders of the Uganda National Congress, which was the first national political party in Uganda. He was among the first two degree holders in the then Kigezi, together with the late Canon John Bikangaga. It is reported that in 1948, he was the first non-Musoga head prefect to be elected at Busoga College Mwiri. Indeed, each time I met Mr Bisamunyu, we spoke in Lusoga. 

The late Bisamunyu served Uganda as a committed worker. He was a legislator in pre and post-Independence as well as chief executive of several parastatal organisations in Uganda and East Africa. He leaves behind an outstanding contribution and legacy worth emulating. He has served both Uganda and East Africa with honour and distinction. 

I welcome the family members who are seated at the Treasury Bench behind my seat. We will continue to pray for them and may journey mercies accompany them and all the mourners as they go to lay the late Bisamunyu to his final resting place in Kigezi. Fare thee well, hon. Bisamunyu. May your soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you. 

(Entrance of the Late Eli Nathan Bisamunyu)

The National Anthem 

The East African Community Anthem

(Laying of Wreaths)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. ERINATHAN BISAMUNYU, FORMER MEMBER OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY FOR EAST KIGEZI, KIGEZI DISTRICT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as the mover of the motion comes up, I want to recognise hon. Henry Kyemba, former MP, former minister and member of the Judicial Service Commission. He is in the Gallery. I want to recognise the honourable Ten Point Programme, hon. Anthony Butele; former minister, former Member of Parliament. He is in the Gallery. I recognise hon. James Kubeketerya, former Member of Parliament. You are welcome. Of course, I also recognise the citizens who are in the Gallery. You are all welcome. 

3.07
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to move this important motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Eli Nathan Bisamunyu, former Member of Parliament and former Member of the Legislative Council, the First and the Second Parliament representing East Kigezi, formerly Kigezi District. I must say that East Kigezi is now Rukiga County, represented by hon. Jack Sabiiti. 

The motion reads as follows: 

“WHEREAS Parliament has learnt with grief of the death of hon. Eli Nathan Bisamunyu, former Member of the Legislative Council, the First and Second Parliament representing East Kigezi in the then Kigezi District, which occurred on 6 May 2014 in Mulago Hospital;

AND WHEREAS the late hon. Eli Nathan Bisamunyu was born in 1928 at Kasooni-Mparo located in the present Rukiga County, Kabale District, he studied in Kihanga Vernacular Elementary School then, Kigezi High School, Busoga College Mwiri and Makerere University College where he graduated in 1953 in political science, literature and history, and together with the late Canon John Bikangaga it is recorded that they were the first pioneer degree holders in the then Kigezi District;

AWARE that while at Makerere University College, together with the late hon. Abubakar Mayanja and the late hon. John Babiiha they founded the Uganda National Congress, the first political party in Uganda, which later merged with the Uganda Peoples’ Union to form the Uganda Peoples’ Congress. In 1962, the late Bisamunyu was elected to represent East Kigezi in the Legislative Council and subsequently was a Member of the First and Second Parliament, which was dissolved in 1971;

RECOGNISING that the late Eli Nathan Bisamunyu served as a community development officer in Mbale; as the Director-General of the East African Harbours Corporation; Managing Director of Uganda Posts and Telecommunications Company; Managing Director of Transocean Uganda Limited and Managing Director of Uganda Industrial Machinery Limited, which was the last post he served and retired after a long career in the public service in 1989;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by the Parliament of Uganda duly convened and sitting in Kampala on this 9th day of May 2014 as follows:
1. 	That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, the Government and the people of Uganda and the East African Community upon the demise of a distinguished personality.

2. 	That it takes cognisance of the distinguished service and contributions rendered by the late hon. Eli Nathan Bisamunyu to Uganda and East Africa in various high profile capacities.

3. 	That the Almighty God sustains the bereaved and grants the late hon. Eli Nathan Bisamunyu eternal peace.” I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded; you can justify.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, today we are talking about a great man, a great politician, an important role model and an icon in our society, in our country and in our region. As you have already heard, he had a very humble beginning, starting in an elementary school in the relatively remote areas of Kigezi. The school is actually situated about 20 or so miles from Kabale. He started at a young age; he was in school at the age of five and six years old whereas his classmates were literally men of 16, 18 and 20 years old.

This young man was able to do well and acquire, because of his excellent academic performance, a scholarship that enabled him to move from Kihanga to Kigezi High school in Kabale town. Again he continued to perform very well and he was able to scale the mountains and move through the valleys and be admitted at Busoga College Mwiri. Actually, he had initially been admitted at Kings’ College Budo but by the time he came, although he had a place clearly defined for him, he was informed that although he qualified, his place had been given to somebody else for reasons that I will not go into.

Madam Speaker, the teachers and headmasters arranged that this brilliant young man needed another good school hence he went to Busoga College Mwiri where Eli Nathan Bisamunyu is talked about all the time. If you go to Busoga College Mwiri today, there is a board of distinguished scholars and leaders in the school - I am glad that the former patron of the OBs is here, Ndugu Kyemba – and Bisamunyu’s name is very prominent as head prefect of Busoga College Mwiri in 1948. 

He almost became part of the community; he actually used to spend a lot of his time with the families and fellow students in the countryside in Busoga where he read political science and literature. He excelled and performed very well and graduated with a bachelor’s degree from the University of London issued through Makerere University College, which was then a college of the University of London.

While at Makerere, he did not only excel in academia but he was also a great political activist. As we have said in the motion, working together with a number of other patriots like Abubakar Mayanja, Babiiha and a number of others, as you very well know, they founded the Uganda National Congress, which was really the earliest organised political party in the country. Later, on as you know, there was a merger between Uganda National Congress and also Uganda Peoples’ Union and that is how UPC was born. 

I should point out that at the time he was at Busoga College Mwiri, one of his colleagues was Milton Obote and their relationship and friendship continued for very many years. I want to point out, Madam Speaker, that these were young people at university, uniting with other nationalist organisations to struggle for independence. So really, Bisamunyu struggled for independence, organised for independence and his name will remain in the annals of the history of Uganda as one of the Ugandans, even at that tender age, who looked far and said, “Let us start organising” and eventually we got independence because of his struggles.

He served in many areas as we have already been informed from this motion. He worked in Mbale but I want to say that one of the responsibilities he performed was an East African responsibility. When there was an effort to strengthen the East African Community, a number of corporations were set up and Bisamunyu was appointed Director-General of East African Harbours and for many years, he was resident in Dar-es-Salaam serving the people of East Africa and also ensuring that Uganda, although landlocked, was able to get her cargo.

What type of person are we talking about? Bisamunyu was a humble man. Bisamunyu was a down to earth man. Bisamunyu dined with kings and enjoyed life with ordinary people. He was a peoples’ man. Some of us used to look at him in Kabale as - Whenever he was in town, you would find us, the young people, gathering around him because he had become such a powerful institution and an inspirer of many. 

As was mentioned somewhere, at that time when we were young in school, we knew only one English dictionary and that was Michael West. It is said, and this is subject to confirmation, Madam Speaker, or at least legend has it that Eli Nathan Bisamunyu, who excelled in English language and English literature, was at some point a student and classmate of Michael West or they were contemporaries somewhere. It is said that whenever exams came in English and English literature, Michael West was extremely good but he was always the second; who was the first? It was Eli Nathan Bisamunyu. So whenever he was in the vicinity, we would call each other and say, “Come and see; Bisamunyu is around” and indeed we would go.

Fortunately, this great “institution” would spare time for us as young people and talk to us. We would ask him questions and he would literally answer everything and his image became bigger and bigger. So this Parliament should emulate him because this man - talk of corruption - was an extremely clean man inspite of the numerous lucrative positions that he held in Uganda and in East Africa. 

This man was principled. How principled was he? One day in this august House Bisamunyu, who was a prominent member of the Uganda Peoples’ Congress, had very sharp disagreements with his own party. In the middle of the debate, after making his point and disagreeing with the party that he belonged to, Bisamunyu decided to walk across and join the Opposition. It caused some turbulence because during those days, the tendency was that people –(Interruption)

Madam Speaker, I will concentrate on my point –(Laughter)– After Eli Nathan Bisamunyu had made his point, he eventually decided to reconcile with his party but the point I wanted to make is that during those days, the Uganda Peoples’ Congress was in power and DP in the Opposition and the tendency was for people to move from the Opposition to the government side. However, Bisamunyu did the opposite and he never bothered about what people thought concerning his views. He articulated them candidly, clearly and often convincingly. So really, he set a great example from that point of view.

Let me also say that Mzee Bisamunyu helped unite Uganda but specifically Kigezi. The disease of sectarian politics has been very common in Uganda but I think its headquarters could have been Kigezi – (Interjections)– Well, there are big protests especially from the chairman of Kigezi Parliamentary Group or Kabale Parliamentary Group. 

The fact of the matter remains that there were very sharp differences based on religion. This was incontrovertible and based on religion and the like. So Bisamunyu went out of his way to try and bring people together. He cooperated closely with his colleagues in Parliament irrespective of what political shade they belonged to and he really helped forge unity. If you want, he was a pioneer of the movement politics that brings people together. 

Therefore, there is a lot to learn from Bisamunyu as a nationalist, as a non-sectarian leader, as a scholar and as a Pan-Africanist. As we pay tribute to him, let us look at what he did and let us get lessons from his exemplary life.

Madam Speaker, if you give me one or two additional minutes, I just want to make one additional point. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister of Uganda greatly regrets that he is unable to be here because he is out of the country on official duty, but he had a special relationship with Eli Nathan Bisamunyu. If you do not mind, Madam Speaker, I will just read a short paragraph from the message that the Prime Minister has sent to honourable Members of Parliament. Actually, his office is supposed to – (Interjection) - I am glad with your permission, colleagues can get the statement: 

“Bisamunyu was very closely and deeply linked with my family - First, he was taken up by my father, Kezekiya Bagwowabo, who became the Catechist of Kasooni Anglican Church as it was then called. In 1927, the land on which the church was erected and on which it stands today was donated in 1925 by Bisamunyu’s father. My father, as a sign of appreciation and gratitude, took up the young boy and looked after him especially his education. He looked after him as his own child. 

Second, to the chagrin of my father, Eli Nathan Bisamunyu developed a relationship with my sister, Phoebe Kantangizi, who was one of the first girls in Kigezi to receive formal education. She graduated as a school teacher in 1948 and taught people like Prof. Mondo Kagonyera, the Chancellor of Makerere University. She developed a relationship with Bisamunyu and children were born to them when he was still a student at Makerere University College as it then was. These children have in turn produced and left a line of lovely grandchildren and great grandchildren to Eli Nathan Bisamunyu and my sister Phoebe.”

To conclude the Prime Minister’s message, which fortunately you have, he quotes some unnamed author – “Allow me in conclusion to quote the words of a gentleman whose name I now do not recall, in his eulogy to a friend. This is what this gentleman said: ‘Although what we have lost is tremendous, what he actually gave us is immeasurable.’” That really and specifically applies to Eli Nathan Bisamunyu. The second and last quote is: “To those who knew him, no explanation is necessary. To those who did not, no explanation is possible.” Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for this opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much, hon. Rugunda. Can we have the seconder of the motion; if you could just use five minutes, please?

3.32
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much. It is with profound sadness that we have learnt of the untimely passing on of hon. Eli Nathan Bisamunyu. This son of Kigezi and Uganda was a dedicated servant of the people and an assorted talented man of integrity, honesty and a nationalist.

The late hon. Bisamunyu was born in November 1928 in Mparo, Kigezi District, in the current Rukiga County, which I represent. He joined Kihanga Primary School and then went to Kigezi High School. While at Kigezi High School, he distinguished himself both academically and in sports. He later joined, as stated by the proposer, Busoga College Mwiri where he was the first non Musoga to be elected the head prefect because of his profound humorous social values. 

Due to his academic excellence, Milton Obote and himself where selected to sit for Cambridge School Certificate examinations, which they excelled in, paving their way to join the University of London where he got a BA through Makerere University College in 1950. He was one of the first Ugandans to graduate from Makerere University College alongside people like Babiiha, Abubakar Mayanja, as it has been stated. They joined hands with Ignatius Musaazi to form the Uganda National Congress, which later merged to become the Uganda People’s Congress. Today we assemble to celebrate his life as an accomplished patriotic Ugandan and distinguished legislator from 1962 to 1971 where again he served as the Deputy Speaker of the LEGCO.

As a nation, we have lost a political encyclopaedia who used his knowledge to mentor many young people. The late hon. Bisamunyu began his career in the public service in 1953 where he worked as a community development officer. He was later transferred to work in the office of Sir Andrew Cohen, the then Governor of Uganda. In 1961, he was elected as the first area Member of Parliament representing Kigezi East, which is the current Rukiga Constituency that I represent.

In 1970, when the then Deputy Speaker, Rt. Hon. Wanume, became sick, he was elected to become the Deputy Speaker until 1971. When Amin took over, he was made the Director-General of the East African Harbours Corporation based in Mombasa. In 1978, he was appointed as the Managing Director of Uganda Posts and Telecommunications and later became the Managing Director of Uganda Industrial Machinery Limited and it is from here that he retired.

The late hon. Bisamunyu, even after retiring, remained active in rendering dedicated service to his country with due diligence. His service was never tainted with corruption, discrimination or greed. Having excelled in academics, administration and politics, he became the most inspiring personality to most leaders particularly in Kigezi Region such as Prof Tumusiime Mutebile, Dr Ruhakana Rugunda and indeed I. He mentored many of us into administration, politics and clean leadership. 

He was a very articulate, honest and well informed politician. He believed in transparency and one time, as again has been stated, because of certain squabbles in UPC he threatened to move away from the UPC party and he demanded that UPC cleans up. 

The late Bisamunyu was down to earth and wanted to be remembered as a simple man. He associated with the rich and most poor, particularly in Rwamuchuchu and Rukiga where he comes from. He was a respected counsellor to married couples and a social person within the community. 

The late Bisamunyu, I must say clearly here, was the one who introduced me to politics. He nurtured me and he was my role model. I have always followed in his footsteps and as you know, that is why I had to leave the Movement to come this side. (Laughter) I want to testify that at one time, he sat me down and asked me to show exemplary leadership to the people of Rukiga. I have lived and still live by his words and his wisdom. 

Hon. Bisamunyu, although the sparkle in your eyes is gone and your smile is faded, rest assured that some of us will work to achieve your wish to see a better country enjoyed by our children and great grandchildren, a dream that led you and others to form the first political party. Hon. Bisamunyu, you have fought a good fight and you now await your crown. Your sweat was not in vain, the struggle will continue and we will live always to be inspired by your dedicated unwavering and good leadership. May your soul rest in peace.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition. Honourable members, Busoga College Mwiri is a very important school in Busoga and Uganda. The majority of leaders studied in that school but for 32 years, the man who shaped it was Reverend Coates. So, I am happy to welcome his daughter, Margaret Coates Mahoney. She is here. You are welcome. Let me now invite hon. Otada.

3.32
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I rise to second the motion to pay tribute to this great son of Uganda, the late Eli Nathan Bisamunyu. I also want to thank the mover of the motion and my brother who ably seconded the motion.

Yesterday I was chatting with hon. Jack Sabiiti and I told him that I did not know much about the late but the little that I knew compelled me to really acknowledge Government, first of all, for honouring him with this very good gesture because surely, this is a great personality in our country who has helped to enrich our history. My heart goes out to the family, Madam Speaker, the President, colleagues in the House and to the people of Uganda upon the demise of such an illustrious personality.

I am quite encouraged by the fact that we have now consistently recognized the importance of recognizing past or former leaders. I think that the importance of this need not to be over emphasised because of all the resources on earth, there is no greater resource than the resource of a human being and the power of the human brain. For people who are endowed with intellect, courage and ability to move things and change society, they surely must be honoured and I am happy that we are here today.  

Madam Speaker, reading the long history of this illustrious son of Uganda, we realise that we can shape the destiny of our country by ourselves and this is a living testimony. You know, there has been and there still is this famous saying - African solutions to African problems. Africans surely can shape the future of their country by themselves if they choose to do certain things that the late was doing. 

What impressed me, among other things, is the fact that he was able to rise above just knowing that he belonged to a certain part of the aisle politically and that he should not keep quiet. He was able to rise and criticize positively what he thought was wrong with the view of making it right. This is something that we ought to emulate as politicians and especially as Members of Parliament who are charged with the duty of shaping a country that should be attractive enough to foreign investments, political predictability and an environment that can enable this country to move to the next level. We can do it by ourselves and not wait for other people to do it for us.

Being a legislator in the post-colonial days, Madam Speaker, I am sure was a very challenging task that he undertook. I am confident that he was the right person in the right job at the right time, and that he did his part to serve this country and his time has actually come to depart from this world. 

Like hon. Amama Mbabazi said here, I want to agree with him that the loss will always hover over our heads, but we cannot keep over emphasising the loss; we have to look forward. The loss is with us, it is painful, but we have to cope with it. The only thing that we can do is to take up the legacy from where the deceased has left us and try to do those things and have those values that he aspired for in his life as a politician. I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise to support the motion and thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, my plan had been to let this family go at 4.00.p.m. So, I will just limit the next contributions to three minutes. 

3.40
MR ONYANGO KAKOBA (NRM, Buikwe County North, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to join my colleagues in paying tribute to this great son of Uganda. Just like hon. Otada, I do not know much about the deceased but given what I read since yesterday and what has been said here today, the late Bisamunyu was a great man. 

First, he was a member of the Legislative Council and when I read the background of the Legislative Council and how it started, I realised that it was mainly a body for whites before they brought in Asians and later on the Africans. So, it was not easy working under such circumstances and yet he excelled to the extreme that he later on became a member of the National Assembly.

Madam Speaker, we also realise that the late Bisamunyu was one of the people who struggled for the independence of this country. We could say that the fruits that we enjoy today are partly attributed to him and his colleagues at that time.

Madam Speaker, given the late’s background, there are some few lessons that we can learn. The first one is that whenever we do something, we should always strive to excel in what we do. Secondly, when we give service, let us give dedicated service in whatever we do and thirdly, we should be transparent in all that we execute.

It is good that the Government has recognised this great son but I would also urge that this recognition should even be done when people are still alive. In this respect, I want to thank the Parliamentary Commission for having recognised this great son of Uganda when we celebrated our 50 years of Independence because he was one of the people who were invited.

As I conclude, I want to say that the late Bisamunyu has lived his life. It is a great challenge for us, and the challenge that we have now is to make sure that we lead exemplary lives. If I may quote one of the philosophers, he said, “What matters are not the years in your life but the life in your years.” The late Bisamunyu has lived both the years and the life. I thank you very much for your kind attention. 

3.51
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also add my voice to support the motion which has been moved by my senior brother, the honourable Dr Ruhakana Rugunda. We are paying tribute to a very great man from a very great region of Kigezi. On behalf of the people of Kinkiizi East in Kanungu and also as the chairperson of the Kigezi Parliamentary Forum, I extend my condolences to the family, the people of Kigezi, the Parliament and indeed Ugandans. 

We have all listened to the illustrious career and life of hon. Nathan Bisamunyu and all of us have great lessons to pick from his life, his career and his experiences. We can learn a lot particularly as politicians of our time. One lesson, for instance, that we learn is the revelation by Dr Rugunda that he disagreed with his party and crossed. That is a feature of us, the Bakiga; we are always principled and we speak what we believe in. 

I want the government, Parliament and Ugandans to understand that we always speak the truth and stand by what our conscience dictates us to articulate. That is a quality that you do not find with very many politicians these days. We have a lot to learn from Mr Bisamunyu, who could disagree with his party at a time when party politics was actually very hot. To cross from UPC to DP, coming from Kigezi, knowing that UPC was basically for Anglicans and DP for Catholics, to take that bold step and change political parties was a very bold and independent step which I am sure many politicians today cannot afford to take. We thank him for that principled politics that he practised.

The other great lesson was that from politics, he went into civil service and he was able to work with several governments. The question is: how many of us can leave politics and go into civil service and even still be respected and be able to rise within the ladder of civil service?  We need to reflect on the way we are running our politics and civil service. We should be able to give respect to even the people who have been in politics so that they can be absorbed in the civil service and be able to serve. 

He was a very honest man and an incorruptible person, which is also a trait of us, the Banyakigezi. We are not corrupt. Although there could be some spoilt Bakiga, naturally the Bakiga are incorruptible. Just check the prominent sons of Kigezi who have been in the civil service like John Bikanganga, Ndugu Rugunda, myself –(Laughter)– and many others. So, it is true that genuine Bakiga and Banyakigezi actually are incorruptible and it is a lesson that we learn from hon. Bisamunyu whom we are mourning today.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I just want to say that for Kigezi as a region, we appreciate that there has been a lot of progress in terms of transformation. However, we want to use this opportunity to urge Government to continue focusing on our region and supporting the region to move from where it is because we still have high levels of poverty. Our infrastructure is still wanting. Some of the areas in Kigezi like Kanungu and some parts of Kisoro are still not accessible because of the terrain. We therefore want to use this opportunity to urge Government to focus on Kigezi and work with us so that we can improve the lives of the people of Kigezi. I thank you very much.

3.54
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I also stand to support the motion moved by my senior colleague and I just want to say in these three minutes that as a nation, we have really lost an important person. I know at this age, somebody has all the brains and experience to guide especially us, the politicians. So, it is a great loss to Uganda and Kigezi at large. We shall live to miss him. 

I am very surprised, however, to hear that at that time he was among the first people who graduated from Kigezi. I kept picturing how he managed to traverse all those serious mountains with all the forests and the animals around to come up to the university and get a  degree. It is really a blessing and we are so grateful to God who gave him that determination so that the Jack Sabiitis managed to look up to him and also became what they are today. It is so great that he has left a serious legacy.

When I read through all the Hansards in this House, I also found out that the man was really brilliant. The discussions he had in this House were really good. We are so grateful to God for his life because he really managed to serve this country and discuss and really represent the people of East Kigezi very well, according to what I read. I even heard that whenever he could go to meet his people, his speeches were very different and everybody would want to sit and listen to hon. Bisamunyu. So, we are really grateful for all those contributions and we pray that the Lord receives his soul in eternal peace. 

I believe, according to the Bible, that what you do here, even in heaven it will attribute to your goodness. The good things you do here are the good things that will receive you in heaven. I hope, hon. Niwagaba, that maybe we shall also reach there very well; we have something to look at – (Laughter)-  and so we are very grateful.

Madam Speaker, like hon. Chris Baryomunsi has said, the Bakiga are really straightforward. From the discussions I read which he made in the LEGCO at that time, everything of his was straightforward. Even in his services to the constituency when he was still representing the people, he was straightforward. So, we shall miss his services. 

We are so grateful for his life and we pray that his soul rests in peace and the family takes heart because God gives and takes. I believe this was the right time; God had decided that he would give all these contributions to us so that at this time he rests. Though we shall miss him, the family should take heart and accept it because that is –(Member timed out_) 

3.59
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My heartfelt condolences go to the family of the late Bisamunyu, the people of Kabale and the people of Rukiga in particular. I want to also thank you, Madam Speaker, for accepting to spare time and chair this session and for being patient with us as we conducted the service at All Saints Cathedral. 

Madam Speaker, while we pay tribute and celebrate the life of hon. Bisamunyu, today is also an opportunity for us to reflect on three important generations that we have had in Uganda and the contributions that they have made. In my opinion, we have had three outstanding generations. The first generation was the one of the revival time, with people like Festo Kivengere and the father of Prof. Nsibambi who really dedicated their lives to spread evangelism and they used it to promote education in our country. The second generation, which I think is important, is the generation of the Bisamunyus and the Milton Obotes who fought long and hard to attain independence for our country. The third generation, in my opinion, is the generation of President Museveni and his group that laid down their lives so that you and I can enjoy the freedom and the peace that we are enjoying today.

The challenge that Bisamunyu leaves today, if we were to fully celebrate his life, is to complete the circle that they started in 1962. After 50 years, we cannot afford to continue to beg from developed countries. I think we should work hard to solve the bottlenecks that are standing in the way of our independence, so that we can be a fully independent country. You saw what we went through when we had the Bill on anti-homosexuality here. You saw the way the developed countries tried to blackmail us, to arm-twist us because we are getting just 20 per cent of our budget from them. So, I think we can pay them back and thank the generation of Obote and Bisamunyu if we work hard to fully develop our country.

Hon. Bisamunyu was a good man and because of his goodness, he impacted many lives. I think it is because of his goodness that even after being associated with Milton Obote, he was able to be appointed Managing Director of Transocean Limited during Amin’s time and to other posts. He was a source of inspiration to many young people including myself. He taught us always to be guided by our hopes and not our fears. I think because of that principle, he was able to be head prefect at Mwiri College in those times after a long time of the Basoga being head prefects there.

In my opinion, he was the grandfather of clean politics in our region. When he decided to quit politics, that was it; he never again mingled or participated in the politics of Kabale to support one person against the other, a temptation that I normally see for politicians of our time.

As I conclude, I would like to say that Mzee Bisamunyu and his contemporaries, like the late John Bikangaga, built on the works of the late Paul Ngorogoza by encouraging fellow Bakiga to find new friendship beyond our region. This is an approach that has helped us to solve the problem of land scarcity in our history. What remained a puzzle to him is that even though he made a lot of friends in Busoga, actually there are very few Bakiga who settled in Busoga. It remained a puzzle to him even up to his death. 

The last point I want to make, which is personal, is that he was not a selfish person. He was always willing to share and guide people on what is right and what is wrong. On a personal note, when he overcame a personal challenge of drinking, he had the courage to share his experience with others on how he managed to do that and to encourage others to overcome personal weaknesses. Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I want to wish hon. Bisamunyu eternal peace. 

4.04
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, my heart goes out to the family, relatives and friends of the late Bisamunyu who is lying before us. 

Honourable colleagues, here lies a man whom I have held in high regard since my youthful days. I did not grow up in Kigezi but I am one of those who proudly stand to say yes, your efforts made me what I am; your efforts made me have a living because working with other prominent Bakiga, you found a place for my parents where they could bring me up. Those are the people that hon. Bahati was talking about. I represent the people of Kigezi in the diaspora. (Laughter)

Before us lies an icon of intellectual excellence, a very cerebral gentleman and an eloquent debater; in most cases when he was debating on the Floor, everybody held their breath in utter excitement, amazement and respect. That is what I read about him. I did not know him personally but I have read about him. Stories abound about hon. Bisamunyu who in full command of the English language in most cases would sometimes even fail to get the necessary English words and would craft his own like eitatari, neibakanyite. (Laughter)– The Whites would then start looking for these words in all the dictionaries and they could not get them. Those were the stories that we heard about him. That was the Bisamunyu that those of you who did not know him should know.

We mourn a patriot, we mourn a nationalist and we mourn a resolute researcher, a very courageous man who had no kind words for the corrupt. I wish we had many other Bisamunyus today. We mourn a very humble man, a very trustworthy civil servant, a very eloquent politician and a very humble down-to-earth old gentleman and a leader in Kigezi.

The likes of Bisamunyu, Rwamafa, Bahukika and Barisigara are all long gone. Here was our candle, which has burned out. He lived a very simple life and like one great man said, simplicity signifies the magnanimity of a soul and that if you can share with Her Majesty and do not lose the common touch, then you are a man. He lived that kind of life. He was down to earth, lived amongst his people, with his people, worked for the people and with the people. In summary, his life was that of kindness to other people’s troubles while being very courageous in his own. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

4.08
MR JOHN AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, and thank you so much, the family members of our father who is now lying in front of us. 

I want to extend the condolences of the people of Agago. During that time, Agago was not yet registered as a district but it was a county. We called it East Constituency for Kitgum District. Now Agago is both a county and a district. I do not have a lot of words to say about our late father but I want to restrict my submission to the Bible. You know, the Bible tells us that all things work out for good to those who love the Lord. The Lord plans and after that, all things work out to give Him the glory.

I want to extend this word to the family members; in the book of Thessalonians, it is stated very clearly that: “But I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that you sorrow not, even as others which have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not prevent them which are asleep.” 

Console yourself with this word. Of course, all our time has already been planned and God has already planned for all of us to follow the same footsteps.  Above all, in the book of Revelations, it says that, “For the Lord will wipe away our tears.” That means even though we are now here celebrating the life of our father, definitely, we know that God has a plan for all of us to be accomplish.

I would like to say that he had a very long history and such history can help Ugandans. Why don’t we put it in writing so that we put it in an archive? We know that the fight for independence was not easy and he contributed towards that. Besides, why don’t we propose a street in his name, both at national level and even at local level at his home, so that he will be remembered for a longer time? I thank you and I pray that God grants him eternal rest. Thank you.

4.12
MS RONAH NINSIIMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I also thank you most heartily for sacrificing Friday and being able to come and pay tribute to the late Bisamunyu.

I want to the thank you, once again, and Parliament for that event, which you organised during the IPU conference - the week of activities. That is when I got the opportunity to speak to the late; Parliament asked me to contact him to help us with the contacts of other leaders in that area so that they could be honoured. I remember these were his words: “We are very proud of Madam Speaker and the Ninth Parliament for the work you are doing. We are praying for you. We did our work as the former leaders and we are now entrusting this country with you, the young generation, to ensure that you steer it ahead.”

He was very excited about that event. Even as he gave us the contacts, you would see that he was really happy that he was recognised. I would like to thank you and to pray that God may show you another way to remember some of these people and honour them because it adds something to their lives.

Madam Speaker, that said, I want to use this opportunity to pray that you do something for Kabale Hospital. At All Saints, when the doctor was speaking, he said that when government sent means to fly the late to Kampala, he was not at Kabale Hospital but at a private clinic along Katuna Road, belonging to one Dr Anguyu. When they asked the family why they had not gone to Kabale Hospital, they said there was no need because earlier, they had been there and they had not got the attention they needed.

According to his daughter, she felt that her father was very important but to go to Kabale Hospital and spend hours and hours without seeing any doctor, to them, was strange. They came to Mulago Hospital and again, according to the daughter, there was no care. They were traumatized by the way people were dying due to lack of care.

Madam Speaker, I thank you, of course, because we have engaged your office so much. I know you are working on our petition from Kabale, as a result of mothers who died giving birth because there was no attention. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute to conclude.

MS NINSIIMA: Thank you. I would like to pray that we use this moment to instruct someone in this government to pay special attention to Kabale because the Shs2.5 million salary increment did not work for us. We do not have doctors in all the health facilities –(Interjections)– I am saying this because Madam Speaker has written a number of letters regarding issues of Kabale and they have worked. That is why I am requesting for your letter, Madam Speaker, to instruct –(Laughter)– on the issue of Kabale Hospital.

We do not have doctors in all the seven health centres. If mzee could not find a doctor in Kabale Hospital and was in a clinic at the time they went there, it says something big about the health situation. If they have not found care in Mulago, it speaks volumes because they built Mulago in the UPC government and they were supposed to find good care there. Madam Speaker, I am sorry I am becoming high but I request that you do something for us. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We have noted your very grave concerns.

4.15
MR VINCENT SEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kalungu East, I join the other honourable Members of Parliament to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Bisamunyu. I thank God for the life of this great son of Uganda and I wish to convey my deep-felt condolences to the bereaved family of the late Bisamunyu.

We are here to honour the late for his glorious contribution towards the development of this country. Development is like building blocks; those of us in this country today are adding to what our predecessors started. Our political predecessors like the late Bisamunyu served this country when many areas did not have good roads like we have today and when communication was poor. However, they still served and kept on building and here we are, trying to add on to what they did. We cannot underrate their contribution, which has really been mentioned by many of the earlier speakers. Therefore, I want to say that our policies should be tailored in such a way as to give respect and support to our elders.

Madam Speaker, I think the Minister of Ethics should come up with messages to educate our youth in respecting elders. When people grow old, our society tends to disregard them. In some societies, in disciplined societies where they line up for many things, when they see an elder, they allow them move to the front, but here they will just push the fellow. Our youth are not trained to respect elders, and this is a very important element that you must inculcate in them – respecting people who have served. We now enjoy some of these benefits because some people did a lot of work to ensure that they are in place. (Member timed out.)

4.19
MR JACINTO OGWAL (UPC, Otuke County, Otuke): Madam Speaker, we learnt with deep sorrow and sadness the news of the passing of hon. Eli Nathan Bisamunyu. The late was a veteran legislator and a national leader. He was one of those Ugandan patriots of that rare generation of the 1960s. He stood for national unity, for the development of Uganda as one country, one people with one destiny. I found that in the archives of UPC.

As a party, we mourn this great man because he was only one of those few left from that generation who are leaving behind history and resources for the younger generation of the party and indeed, the leaders from Kigezi and the country, who aspire to take on public leadership. It is a generation where all of us strive to reach back to and illustrate what it means to serve in public office and deliver services to our people. They did it with complete commitment and with selflessness. 

He and his contemporaries really laid a foundation for free quality education and quality health services. They planned and executed development plans, which benefited the country equally. They provided equal opportunities for our young men and women through an egalitarian education policy that sought to uplift our people. They did not look at the accidents of birth, geography or history of somebody. They saw every one as equal and they provided that service. That is why he came from the remote area of Rukiga County and found himself in Mwiri College. There was a policy of equal education and equal opportunities for all. Unfortunately, now in our generation it is sad to note - and I think he died with a little bit of a heavy heart –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR JACINTO OGWAL: Finally, what is important is that we have lost somebody of vast experience and wisdom. As a country, we know this is a generation that was not tainted with corruption and I think it is the greatest lesson we can learn.

We would like to pray that the Almighty God rests his soul in eternal peace.

4.23
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to join my colleagues in supporting the motion. 

In front of us lies a true Munyakigezi. A true Munyakigezi is supposed to be very intelligent because Banyakigezi are supposed to be “bagezi”. Two, a Munyakigezi does not sell his soul; he speaks his mind without fear or favour. (Applause)

The last time I talked to the late at one of the functions he expressed to me his dismay at one of the legacies NRM has brought to this country - the commercialisation of politics. He was very bitter at what we are doing commercialising politics. This gentleman you see here was a man of integrity and that is why he served and retired honourably, unlike the new crop of leaders who want to rule until they die. He knew when it was time to leave public service because it is a service and he left and retired honourably. All the companies he headed as managing director unfortunately are no longer in existence, but you know how much they contributed to the economy of this country.

In Kigezi, there are two ways people would get out of poverty; one was through trade with Rwanda, which stopped when RPF conquered Kigali, and the second was through education. It is sad that you can now hardly hear of a Munyakigezi coming up and excelling in education because our schools are doing badly. (Interjections) Hon. Ndugu, those were the days, of course. It seems that age is stopping with some of us. We wish to request government to do much more in improving the quality of education and the levels of education of our people.

It is sad that the late was not even actually helped by government. Prof. Mutebile helped to bring him from that private clinic to Mulago, and it is very unfortunate that a fellow Munyakigezi who heads the Ministry of Health is presiding over a hospital that cannot even serve the district - (Interjections) - How I wish; Of course, one of the reasons I am on this side now is because I spoke strongly about the issues of health. Hon. Ndugu, I pray you put in a lot of effort in improving our health sector. (Member timed out.)

4.26
MR FRED EBIL (UPC, Kole County, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Government of Uganda and the Parliamentary Commission for according the late Nathan Bisamunyu a decent and befitting funeral. He is worth what we are doing today.

His story, from the life and politics, that is to say his career, tells us what Uganda was, what Uganda can be and what Uganda should be. It is unfortunate that the youth of today are not given the same opportunities to realise their full potential like they did at that time.

The spirit that they exhibited was great. Envisage a situation where you as a person, as a citizen, did not wait for what the country could do for you but what you could do for the country. This was a very important feeling that made us independent. It is that same spirit that led the UPC government immediately we entered power in 1962 to build the 22 hospitals that you see still standing up to today.

Madam Speaker, we need to revive our system of education. We also need to inculcate in our youth a new spirit not only of patriotism by lip service but by practice, so that our youth can gain the self confidence that the late and his colleagues, like the late Dr Milton Obote, had in order to move this country forward.

As a Member of Parliament for Kole and on my own behalf, I would like to send my deepest condolences to the family, the people of Kigezi and the people of Uganda. I urge them to always know that they did their best and to know that as a country, we will always rise and fall together as one people and as one nation. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity.

4.32
MR DEOGRATIOUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Bukomansimbi and on my own behalf, I would like to extend my condolences to the bereaved family, the people of Uganda, and in particular the people of Kigezi for this great loss.

According to the information I have, the late was an obedient, honest, transparent, trustworthy and courageous person. That is why he was not corrupt. At that time, it was very difficult for somebody to go to Busoga for education. This shows the late was a courageous person.

His career shows the value of education. He served in different capacities as has been indicated by the motion moved by the Prime Minister. The late, like many Ugandans, at the age of 86 had survived but in a hard way. I got to know that at the time of his death, he had unpaid arrears from Government. He has left this country when the pension system is not yet clean. I think he is one of those people who have died unhappy.

Madam Speaker, I want to inform Government that in the countryside, there are so many ex-servicemen who served this nation but are living without being paid their pension. At one time, I met His Excellency the President and pointed this out to him. It hurts to see somebody laying here and he actually died before getting his pension. I would like to urge Government to ensure people of this nature get paid on time.

I also would like to take this opportunity to inform the country that the late is not the only person who failed to get proper medical service from our medical facilities. In situations where civil servants are working for three months without being paid, you do not expect any good services to be delivered to – (Member timed out_)

4.33
MS ALUM SANTA (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to speak in support of the motion. On my own behalf and on behalf of the people of Oyam District, I send my condolences to the family and the people of Kigezi and the entire country for this great loss.

There is a saying that good people always do not live for long. Because they are good, God also loves them more than we do. However, I am very happy that God decided to keep the late Bisamunyu for this long. I take this opportunity to ask all of you to learn something from this as people who are still living. 

From the history I have read about the late, I will pick only two lessons for us to learn from. One of the lessons is that the late was a patriotic person. He was not selfish and he loved his country, which is lacking in us today. As a nation, if we could practice what the late used to practice, we would see Uganda as one. This habit of seeing ourselves as “I” instead of “us” will not take us anywhere. As a nation, the moment we begin to look at ourselves – even as legislators, when we make laws, we should always look at the entire nation and not make laws to suit us as politicians. We should make laws for entire nation. That is what the late here lived for.

Secondly, I noticed that he was a role model for many people. Even some of us who did not know him, after reading his history we are already picking something up, especially the fact that he lived for the nation. As a member of UPC, I really see that there are so many things for people in other political parties to learn from us as far as the history of this nation is concerned – (Member timed out_)

4.36
MS JOY ACHENG (UPC, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to rise and support the motion to pay tribute to our father and grandfather, the late hon. Eli Nathan Bisamunyu.

Madam Speaker, I personally did not meet the late but I strongly believe that he was a good person. Our elective positions require that you, the candidate, is good, honest and generous. That is why I want to believe that he was a good person.

Referring to what he did for our country during the UPC leadership, I would like to say that these people built the country. They worked for the country and they put the country at heart. That is why my colleague from Kole County said that the UPC Government constructed 22 hospitals for the next generation. The UPC Government built hospitals for generations. They were not like the way things are done now, where before we commission a building, it will have collapsed.

My humble appeal to the Minister of Health, Ndugu Ruhakana Rugunda, is to kindly rehabilitate those hospitals. They are very important and vital to our people’s lives. You realise that many of them are along the highways – Kiryandongo Hospital, Itojo Hospital and so on – and you know them. Please, let us have them rehabilitated, refurbished and made functional instead of putting up health centres II and III while these ones are left unfurnished. If you do that, you will have done something in remembrance of what the late here stood for.

Madam Speaker, we have also been told that he was very objective. I want to thank him for opposing what was not right, even during their time of leadership in the UPC. Can we learn something from him? Some of us here even when we see human faeces we will argue that it is brown bread. (Laughter) So, let us learn something from him.

Finally, I want to thank the family members who took care of him from the time he retired, to when he was hospitalized and now in preparation to give him a decent send-off. I thank you so much. I pray that God blesses you and He continues keeping the lights on him. He should not die with his name. I thank you.

4.39
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on behalf of the people of West Nile to join my colleagues in supporting this motion to pay tribute to this gallant son of this country. 

Last evening when I got information that there would be a special sitting of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Bisamunyu, I told myself that I must get time and be here. This was majorly for three reasons: I got to know the late through his son, the late Joseph Bisamunyu, who was an Assistant Commissioner at the Ministry of Information (RIP). However, I also got the chance to know more about the late when I was the chairperson of the DP Parliamentary Group in the Seventh Parliament. During that time, I interfaced a lot with Mzee Boniface Byanyima, the then national chairman of the Democratic Party, when I was reconciling the factions of Dr Paul Ssemwogere and that of Mr Bwengye. We used to talk at length about multiparty systems and the art of crossing the Floor. My attention then was drawn to how the Secretary-General of DP, the late Basil Bataringaya, crossed the Floor with a number of people and how the late here also crossed from the ruling party to the Opposition.

What does that show us? It shows us the spirit of accepting differences in diversity and having a purpose for existence. Today, what are we being treated to? I see my fellow ex-seminarian – (Interjections) – not hon. Okello Jacinto; he has never crossed the Floor, but my colleagues from Kabale, Lwemiyaga, Buyaga and Kampala Central who are being demonized for standing and appealing to their conscience. When shall we be able to emulate from the great leaders like the gentleman lying before us who belonged to a ruling party but because he believed his conscience was appealing to him to do the right thing, he crossed the Floor and he was never punished? I am happy to say this in the presence of hon. Ndugu Ruhakana Rugunda who came from the UPC and still has UPC blood in him – (Laughter) – He should be able to advise. (Applause)

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, let me give some information. I agree with my brother that I was a UPC youth winger but I also agree that the NRM has brought UPC, DP, CP, the independents and is now bringing FDC and others into one home of all Ugandans. So, the Movement contains all the blood from all the political parties.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I take note of that. The second issue and the second opportunity is when I personally –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one minute.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The second opportunity when I had physical closeness in sharing discussions with the late hon. Bisamunyu was in the Seventh Parliament when we were invited for a fundraising function at Mparo Church of Uganda in Rukiga County by the hon. Jack Sabiiti. By that time, the Parliamentary Advocacy Forum (PAFO) had just metamorphosed into FDC and we were preparing ourselves for a multiparty dispensation. When I met this veteran politician, he gave me counsel. 
You know about the old adage, bukadde magezi, that is the time I got to know that it is true that Uzeeni akili. At that time, the late told us that as young people who were entering into a new political dispensation, we had to prepare ourselves for certain things. He talked about perseverance. He said that since the country had been around without a multiparty system for long and that we were getting into it without experience, we had to prepare to persevere – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: I want these people to move when it is still daytime. Okay, half a minute to conclude.

MR WADRI: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for being patient with me. As I was saying, the other thing he talked about was the issue of tolerance. How I wish we can be tolerant with one another.

The second issue, Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: No, the third one now –

MR WADRI: No, the second one because the other one – (Laughter) – It was about the spirit of nationalism. The days the late here went to school were hard, and this was from Kigezi to  Busoga. That was the time when people would go from North to the South and West and from the East to the West. That bound us together in the spirit of nationalism. How I wish we could go back to those days. (Member timed out)

4.45
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I stand here to pay tribute to a great hero, a Ugandan and a Pan-Africanist who helped us attain our Independence in a conflict-free manner unlike other countries that are suffering like South Sudan and others.

Madam Speaker, we always conclude our speeches by saying “may his soul rest in eternal peace.” How can we say this for the souls of great men like this one who made contributions. We should change that conclusion to “May his soul remain active” so that his values remain active in us. Otherwise, if it rests in peace, it becomes dormant because it is the body that rests and disappears; the soul should remain active on its way to meet the Creator, our Lord Jesus Christ in Heaven.

Madam Speaker, we always stand here and say a lot of things but after that, they all disappear. I am happy that colleagues are now saying we should name some of the streets after these people. I am here to raise the bar. The last time I said that we should have a website onto which we post names of great men who contributed to the development of this country. Now I want to appeal to you that we get independence grounds and have write-ups of all the men and women who contributed to the independence of this country and erect monuments in honour of them. It could then become a tourist site. 

We should have grounds in every district to build monuments for great men and women who have contributed to the development of this country, for our children and grandchildren to continue reading about them. They will continue to say, “There was a Speaker of Parliament called Ms Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga who fought for this country and not only for Busoga.” Unless we do this during our time, we shall be blamed because we shall disappear and when time comes to pay tribute, many people will say, “May his soul rest in peace.”

Madam Speaker, I want us to change the way we do things. Can we start, under you leadership, to acquire land in a place like Sheraton and have grounds with monuments and write-ups so that those who come from abroad get to know that there were men and women who fought for Independence.

I love this gentleman because like I helped to form the Reform Agenda, that group helped to form a party that fought for the independence of this country. Somebody asked me, “Ekanya, why are you dressed today like this?” When I arrived here I did not know that it was his body coming in here. So, I had to request for a necktie that does not match my shirt –(Laughter)– so that I would be able to be in this sitting to pay tribute to him. May your soul remain active; we will continue to pray for you. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Before I invite hon. Latif Ssebagala, allow me to say that the Parliamentary Commission is proposing that in the new Chamber to be constructed, we should have a roll of honour where all these names will be put.

4.49
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I convey my innermost condolences to the bereaved family on behalf of my people of Kawempe North and the Democratic Party but also on behalf of the Muslim Parliamentary Caucus as the Imam of this institution. Because this is a Friday, I had to go for prayers but yesterday, you told us to be here for this very important function and that is why I came in a little late.

Before us lies a man in a coffin but we should not look at what is inside that coffin because he is going to be buried. We need to know that we are not going to bury only the body but also the information and the knowledge that the late had.

Madam Speaker, when you told us that when we celebrated 50 years of Independence the late was among those who were in the gallery, I was touched. I got to realise that you are a visionary leader. I am saying this because it would have been a mistake if the man now before us never got any recognition while he still lived. So, I want to thank you for this initiative.

It is my wish and prayer that we start working on our records and a database pertaining to recognitions made to people of substance every year by Parliament. We should also indicate, in our Parliamentary Calendar, dates to recognize such people no matter whether we will give them medals or not. Calling them up into the gallery and talking about their contributions when they are still living will be the right step in the right direction.

Finally, Madam Speaker, in every history book I have checked, I have not come across a record where patriotism was taught to people despite the fact that these people were patriotic. Now you can see that patriotism is being taught to people with Government spending a lot of money, but which school did these great men go to acquire patriotism? I believe that patriotism is not taught to people as it is being done now. You can see for yourselves that the late with us today never went to any school of patriotism but because he loved Uganda, Uganda always took precedence over any other issues. (Member timed out)

4.53
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO: (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to pay tribute to a fallen hero of this country, a hero who, for some reason, has never been decorated with anything like medals that are being flashed around these days. I want to say that as Parliament, we need to introduce our own medals rather than going for the politically motivated medals that I am seeing being dished out at a heavy expense to this country.

Madam Speaker, as we mourn the passing of the late Bisamunyu, I am just wondering what happened to this country. We had the late Bisamunyu, the Bikangagas and some are still alive like Mzee Boniface Byanyima, FDR Gureme and in Buganda we had the late Kiwanuka Benedict, the late Musaazi, the late Yusuf Lule and others. What is happening? These were few people but they took over the helm of this country. 

I have heard Members complementing the 22 hospitals; yes, that is a fact. I come from a drought-hit area but these people were able to set up ranching schemes, cattle dipping centres and so forth. Despite the fact that the current leadership know about cattle very well, they have not helped the poor people living there. These people constructed cattle dipping centres to treat rinderpest from the herds so that even the few cattle keepers then were able to keep a few cows. This is unlike today. Those dams are permanently there, unlike the dams that we have today.

I still wonder what happened. How can we bring about a renaissance? That time these people built 22 hospitals for a population of only six million Ugandans but now we are 37 million Ugandans. Can Ndugu Rugunda tell this country if there are plans for these 37 million Ugandans? Where are the hospitals to correspond to these numbers in Uganda? We only pay lip service, lip service and it is a pity! What happened? 

I know he is no longer able to decide on his own, but I also know that he has left behind a legacy. I know that during their time, the Europeans could easily have bought them off to postpone Independence but they did not bow to that. They stood and demanded for independence for Uganda. Now look at these days where men and women are busy selling the candidature of one person as the only visionary person whereas they are all occupying positions of responsibility. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, I will not dwell on that one because I already see them shifting in their seats. 

What I want to say is that among the Bakiga of then, there was no malaria, hunger and there were no jiggers but jiggers have now taken over Kabale. Hunger is in Kabale and malnutrition is in Kabale, which is an indictment to the current leadership. May your soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to confirm that when we commemorated the Golden Jubilee for the Parliament and Independence, we invited these gentlemen and hosted them for a weekend at Speke Resort Munyonyo. We had a dinner with them but we also gave them commemorative plaques from Parliament. At least Parliament did its work.

4.57
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to add my voice in support of this motion. I also wish to pass on my condolences to the family and the nation at large upon this loss. I want to add that on behalf of the UPDF, the patriots of this country and on my own behalf, the late hon. Eli Nathan Bisamunyu was a hero to all those who studied the history of Uganda.

I spent the whole morning at the Ministry of Education and Sports trying to find out reasons why our curriculum does not ensure that the history of Uganda is actually a compulsory subject. I can assure you that I have not yet got a good answer. That is very important. I am saying this because if we had that at primary, secondary and university levels, names like the one for the late Bisamunyu would be known to our young people and many other people who may not be in the know of what they did.

You have heard that he was called Eli like me. My original Christian name was Eria, but while in a secondary school and we were trying to be stylish, I came across a Mukiga friend who was called Eli. When I asked him why he was called so, he said there was a great man called Eli. From that day I changed my name to Elly Tumwine. That is how my name changed; it was because of that reference and it shows how important he was. 

When I joined university, I was in the same hall with his son, the late Bisamunyu, as somebody mentioned. He was my great friend. I came to know much more about what he did and his role. On this point, before my time runs out, Madam Speaker, I would like to propose that we should, perhaps every time we are remembering many of the comrades who have been in this House before, compile the records of their contributions from the Hansard and put them together. We can give these contributions to the press and publishers so that the public can share and get to know what they said when they were here and we learn from that continuously. 

I tried to do a Google search for what he said – I cannot summarise it here – but a lot of it was about being independent. He did not only say it in words but he lived his life as an independent minded person. We are here to remember those who contributed and built the foundation on which we are standing because a house cannot stand without a foundation. Although there might be some people who always pluck off some bricks or stones here and there, once the foundation is firm, the house will stand – (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, use half a minute to conclude.

GEN. TUMWINE: I will conclude by saying that the people who built the foundation should be remembered. I suggest that we organise a day for all the Members of Parliament – past and present – who have been approved for their medals to receive them because we could not do it at one small function. We had taken a decision that one day should be set aside by the Speaker, and in arrangement with the President, so that all those who participated in our Independence receive their medals. We have buried many of our colleagues before receiving their medals although they are already approved just because of lack of time for them to receive them – some posthumously and others who are still alive. So I request that we quickly work out that day and recognise those who deserve to be recognised.

I would like to end by telling my colleague who talked about resting that resting is not dying - (Member timed out)

5.01
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in giving credit to and declaring our fellow Mukiga and son of Kigezi a national hero. Indeed, it is in this spirit that Cabinet, in its wisdom, set aside this day such that my uncle, the late Bisamunyu, could receive an official funeral. I thank the Cabinet for this decision. I also thank you, Madam Speaker, for having accepted that decision.

I want to put it on record that my uncle died very happy and peaceful. He did not die in agony. We have heard the testimony of his grandchild who took care of him. It was amazing how the testimony was so revealing, to the extent that we were all convinced that it was divine. He died peacefully, which is rare because those who die in pain die with the feeling that they have not played their part on earth. Mzee Bisamunyu played his part and he did it by playing his role, as you have heard, in his objectivity, leadership and independence. 

You have heard that when he disagreed with his party, he crossed the Floor and when later he mended fences with the same party, he re-joined it. So when you see my friend, hon. Niwagaba, seated across there, if he mends fences with his party and comes back, do not wonder because that is the spirit of the people from Kigezi; we forgive and forget and move on. We are very objective and independent-minded. (Laughter)

Mzee Bisamunyu left a legacy that cannot be doubted. I am very glad to hear Parliament proposing what should be done. I am glad it is coming from Parliament and let it be on record that we in Parliament are the ones who appropriate funds and decide what they should do. So I would be very happy, Madam Speaker, if Parliament takes this on and in the next financial year we will not again lament when we have national heroes brought to this House without archives. 

For the record, Madam Speaker, I thank you for what is being planned for the new Chambers –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, use one more minute because he is your uncle. 

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, I thank you for what you have proposed. There is a young man who proposed – and it has already been accepted – to have a walk of fame between the Ministry of Finance and the new Government building. I think this will receive Parliament’s support.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, thank you very much. May the soul of my uncle rest in peace. Also, as hon. Ekanya says, may his spirit and soul always be invoked to guide us onto the right path. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, in response to what hon. Tumwine was proposing, when we were arranging for the golden jubilee celebrations, we wanted to produce the records but the biggest victim of instability in this country was this House - the records of the National Assembly were vandalised. The little we used was got from Makerere University because everything here was vandalised. So that is the price Parliament paid for the years of instability. Maybe they were used for sigiri, I do not know, but that is what happened.

Honourable members, I thank you very much for giving up your Friday and coming here; he deserved it. I want to put the question that this House do pay tribute to the late hon. Eli Nathan Bisamunyu, former Member of Parliament and former Deputy Speaker as proposed by the mover.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now direct that the Hansard for today and the text of the resolution be extracted and given to his family. Thank you very much.

The East African Community Anthem

The National Anthem 

(Exit of the late Eli Nathan Bisamunyu)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thank you for coming for this special sitting. I thank the family for giving us the opportunity. I thank the citizens in the gallery who have come to bid farewell to a great Ugandan. House adjourned to 2.00 O’clock on Tuesday.

(The House rose at 5.14 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 13 May 2014 at 2.00 p.m.) 
