Tuesday, 3 May 2005

Parliament met at 2.43 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, I welcome you and I hope you had a successful Labour Day. Once again, I want to appeal to you that although we have started very serious matters, you should keep calm and should listen to each other. 

On the issue of rules, rules are not read as if you are reading a newspaper. Rules are subject to interpretation. Sometimes your interpretation may not be the correct interpretation. In our rules we have given some power to some people to interpret these rules, and in case there is dissatisfaction I think the procedure is given as to how you raise the dissatisfaction. Rules of Procedure are not subject to Constitutional Court interpretation. The mandate of the Constitutional Court is very clear; it deals with constitutional interpretation rather than the Rules of Procedure. And if the interpretation has already been made by the Constitutional Court the proper court is for enforcement, which is not the Constitutional Court. So I appeal to you, honorable members that we keep cool. We shall be able to succeed. I thank you very much. (Applause)

2.46
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to invoke rule 58(1), paragraphs (d) and (a) respectively, to seek guidance. And I am very humble, –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: And you are always humble. (Laughter)

MR LUKYAMUZI: I seek guidance from you on two points, which need clarification. One is that last week on the 28th of April, I rose on a point of procedure. Apparently the person holding the Floor did not give in, he continued talking. You also did not assist me to let him stop so that I come in. I am seeking guidance from you on that point. When is a point of procedure and a point of order respectively, valid and invalid? Why should a speaker be pre-judged before pronouncement of what one wants to say?  

The second point - as I said I am very humble - I would like to invoke rule 57 to seek clarification from you. According to rule 57, the Speaker is not supposed to take part in any debate. He can only guide the House. The way I am looking at things, Mr Speaker, that rule is redundant in my view because how can an ordinary Member of Parliament like John Ken Lukyamuzi, the man, engage into discussion with a Speaker? I would be looked at as a detractor if I were to invoke it. So, when can a Member of Parliament invoke such a rule? On the 27th and the 28th days of April I almost saw my Speaker negating that rule. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: That is exactly what I told you. Do not read these rules as if you are reading the New Vision or Bukedde. Not everybody is capable of giving meaningful interpretation. So in giving guidance, one who reads rules as a newspaper may say, “The Speaker is participating”. But a Speaker, if he has to give guidance, has to say something during the debate, and you may misinterpret that as participating in the debate. I think I have cleared it.

2.50
CAPT. DAVID MATOVU (Kooki County, Rakai): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on an issue of public importance especially relating to water in my constituency. On the 2nd of March, hon. Maj. Kazoora raised concern about what government was doing to provide water to the dry areas, and you gave about four days to government to come up with an answer. I think on the 9th of March I stood up to remind the Leader of Government Business of that, so he committed himself that within a month he would endeavor to come up with a comprehensive report to address the issue of water not only in Kooki but also in all other places, which are drought-prone. 

To-date, Mr Speaker, we have not got an answer and I would want the Leader of Government Business and government to get interested in this issue of water. For example in Rakai, water coverage is around 42 percent, in Kooki it is 20 percent and now if you negate the boreholes, which are not functioning, it may come to around 10 percent. My people are very humble people; we do not want to go in for demonstrations. My Kamuswaga has no water. It looks as if of recent those who demonstrate are given a better and faster hearing. The other day hon. Lukyamuzi staged a big demonstration in Ndeeba and we were surprised that the following day graders were on the road working. Are you inviting us to also demonstrate? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank hon. Capt. Matovu for giving way. I am sure that government will answer on the issue of water. However, I am attracted by the last addition by hon. Matovu that hon. Lukyamuzi appears to get service because of being a habitual demonstrator –(Laughter) The truth is that in a way hon. Lukyamuzi is misleading the population –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of order. All the demonstrations I have organized are calculated and dimensional. That is why I have never gone wrong. They are clean and peaceful demonstrations. Is the honourable minister, who is also the National Political Commissar, in order to refer to my demonstrations as habitual demonstrations? Is that not misleading?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think I have already ruled on that. Having a different assessment of a situation does not make an assessment out of order.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Really for the benefit of honorable members so that we do not get this complaint again, I know on two occasions hon. Lukyamuzi approached the hon. Minister of Works, who gave him the programme of work in his constituency. So, he knows ahead of time that government is actually going to act. But in order to give the impression that it is his demonstration, which brings work, he comes forward and holds a demonstration. (Laughter). So, I do hope that this practice can really stop. 

THE SPEAKER: Only hon. Capt. Matovu approached me because of the problem of water. I did not get any other and, therefore -(Interruption)

CAPT. MATOVU: Finally, I want government to get interested in this problem because the UPE programme is already affected. Children cannot go to school; they are busy fetching water. People are walking over 10 kilometers to get water, especially the women. So, I request the Government to take up this issue seriously for the good of my people and the entire places that are affected. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, the issue I want to seek clarification on, for the benefit of our future Hansard readers and ourselves, is in relation to what the National Political Commissar had said that hon. Lukyamuzi usually gets an idea about what government is about to do and then he leads a demonstration for his own politicking. I know recently he led a demonstration against power tariffs. Could it be that he had talked to the Minister of Energy and he had some information that tariffs should be reduced and that is why he led a demonstration for him to be politicking? We want just to get a clarification from the Minister of Energy.

THE MINISTER OF AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Lukyamuzi has been a Member of the Natural Resources Committee since he joined this House. As a member of that committee he is always privy to information in the energy sector. (Laughter)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your indulgence. I am seeking your guidance about the Order Paper for today. Today we mark International Media Day. I was expecting that on item No. 3 there would be a statement from the Minister of Information regarding this important matter. As you are aware, the press is an important pillar in good governance and we know in this country we have certain laws pertaining to the media, which need to be reviewed by the state, such as the sedition and anti-terrorist laws. These are very oppressive laws and I was expecting that today as we mark International Media Day, at least the Government would come out with a statement saying, “We are going to review these oppressive laws” or, “We are going to do a, b, c, d about the law”. I seek your guidance, is it possible for the honourable minister to say something? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, since you are seeking guidance from me on the Order paper, I only include a statement if I am alerted by the minister concerned. In this case I was not. If you have a point to raise here after communication, you have to approach me first.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.58
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and Members of Parliament. I stand here to make a statement on emergency thermal power. 

I wish to take this opportunity to brief the House on the emergency thermal power supply being installed to alleviate the current electricity supply deficit.

In this statement I will indicate the rationale for the type of procurement, which has been made, that is Build, Own and Operate (BOO), instead of the Build, Operate and Transfer (BOT). I will also talk about the procurement process and the short, medium and long-term plans for meeting Uganda’s power requirements. 

The rationale for the type of procurement was a Build, Own and Operate (BOO) and not a Build, Own and Transfer (BOT) basis; and the main reasons for the BOO were the following:

1. Government was dealing with a procurement of an emergency measure to deal with the current power shortage, Mr Speaker. A BOO procurement is the one, which will be accomplished within a short time. Outright purchase would require a minimum of one year to accomplish the procurement process. 

2. Through a BOO, government mitigated the risks associated with the operation of a power plant, including the soundness of the plant and management of the fuel to be used by the plant.

3. Outright purchase would require mobilization of larger amounts of upfront financial resources.

4. Outright purchase would require a plant, which is adaptable to the use of cheaper fuels like heavy fuel oil and natural gas, which we expect to start using in the near future.

5. Government has divested from the generation business and it would require establishment of an institution to operate the plant, if outright purchase of the plant was done.

Mr Speaker and honorable members, it will be recalled that I briefed Parliament on government’s original plan for bringing Bujagali into production in September 2004, which did not materialize. However, coupled with that unfortunate situation, the power supply from the hydropower stations dwindled drastically towards the end of last year due to the severe drought, which has hit East Africa. 

The growth in demand for electricity has also been higher than had been anticipated due to increased economic activity and growth in rural electrification from one percent to about four percent and overall electrification from five percent to eight percent in the last four years. In that regard it was necessary to make a quick procurement to alleviate the situation. The cost of load shedding to the economy, especially the day load shedding, is between five and six percent of GDP.

In neighbouring Tanzania the drought situation affected Mtera Reservoir, which is the main source for hydropower in Tanzania. Mtera and Kidatu hydropower stations, both in Tanzania, are currently operating below 50 percent of installed capacity due to the drought situation. 

Similarly, Rwanda has had to install thermal power plants after closing up their hydropower plants due to lack of water to meet their power supply needs, which have been affected by the drought. They have entered negotiations with Aggreko and they have been here on consultation to see how we have done it.

I now want to move to the procurement process. I wish to state from the outset that the procurement process for the emergency thermal power plant followed the established procurement legal framework. Mr Speaker, a multi-institutional team from the institutions given below handled the procurement of the thermal plant. The team was drawn from the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the Electricity Regulatory Authority and Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited.

A call for expression of interest for the provision of the 50 megawatt thermal generated power plant on a BOO basis was advertised in the New Vision of 4 November 2004, and the Procurement News of 1st to 7th of November of the same year. A request was sent through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to advertise at the respective Uganda Embassies, and the advert was also posted on the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development’s website. 

At the evaluation of expressions of interest stage, four companies were recommended for inclusion on the shortlist and these were: Aggreko International Projects Ltd, Mantrac (U) Ltd, Jackobsen Elektro AS, and Cummins Power Generation Limited. 

The four companies were issued with the bid documents on 21 December, last year. Section 1, IFB2 and IFB6 of page two clearly stipulates that the type of contract would be on a BOO basis. 

On 11 January 2005, a pre-bid conference was held in Kampala and was attended by all the four short listed bidders. At this meeting the bidders brought out the various areas for clarification, which were duly attended to. 

The bids were received from – I have already indicated the companies - and the bid evaluation analysis was made. The evaluation team disqualified Cummins Power Generation Ltd’s bid mainly because it was pointed out in this bid that Cummins would only be able to deliver generation equipment in the fourth quarter of 2005 whereas the advert calls for something different, hence not meeting the emergency nature of the project. Cummins did not also have bid security. 

The team disqualified Jakobsen Elektro AS’s bid because it was found non-responsive as it offered a BOT as opposed to the BOO, which was requested for. The team recommended award of the contract to Aggreko International Project Ltd, which was found responsive at the fixed charge sum of US $31.8 million. This amount includes a fixed capacity payment of US $30.1 million for the three year period, and a total of US $1.7 million for transport of equipment in and out of Uganda as well as commissioning and de-commissioning of the plant.

Mr Speaker, Aggreko has operated emergency thermal power plants in many countries including: Angola, Sudan, Gabon, Chad, Nigeria, Tanzania, Kenya, Brazil, Afghanistan, Indonesia, Qatar, Iran, Saudi Arabia, South Korea, Germany, United States of America, Australia, and they are currently negotiating supply to Rwanda. 

The BOT bid offered by one of the bidders was non-responsive, as I have already stated. However for the sake of comparison, the BOT bid is analysed below:

1. Type of offer is of BOT, which did not adhere to the bid document specifications;

2. Actual equipment offered were in used state and would be operated after seven years after which ownership would be transferred to the Government, so government would be inheriting scrap. Clearly, by the end of this time the equipment would have no usable value.

3. The cost for the plant would be fixed costs of US $53.4 million under the three-year scenario, and US $61.4 million under the seven-year scenario. These costs do not include transport and commissioning charges.

To make a quick comparison, the BOO bid under the three year contract is going to cost US $31.8 million, whereas the BOT bid for the same period would cost US $53.3 million. The total amount, including fuel, for the three-year period under the BOO would be US $169.5 million, whereas under the BOT it would be US $82.4 million.

As required by the Electricity Act of 1999, the Electricity Regulatory Authority advertised in the local papers the notice of intended application for a license by the BOO bidder, Aggreko, and called upon the public to register comments or any objections to the project. By the expiration date of the notice, no objections to the project had been received by ERA.

Mr Speaker, 10 megawatts has been installed on site and we commence generation shortly. The balance of the 40 megawatts will be installed by the end of this month. So, within this month we expect to see an improvement in the power supply starting with clearance of the day load shedding and a reduction of the evening load shedding by about two days in a week.

The way forward on meeting the power supply needs of the country in the medium and long-term is the following. The electricity demand in the country is growing at the rate of 8.56 percent at peak. Besides the immediate and short tem measures like the emergency thermal power generation, which are being implemented, in the medium term the electricity demand will be met by an assemblage of Kiira Power Plant operating as a base load because this is newer than Nalubale. Nalubale will be operating as a peaking plant. Bujagali and Karuma hydropower plants, with a total capacity of 400 megawatts; heavy fuel oil and municipal waste generation with the unexpected generation capacity of 75 megawatts; and small, renewal geo-thermal energy projects of 70 megawatts, are expected in the medium-term. 

In the long term, from 2014 to 2025 three power plants, namely Ayago North, Ayago South and Murchison, which is Uhuru falls, constituting 850 megawatts, will have to be developed. The renewable energy base will be expanded to 150 megawatts and thermal from municipal waste and natural gas will amount to 400 megawatts. Overall the country will have excess capacity or standby capacity in the medium-term of 40 megawatts and in the long-term of 100 megawatts to guard against occurrences like we are going through today. 

In conclusion, the decision to use thermal power generating equipment was made in order to address the emergency power needs of the country. Failure to do so would have led to continued loss to the national economy due to inadequate power supply. The present condition is uncomfortable to many industrialists and it is a disincentive to investors who would like to invest in this country, leave alone the inconvenience being caused to the domestic consumers as well.

I want to say that there will be no additional increase in the tariff arising out of thermal generation beyond the increase, which was announced by the Electricity Regulatory Authority recently –(Interjections)- there is not going to be any increase. 

Having secured the relief power supply, the measures outlined above have been put in place to meet the electricity supply needs of the country in the medium and long term. I want to thank the honorable members for listening to me. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.14
MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened attentively to the statement made by the minister. Unfortunately, she is not addressing the concerns I raised. She is trying to be on the defensive to justify why she went for an expensive alternative. My concerns were mainly two.

One is that, yes, government thought it prudent to go for a short-term or medium-term remedy, and that is to boost our power shortage by thermal power. But there are two alternatives: you can use a machine or generators that use fuel oil and the other one, which is more expensive, is of diesel, which she went for. Given the background of our economy and the need for power, she also did not go for purchase. She went for leasing or renting, and if you look at her statement, honorable members, on page 6, table 1, she is comparing BOO bid for three years and BOT for three or seven years for that matter. But you are comparing machines, which consume diesel. I expected you to compare machines, one that consumes diesel and the other, which consumes fuel oil.

According to my calculation, the Government is going to loose an estimated US $42 million in three years because of use of diesel. Mr Speaker and honorable members, when you use a diesel engine it is estimated that you will spend US $29.3 million in a year. If you multiply it by three you will get US $87.9 million. While you use machines, which use heavy fuel, it is estimated that you will spend US $15.25 million a year. In three years it will be US $45.75 million. The difference is US $45.75 million and this is what we want the minister to explain because the associated costs are going to be borne by the consumers.

Two, if you look at her statement, the problems of power shortage in Uganda are not yet over. Even when we go in for a dam, it is going to take us time. She went for leasing as opposed to purchase, so these are the things we wanted her to explain but she is just putting up cosmetics and confusing us.  

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, hon. Maj. Bright Rwamirama for giving way. I listened to hon. Maj. Rwamirama last week when you requested the minister to bring a formal statement here. The impression hon. Rwamirama created at that time is that government went to buy more expensive equipment than the cheaper one. And now he is creating an impression that running the engine on petrol or fuel would be cheaper than diesel, which is fuel -(Interjections)- yeah, that is the impression you are creating.

The second argument you raised is that government will spend more money on leasing than actually buying the equipment. So, could hon. Maj. Rwamirama tell us the authorities he is using to get his calculations and those figures? Otherwise it will take me a little while to believe?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, I would like to correct the member holding the Floor that actually I was opposed to diesel engines and I preferred engines, which use heavy oil fuel.

THE SPEAKER: Have you finished?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Finally, before I get further clarification from the minister, in the bid documents, which I have seen actually in the advert, government put in a clause that, “The Government of Uganda deserves the right to reject any one or all bids or any part of any bid with or without assigning reasons, to waive all informality in any bid, and to award contract for the capacity and energy for the best interests of Uganda.” 

If this is the position, and having identified the problem, is the minister ready to go for a cheaper alternative that will be affordable by Ugandans, that will promote industrial development? What is happening is that industries are relocating to the neighborhood targeting the Ugandan market. Equally investors are investing in the neighborhood for the Ugandan market. So, in order to reverse this trend, we must make an enabling environment here, especially in regard to the power sector. I thank you very much.

3.21
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I sympathise with the minister. Like I said the other time, her colleagues are just sitting around, especially the Minister of Finance, and not helping her with the figures. Anyhow, they are really sacrificing her. 

My point of contention is based on page 3, paragraph 4 where she alludes to the fact that they are going to go on with the plans for Bujagali. Already the minister, in this very statement, is talking about the failure of Kiira and other hydroelectric power generating dams. Why do you have to go into this hydropower production and building more dams when actually you know the water levels are going down? We have information already that the capacity of the water is not enough to sustain Bujagali. 

If you want to go hydro, why do you not go to Karuma where everything is okay environmentally and ecologically, and you stick to Bujagali, which is expensive? It is going to distort the culture, the environment and everything. Even the dollars going to be used in the construction, they are telling us they are double what was used in India to construct the same dam, for instance.

Secondly, Madam Minister, you are talking about Aggreko and saying that you are not going to increase the tariffs; on what have you based your calculations? After the completion of this thermal plant and it is in operation, what is the amount of tariffs it is going to require per unit? I smell a rat here. This is something, which is under construction yet you are already putting up tariffs, and you are promising the people and the poor that there will be no further increment in prices? Are you the one –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and thank you very much, hon. Sebuliba Mutumba for giving way and accepting to receive this information. While it is true that you are lamenting the high tariffs, it is also true that during the time when the procurement process was going on, the hon. Minister for Energy was locked up in a very serious debate with Mr Cheeye, who is the Director for Monitoring Economic Programmes in this country. Mr Cheeye alleges that the whole process was inflated by US $9 million. So, we are actually shock absorbing that type of inflation. Thank you.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: So you can hear, Mr Speaker. Lastly, is the minister in control of the production of these crude oils? At the end of the day she is promising that they are not going to raise the tariffs of the power but from the world market we hear news that every time the prices for fuel are going up –(Interruption)

MRS MATEMBE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On this issue of Mr Cheeye and what I read in the papers, I got very worried. The information I want to give this House and the honorable member here is that during that time of the second dam, which eventually did not produce the power that we wanted, Mr Cheeye kept writing and bringing up so many details and evidence of things. I had the opportunity to not only write to the hon. Minister of Energy and raise these queries, but also sat with the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Energy to discuss all those things that Mr Cheeye was writing about and presented to my former office. 

What came out was actually that those things Mr Cheeye was writing about that project being a white elephant, which would never give us electricity because of the reasons that were being discussed here by the technocrats like hon. Hilary Onek, those things came to pass. What he was writing about the inability of that dam to work turned out to be true. 

So when I read this yesterday I said, “Surely, what this man is writing should be given due attention. It should be studied in detail because if it is coming in to help due to what happened to the other dam, then it should not be ignored”. Therefore, I really want to use this opportunity to tell the honourable minister, you remember the letter you wrote to me when we wrote about those things. You had better study these things in detail and by the time you go in again, please at least listen to the voices of people who are genuinely worried about what is going on. We should not lose finances when we are trying to help ourselves. I thank you.

MR MUTUMBA: As I wind up, I thank you for the information. Mr Speaker, the honourable minister should study these projects like the hydropower generating dams because what they put on paper that they are going to produce so much megawatts, is not what actually comes out.

The minister is also not going to be in control of the prices of crude oil. Madam Minister, before you go into these projects and programmes, there is a committee on energy, and there is Parliament. I wish that before you sign these agreements you would come before us and we assist you. Some of us may be in the know here and there, but the moment you sign the agreements and you come to us when they are starting to process and go on to implement the plans, to us it seems like it is becoming even fuel –(Member timed out)

3.29
MR TOM KAYONGO (Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have actually been taken aback by the statement of the minister. My constituency is home to one of the missionary hospitals, Mengo Hospital, and it has been hampered by these blackouts very many times. 

Last year I shared this with the hon. Minister Kamanda and asked whether there was anything they could do to help this hospital to be on power 24 hours a day. Hon. Kamanda assured me that they had explored gas deposits in River Semliki, and the deposits so far available could last 50 years. The arrangement was that they were going to heat that gas and transform it into electricity, transfer it to Jinja and then the company in charge of distribution would distribute power and then this loading shedding and power cuts would be reduced. Now the minister has come up with something totally different and nothing is mentioned of the gas deposits, which were going to be heated to produce electricity. Every time we complain about power another version comes out. Who is telling the truth?  

The honourable minister should be kind enough to tell us what the truth is. She says the charges will not go up again and yet fuel the world over is getting less and less and those who are drilling oil have actually turned to wells, which they had closed years ago to see if there is any reserve; which means that diesel will never be cheaper than it is today. Therefore, in future there will be more charges than the minister is promising us.

MR D’UJANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have only one clarification on this presentation. In the table on page 6 there is a comparison of BOO and BOT. I would like to know from the minister if these bids are alternative bids from one bidder or different bids from different bidders. Thank you.

3.33
MR JOHN ERESU (Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Mr Speaker, I feel a little disqualified to discuss the subject, but I should talk about it because I am a Member of the Parliament of Uganda. Obviously Kaberamaido District has never seen electricity for the last 20 years or so, and there is no hope it will ever have electricity in my lifetime. 

The minister, on page 3, paragraph 4, has stated that the growth in the demand for electricity has been higher than anticipated due to increase in economic activity and growth in the rural electrification from one percent to about four percent. Can the minister also in her submission give us how much has been spent on the rural electrification programme in this country and which areas have been covered? I only know that whenever the minister comes up to tell us about rural electrification and she tells us about the need for rural electrification, she talks about Nakaseke. 

Secondly, the minister should tell us really, what is the electricity policy in this country? Because -(Interruption)

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. I have listened to my colleague and he has stated categorically that the hon. Minister of Energy and Mineral Development has only been talking about Nakaseke when it comes to rural electrification. I think this is not fair. I have been in this House and whenever the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development comes to this House, she has always covered issues covering the whole country in as far as rural electrification is concerned. 

DR NABWISO: My friend, hon. Eresu, was complaining about electricity in Kaberamaido. I want to inform him that according to hon. Amama Mbabazi, the Movement will be in power for the next 30 years, so he can wait until after that time. (Laughter)

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I cautiously take the information given and I want to add that the failings in the electricity sector, the failings in electricity reaching Kaberamaido are specifically not because of the Movement being in power but because the electricity policy - especially regarding rural electrification - which has been entrusted to this ministry, has not been followed up by the team down there. 

Last time we were told that power dams and other sources of power, including the recent one of gas, were going to be installed and we would be having enough electricity. We have also been told that we shall have solar and windmills. The Vice-President has been moving round the country, including Kaberamaido, telling people to grow upland rice, and I can see one big problem. How will this rice be purified if the sector is not working hard to make sure that in Kaberamaido we have electricity?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Eresu for giving way. The information I want to give is that the Movement undertook to change Uganda. First of all it was to fight dictatorship and introduce democracy. Hon. Nabwiso was part and parcel of that struggle; we struggled together. It took us five years to achieve that objective and hon. Nabwiso started with us, and we are in Parliament now. Thanks to the success of that struggle by the Movement, democracy has been delivered. 

The Movement has –(Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the Minister of Defence to mislead this House that because of the struggle of the Movement against dictatorship and other forms of underdevelopment the country has seen such a high level of democracy and development when actually in Teso, Lango, Acholi and other parts, before the Movement came to power we were very rich with our cows, now we have no cows when the Movement is in power? Is the minister in order to mislead this House when actually we are poorer and there is a higher level of suffering in those areas? 

In Kinkizi I am sure you are living in heaven but that is only part of Uganda. The greater part of Uganda is in a terrible situation. Is he in order to mislead the House?

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, I do not think this is an issue for a point of order. It is a question of assessment of a situation. His assessment is different from yours, maybe both of you are right, but that cannot make his assessment out of order.

MR ERESU: In conclusion I want to say –(Interruption)
 
MR MBABAZI: I gave way to a point of order.  I was just giving information to hon. Eresu that we have delivered that very clearly, and hon. Daniel Omara Atubo and hon. Aggrey Awori are clear testimony of the democracy that we have achieved in this country.

The Movement has undertaken to transform Uganda from a third world into a first world, and I would like to assure hon. Nabwiso that although he has departed from the path of change, the Movement is on the right course. It is on the same course and it is determined to change this country. I have said many times that as long as our people so wish, the Movement will stay. Those who said 30 years, I was talking about 30 years in achieving educational levels that we are talking about. But actually I said before 60 years is the time.

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, let us concentrate on the topic, the subject of the statement.

MR ERESU: In conclusion I want to say that Parliament approved a loan for rural electrification and disbursements were made but they stopped somewhere in the middle. So the rural electrification, in my opinion, has not taken off successfully. I can only commend the Movement Government for having obtained this loan. It is now up to the sector to implement the electricity programme, which has failed us in rural areas. That is why we are having lullabies. I thank you.

3.43
MR ROGERS MATTE (Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I need some clarification. In the statement presented, the table on page 6 indicates that over a period of seven years the BOT bid is not feasible. According to my calculations I see that when you compare the period of seven years with the three years and you scale down the values given in the last column of the BOT bid, you find that it is cheaper on average. It is cheaper - by the figures you have given - because it would give, on the fixed charges, an average of US $26 million over three years.

The second column indicates US $53 million but that is taking into consideration the fact that the plant would run for only three years. But since it is for seven years, there is a cost of –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But why do we not really conclude this matter. As I have said the committee will –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the honorable member holding the Floor that actually that calculation is also defective because it assumes the dealer will be importing fuel free of tax. I want to tell you that once you have diesel fuel, which is used in cars around here and the man is importing it, you have to work very hard to ensure that it does not leak to the market. There is also a problem that it will affect our revenue collection.

MR MATTE: Thank you for that information. My calculation was indicating that there is more benefit if we took seven years given the fact that even at the end of the three years we are not sure whether the procurement process for the new dams in the medium-term will have been successful. Can you assure us that at the end of the three years the other plans, which you have mentioned here, will be functional such that there is no period when we go back to square one? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, let the minister wind up. We have another ministerial statement on Luwero so let the minister wind this one up now. The committee should study in detail, get experts to testify and then later it will come back here as a report.

3.46
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the colleagues for their concerns. 

Let me respond directly to the supplementary questions raised by hon. Maj. Rwamirama. He asked, “Why not use heavy fuel?” The use of heavy fuel is not new. We have already implemented a plant in West Nile using heavy fuel and it is that plant, which is providing power to the West Nile region, which is enjoying an 18-hours uninterrupted supply as we speak today, and 24-hours supply over the weekends.
As it is clearly stated in my document on page 2, the reasons for choosing BOO are given. Mr Speaker, this is an emergency, and the world over emergencies are handled under BOO arrangement.  

Secondly, a BOT would have required heavy upfront resources, which we did not have because this is a calamity, which was not anticipated and would not fit in our budget. Those are some of the reasons why we have chosen these. 

Thirdly, we are anticipating to get better solutions in the next three years, like we are praying hard to get natural gas from the Semiliki region. If we get that, it would certainly be a better option than this one. We are also in advanced stages of negotiating a plant using municipal waste. We want to convert the garbage, which is a menace in this town to energy, and we expect that one to come on board in the next 24 months. Those would certainly be better solutions; and for that matter we went in for a short-term measure to alleviate the current crisis. 

Mr Speaker, about Mr Cheeye’s stories: Mr Cheeye has written many stories, many of them scandalous, others libellous against so many people, but if people choose to go by Mr Cheeye’s story nobody can stop them. But as far as I am concerned, what Mr Cheeye is alleging is not true. And, Mr Speaker, going by your guidance, the committee will examine the documents and establish whether the loss Mr Cheeye is alleging is true or not. 

We all know that one company, Jacobson, has been approaching so many people to front for it, and this is the company, which was non-responsive. We advertised for a BOO, this company offered for a BOT, then people come after the big process is almost complete and say because Jacobson has talked to us, reverse the process.  Mr Speaker, we have stuck to the rules of procurement. 

On the Rural Electrification Programme, we have got a plan and strategy, which we submitted to this House. That plan, I am sure, is available in the library of this Parliament. We also have an Energy Policy, which we have submitted; and to my good friend, hon. Eresu, if he has not read the newspapers of recent, the areas of Bubulo, Rwakaka, Kaberamaido, Katakwi, have been advertised for concessions under the Rural Electrification Programme. So, maybe he has been missing papers, but those are in process and very soon concessions will be given out and constructions of the lines in those areas will commence.

Mr Speaker, just in a few words, I want to say that the Rural Electrification Schemes have been done throughout Uganda. We have done lines in West Nile; West-Nile today is a shining example of rural electrification. We have constructed lines in Soroti, Iganga, Kamuli, Bugiri, Jinja, Luwero, Kayunga; the best line today we have in the country is the Masindi-Apac line. That one is new and it is the best, it has got minimal losses. 

Mr Speaker, two weeks ago we got a loan approved for the line from Corner-Kilak to Patongo to Abimu.  Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR MULENGANI: Mr Speaker, I was very reluctant to contribute to her statement, but it is also good for the Minister to be clear and truthful. I represent the people of Bukooli Central in Bugiri District, and every weekend I am in the constituency. Mr Speaker, is the Minister therefore in order to say that they have done rural electrification in Bugiri generally? Mr Speaker, at the moment the proposed rural electrification in Bugiri has stalled. Is she in order therefore to say they have done rural electrification in Bugiri yet the line is stalled to-date, Mr Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: You see, for me to rule on your point of order, I must be furnished with the facts to be able to say she is or she is not. This is a factual situation of which I am not competent to rule one way or the other.

MRS BBUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. But, Mr Speaker, what I wanted to say is that the demand for rural electrification is overwhelming; at four percent it is like the country is not yet electrified. But what is important is that we have a plan and a strategy, and we are working towards achieving 50 percent rural electrification in the very near future, but the issue at hand is increasing generation. It does not help to put up wires and you run them empty.  Mr Speaker, I thank you.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, this Minister’s statement involves substantial funds in foreign currency. The Minister has not told this House the source of these funds. I think it is very important for us to know whether it is a donation or aid, or it is from World Bank, or from the coffers of our internal resources. May the Minister please clarify this? I kept on standing up, but I am happy you have picked me.

THE SPEAKER: Can you answer that one on the source of funds?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, in the same vein –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Let us first get this answer.

MRS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, I had wound up my response, but in view of your guidance, the source of the thermal is going to be mainly the consumers.  Government is going to waive taxes and meet part of the fixed cost, but the rest of the recurrent cost would be met by the consumers.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Point of clarification.  Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But you see, hon. Lukyamuzi, you are a member of the committee and this matter is coming to you. You will have plenty of time to ask these questions.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LUWEERO (Mrs Magoola Zirabamuzale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Around this time last year, some observations were made and questions raised. I intend to answer them now. 

Mr Speaker, observations were made that the Ministry of Luwero Triangle has not done anything significant in the areas under its jurisdiction. Members will recall that the porfolio of the Ministry of Luwero Triangle was created in December 1992 and has therefore existed for about 12 years now. 

Members should further note that the liberation bush war extended to Western Uganda. Originally, the war covered districts of Luwero, Mpigi, Mubende and Kiboga. The areas covered by war had their entire social economic infrastructure shattered. 

During these 12 years, the ministry has been able to undertake various activities in the areas under its jurisdiction financial constraints notwithstanding. Among these achievements are:

Supported rehabilitation and construction of public institutions like schools, health centres and other supporting units, namely: those from No. 1 – 29 in the statement. I would like to ask you to read through as we go along. This support has been in form of building materials such as iron sheets and cement. 

The ministry has also supported the construction of houses for veterans by the UPDF during the army week in Kikandwa in Mubende, Kapeeka in Luwero, Masulita in Wakiso, Kikunyu in Kiboga and Nyimbwa in Luwero.

Mr Speaker, the ministry also supported the rehabilitation/construction of six administration centres indicated in the statement. 

Mr Speaker, we also constructed mass graves in the following districts: Luwero (10), Nakasongola (1), Kiboga (3) in Lwamata, Muduma and Kilengete, Mubende in Kikandwa and Kyamusisi. There were also seven mass graves in Wakiso district, Mukono had one, Hoima (1), Kabalore (1) and Mbale (1) in Bukonko and Mpigi had one.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, in line with the government policy of poverty eradication, the portfolio had supplied hybrid seeds such as clonal coffee, rice seeds, vanilla vines and passion fruits to various farmers in the district of the triangle such as Luwero, Kiboga, Kabalore, Mubende, Masaka, Rakai, Mukono, Wakiso and Mpigi. 

Mr Speaker, honourable members may be informed that with the assistance of the Commonwealth Secretariat (UK), the portfolio has come up with a bankable project for the establishment of a tomato paste plant in Luweero district. The consultants behind the feasibility studies were facilitated by the Commonwealth Secretariat in London. Luweero District has offered land measuring approximately two square miles for the core farm which will be beefed up initially by over 1000 out-growers. Some investors like Mukwano Industries and Britania Limited have shown interest in taking up the project provided some basic preliminaries like availability of 1,500 hectares of irrigated land, mitigation of transport costs and utilities as well as division of duties on imported inputs for the factory put in place by Government.

Recently, we received three groups of investors from Iran and Canada through Uganda Investment Authority in January, February and March 2005 respectively. They wanted to acquaint themselves with the project. Both groups have expressed interest in the project and we are yet to hear from them on their final decision. 

Mr Speaker, once a viable investor is identified, the project will go a long way to alleviate poverty and provide employment for the rural people as the plant in estimated to consume about 250 tones of raw tomatoes per day. 

Mr Speaker, Members and of course government were wondering which people were camping around the Parliament for non-payment of their war debts. Observation was further made that the Committee on Government Assurance investigated and reported to the House that money meant to pay these peasants was paid to some other people. 

Further observations were that the little money which was put in the supplementary budget and which was supposed to pay those peasants according to the order was diverted. 

Mr Speaker, I wish to inform Members that there is a War Debt Verification Committee under the Office of the Prime Minister, which was established on the advice of His Excellency, the President in November 2001. The committee is comprised of 20 former bush commanders/contacts and is chaired by Maj. Jacob Asiimwe and deputized by hon. David Kibirango. It was mandated to re-verify all claims (earlier on verified by a former committee chaired by Mr Mugwanya) as well as all other outstanding claims pending verification and settlement. 

Honourable Members are informed that after verifications of the claims by the committee, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, which holds the compensation vote, effects payments. My ministry and the verification committee then, monitor the actual payment of the recipients at the grassroots. This system was used in relation to payments effected in November 2002 and June 2003 through the portfolio of Luweero Triangle. This is only to say that those other payments, which were made before, did not go through the verification committee. 

The committee has so far verified a total of 3,902 claims out of which 639 were approved. Later 278 claims were approved after going through the 865 appeals, which claimants were not satisfied with the committee’s decision. This brings the total approved cases to 917 and the dismissed cases to 2,985. The approved claimants are distributed throughout the 20 districts of the triangle. This excludes Mbale and Kapchorwa, which have just come in.

People camped at Parliament: 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, you should know that the majority of these people who were camped at Parliament and later shifted to the football ground at Lugogo and then to Kasana in Luweero were false claimants whose claims had been dismissed for various reasons like forgery, exaggeration, multiple claims, impersonation, lack of evidence at the grassroot and unauthentic recommendations.  

It should also be noted that some of them have also had their claims settled, but continued denying being paid. The best culprit in this regard is a gentleman, Kaziro Sejjange, who received a total of his entire compensation of Uganda Shs 3,000,000 in November 2002. Surprisingly, he became the leader of the demonstration group, which was here at Parliament and then later camped at Kasana in Luweero.

Diversion of money meant to pay peasants: 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I wish to make it categorically clear that my ministry has never been involved in any diversion of funds. Instead it was my ministry, which raised concern that people classified as “Luweero Triangle War Debt Claimants” were being paid huge amounts of money yet their claims did not go through the committee under my jurisdiction. Members will recall that the Committee on Government Assurances investigated the same issue and reported to the House accordingly.  The committee exonerated my ministry on this matter, and indeed recommended that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should only pay those genuine claimants approved by the Verification Committee under the Office of the Prime Minister.  

Members will further recall that towards the end of last financial year, a total of Uganda Shs 250 million to Shs 500 million requested for under the supplementary budget to settle at least a third of the outstanding approved claims was passed by the Cabinet and subsequently Parliament. A total of 230 claimants were paid from these funds. Their approved claims ranged from Uganda Shs 200,000 to Shs 3 million. However, two cases above that amount were given special consideration and their claims were partly settled, that was Dr Sebuliba and Lt. Col. Musajjawaza, who were paid Shs 20 million and Shs 13 million respectively out of their claims of Shs 400 million and Shs 170 million respectively.  

It should be noted that it is the desire of the ministry to settle all outstanding war debts.  Unfortunately, due to inadequate resources, funds have always been released in small and irregular instalments. We are, therefore, obliged to pay only people who can be accommodated within a particular sum of money released at a particular time. We have attached priority to the peasants in prioritising payments.

Mr Speaker, and honourable members, observations were made that the Luweero Triangle has been forgotten by Government. Members will recall that by establishing a whole portfolio of Luweero Triangle and the Minister of State in the office of the Prime Minister, the government was recognizing the special needs of the Triangle.  

Let it be noted that the rehabilitation and reconstruction of Luweero Triangle was supposed to be in phases. 

i) Relief distribution of resettlement packages like blankets, hoes, pangas, seeds and so on.  

ii) Rehabilitation (refer to pages 2-5).  

iii) Development: This is a long-term process.

Immediately after the war in 1987, several donors gave financial resources for the relief stage through the Emergency Rehabilitation and Reconstruction Fund. Resources required for major development programmes have actually not been acquired directly under the portfolio. However, through other sectors, major development activities are ongoing. We are now in the process of developing Luweero Triangle Development Programme, covering a three-year period. In essence, I can say the development phase of the triangle has not taken off though there is a widely false belief that Luweero Triangle has gained so much in terms of development and hence has outlived its usefulness.

Mr Speaker and honourable members may know that notwithstanding the extreme inadequacy of development funds, efforts have been made by the ministry to secure funds from within the national budget beginning financial year 1993/1994. However, considering the financial budgetary constraints, funds have dwindled to Shs 40 million per year for the whole of the Triangle. Most of the investments that could be characterized as “special” have therefore been of emergency and relief nature. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, my office is re-directing attention and efforts in the near future funding to programmes, which will reach the grassroot people. All people of Luweero Triangle must be catered for because they all suffered during the Liberation War in one way or another.  

My office is currently in the process of reviewing the development priorities for the region through a comprehensive project that will shape focus of future interventions. This project will complement the efforts of the Government to support a comprehensive poverty reduction development process tethered to the unfulfilled needs of the region, while consolidating the gains achieved by pas intervention. It is envisaged that these interventions will accelerate the end to the need for special development interventions or treatment of the region in future.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, it is the mandate of my office to advocate for the development of Luweero Triangle, but the revenue base of the local administration is too narrow to enable the districts embark effectively on development programmes. There is still therefore great need for the portfolio of Luweero Triangle, as an affirmative action, to spearhead the development phase of the Triangle, especially in those areas, which are just waking up from the coma effect of the war.

Last but not least, we wish to thank those districts of the Triangle where Government programmes and interventions have been implemented for the good of the people. I thank you, Mr Speaker.  (Applause)

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. Debate is open but I think we take about three minutes, not more than that.

4.16
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (Mityana County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for the statement, and I want to be clarified on about three issues.  Mr Speaker, the honourable minister mentioned mass graves, particularly in Mubende District, Wakiso District, Luweero District and some other districts.  Yes, I personally know some of these mass graves were constructed; two of them are in my constituency, that is, Kikandwa and Kyamusi. But, honourable minister, when you look at some of these mass graves, they are really in a very poor state.  

Honourable minister and Members of Parliament here, this is our history; we cannot forget these people who died in the bush war. Once we neglect these mass graves, we are forgetting a very important factor in the history of our country. Honourable minister, there must be a policy on how to maintain these mass graves so that we do not forget our history, where we have come from.

Two; honourable minister, incidentally our people are dying off. You go to some of the historical places, there is no document, which is being prepared. People talk about Kyamusi, Semuto, but once these people die, where are we going to get information from?  At times we visit them and they say so and so knew about this history, but history is not kept. Madam Minister, we need to prepare documents so that our history is kept. What you see today is because a new generation has come; they do not know what happened some time back and there is no document, which has been prepared, thus making us forget our history.

Third; on page 7, honourable minister, you have mentioned people who are claiming some money and there is some money, which was approved last financial year, but there is information that some of the people who claim this money actually were not the real Luweero people. I do not know whether you are aware of this. Some of them are using the Luweero name to claim some funds from the ministry, like the projects you have mentioned here in this document, some of them are personal projects.  People are saying this is a veteran health centre, but these are personal projects, people pay money but you went on releasing money to such health centres.  

Last time I actually had a scandal here with one of the Ministers, he went to officiate at a health centre - it is a personal house, somebody claims that it is a health centre for veterans, but this health centre does not exist at all, and you have even mentioned it in your statement here. So, Madam Minister, much as we might claim this to be going to our people, but some of this money is going into personal pockets. You should be aware of this. At the end of the day our people are still demanding something. So, Madam Minister, you should be aware of this. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.20
MR ANTHONY YIGA (Kalungu County West, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for her report, and I know being the first time on the Front Bench, we really have to sympathize very much with her, and also the fact that she is heading a ministry, which is actually cash-strapped. 

Mr Speaker, I was very much concerned about the issue of Luweero Triangle and I wanted to see whether the Government really had any plans to develop this area, which has more than 20 districts. What I have discovered in this report, Mr Speaker, is there is no plan. The war in the triangle ended 20 years ago in 1986, and up to now we have not actually –(Interruption)

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: Mr Speaker, I wish to inform my hon. colleague that actually there is a plan called the Luweero Triangle Reconstruction Plan. I can testify to that because at that time I was in charge of the department, and I participated in drawing up that plan. So the Minister should be having it somewhere in her office, and if there have been any problems with funding, that is a different matter. But there is a document known as Luweero Triangle Reconstruction Plan (LTRP). Thank you.

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Wagonda Muguli for that information. Maybe when you left that ministry, you went with that information, but according to page 9, what the Minister actually has informed us here is that her ministry is in the process of developing Luweero Triangle Development Programme covering three years so there is nothing, they are just trying to formulate a plan. So, if you have that information, you better forward it to her so that she gets t somewhere to start from.

Mr Speaker, my concern is basically development. This war ended in these districts of Luweero Triangle 20 years ago, and up to now there is no development plan for this area. When we look at Northern Uganda where we have a Minister also in charge of Northern Uganda, even before the war, even before the LRA insurgency has ended, already there is a development programme for that area.  So, what is the problem, why does Luweero Triangle also not attract similar assistance, Mr Speaker, so that we also have development in this area?  

Mr Speaker, recently I visited some of the areas in this typical Luweero, especially in Mubende when I went for hon. Suubi’s wedding, and I could not believe what I saw. People are so near the main road but they are really crying. I had the chance of going through Luweero. Much as the Minister in charge of Energy has been able to extend electricity lines to that area, people cannot even use that electricity because they lack the means to enable them use that energy. So, Mr Speaker, let us think of comprehensive development plan and a rehabilitation plan for these areas, otherwise people will continue to live in a war situation even after these 20 years. Thank you very much.

4.25 
DR STEVEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am extremely excited about the new Minister for Luweero Triangle. We have never had a comprehensive report like we had today about Luweero Triangle, so I feel that we have the right person in Luweero Triangle.  

But, Mr Speaker, the devastation that occurred during that difficult period in this country was widespread. I am glad that Luweero Triangle is being rehabilitated, but there are areas like Pallisa, and particularly Butebo, which were devastated. The people lost their cattle, and initially there was a plan by the Government to replace those cows and people were made to record the number of cows each of them had lost. It is known that the so-called Karimojong, who took these cows, were not really Karimojong because some of these cows were discovered in Mukono and beyond.  

Mr Speaker, I represent Butebo, and complications within the district are such that it has been very difficult to develop Butebo and Pallisa counties. Corrupt leadership was unleashed upon us, and now we are enclosed in a cocoon of corruption, embezzlement and all the evil you can think of.  The roads in Butebo, where the Government spent money through the UTRP, are now impassable.  

I have seen that Luweero has come to mean something a little bit wider; I have seen Mbale there and other districts. I hope that the Government will realize this and extend the spirit of Luweero to Pallisa and Butebo Counties, which have been devastated to an extent, which nobody can recognize and which has never happened in this country.  These areas, during the colonial days, were productive, clean and progressing, but they have now fallen. Education has gone down; we have the least number of children in Makerere University, we have the worst roads; something has to be done.  

When we report to the Ministry of Local Government about our issues, nothing is done. I have just made the issue known to the Minister responsible for Northern Uganda; I hope something will be done.  But we are silently suffering; instead of progressing, we are retrogressing. We need a district, we cannot get along with people who are corrupt during the daylight.  Corruption in Pallisa is from Kibuku and Budaka and we cannot get along with these people anymore.  The roads in their areas are passable while in our areas the bridges –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you, hon. Mallinga, for giving way. The information I would like to give is on the new district he is talking about. Actually we were moving very well until the people of Pallisa themselves failed to agree on how we should divide that district. So, that is what is actually stalling the process of having that district divided into two according to the wishes of the people of Butebo.

DR MALLINGA: The failure to divide the district has been by those who are institutionalised into corruption; they don’t want Butebo and Pallisa to go away. They would have lost their place where they have been practicing corruption. Instead they are suggesting methods of dividing the district, which have never been heard of in this country. I hope that the Government will come to the rescue of the people of Pallisa and Butebo.  

4.31
MR NANDALA MAFABI (Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the Minister in charge of Luweero for such a good report.  I am also asking the Minister in charge of Karamoja, since he is present, to also come up with a report about Karamoja.  The Minister in charge of Karamoja should be aware that in Bugisu and Teso we have a problem of cattle rustlers, and I am told the Minister is the one leading this. So he should come up with a –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, KARAMOJA (Mr Peter Lokeris): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As honourable members see me here dressed, very smart, unable to go through a bush, unable to think about any illegal cattle rustling, only being a bit unfortunate that I lead the people who at times go to raid. But now they are peaceful with the people of Bugisu because of our concerted effort to talk to them to have peace with other people. The people of Mbale are enjoying the meat from Karamoja through trade. Is it in order for the honourable member to insinuate that a person of this type can afford to go and bend in those filthy bushes in order to look for just a cow?  Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you substantiate that he leads?

MR MAFABI: Mr Speaker, last week -(Interruption)

MR BENEDICT ETONU: Mr Speaker, I thank my Colleague for giving way to get this useful information; it might help him just in case it happened when he was not available. It was reported in this august House that some among the cattle stolen from Kumi, a bull was found in the hon. Minister’s kraal.  (Laughter)

MR MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you can see. Last week but one 28 heads of cattle were stolen from Sironko and found in his village. Mr Speaker, if we talk about this issue of Karamoja, we can go on for the whole day, but the issue today is about Luweero.  But I will be very happy if the Minister for Karamoja comes here and also give us a report on cattle rustling as the Minister of Luweero has done. 

Mr Speaker, we know that our Constitution in objective 12 talks about balanced equitable development. We all know Luweero is a disadvantaged place. For the last 20 years we have made a lot of development programmes, we should have really taken into consideration the problem of Luweero. It would have been one of the first priorities to be developed because they helped us to fight the war, which made us get in power as you see us now. 

We have lost a lot of things - We have Elgon 13, which fought in Bugisu, they also destroyed our property. When are they going to compensate us in Bugisu, Madam Minister? 

Two; we are very aware that anyone who lends money to Government or who does business with Government is issued with a promissory note. When are you issuing promissory notes to the peasants in Luweero so that they are assured that they will get their money? This money should also attract interest. Are you paying them with interest for the last 20 years, or you are just paying them the principle in 1986? 

Three, Madam Minister -(Interruption)

MR EMMANUEL DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable member for giving way. Mr Speaker, a while ago you ruled and asked a Member to substantiate whether actually the honourable minister is a cattle rustler. Mr Speaker, information has been given in this House that actually the Minister was found in possession of stolen property. According to the Penal Code, this is a criminal offence. I want to find out what action has since been taken against the Minister.
 
MR MAFABI: Mr Speaker, this Minister here is always above the law; he is the leader of cattle rustling. That will be a Police case, we can wait for now.  Let me finish my point.

MR LOKERIS: Thank you for giving way. Mr Speaker, one time I read the New Vision purporting that there was some bull in my kraal. First of all, I do not have a kraal - and I decided to take the New Vision to court and we are pending to hear that. So it was totally malice by somebody called Etengu, and I want to inform hon. Ben Etonu, one of the old Members here, that there was a lot of brushing of soldiers up there. What he is saying is tribal, and at this age of ours, tribalism should be discarded. Thank you very much.

MRS BEATRICE WABUDEYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and my brother and colleague, hon. Nandala Mafabi for giving way. It will be unfair for me to sit here and let a statement be recorded that Elgon 13 have never been attended to. I would like to put the record straight that members of Elgon 13 from Mbale and Sironko districts have been attended to. We have a programme, in the offing, and Mbale and Sironko districts basically also benefited from the re-stocking programme mainly because of our participation in the liberation struggle. I thank you.

MR MAFABI: Mr Speaker, it is very good it is in the offing 20 years down the road. I hope they do not promise us another 20 years, and when people are dead then we shall do it. 

Now, the Minister in charge of Luweero is saying they are developing programmes. We have districts, which make development programmes, are these programmes not being funded? Why do we want to make double funding, is this duplication of resources?  We have Northern Uganda, we have livestock project, we have Prime Minister’s office for re-stocking, I am worried that many people are benefiting from these programmes of Luweero; they are not reaching the desired end. I think it is time the Government sat down and designed a development programme, which should really aim at developing the Luweero Triangle, but should be channelled through the district not through a ministry. I think the ministries have been around and they have failed, and the only place to go through -(Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and hon. Nandala Mafabi. Money from the centre goes straight to the districts, for example, re-stocking, which was started during my term when I was the Minister of State for Luweero Triangle, the districts had committees in charge of re-stocking. They were in charge of giving tenders to the people to supply whatever items they wanted to carry out. The problem, which I identified that time was that some districts mismanaged the re-stocking programme by buying very young, small animals at very high costs instead of buying heifers in calf. But the problem was not from the Office of the Prime Minister; it was from the districts; some districts mismanaged this programme, Mr Speaker.

MR MAFABI: In conclusion, Mr Speaker, it is better to have a comprehensive plan so that these funds or whatever development programmes in that area are implemented. Short of that, if we have duplication of programmes in the districts, we are going to waste resources. I thank you. 

4.42
PROF. VICTORIA MWAKA (Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank and congratulate the Minister for Luweero Triangle for her very good and comprehensive statement. My issue is small, but very important.  We know that Luweero District is the core of Luweero Triangle -I want to thank and congratulate the Minister for Luweero Triangle for her very good and comprehensive statement.

My issue is small, but very important. We know that Luweero District is the core of Luweero Triangle and we have a very important road, Matuga-Semuto-Kapeka-Ngoma Road. We know that the new government policy, as far as priorities are concerned, is roads connecting districts. This means that roads connecting places within districts are no longer on the priority list. This road has been on the presidential pledges every election cycle and has never been done at all. If you go on that road, it is like a cattle track. Could I request the honourable minister to consider putting this road on the Luweero Triangle priority issues because it is no longer a priority now as far as we learnt from the budget cycle.  

THE MINISTER OF WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr John Nasasira): I wish to thank the honourable member for giving way. There is no need to request the Minister to put this road on the programme; this road joined the programme this financial year.  As I talk now, Matuga-Semuto-Kapeka Road is going to be tarmacked. The engineers are already on site; they have been there for the last six months finalizing the designs. So, I just thought that information should rest your worries.  Thank you.

PROF. MWAKA: Thank you very much, hon. Nasasira, for having cleared the air. I am a Member of the Budget Committee, and when I asked that question, the Chairperson of the Budget Committee with other Members talked at length about that issue. I raised it again, but she told me that now the priorities as far as the budget is concerned, are roads connecting districts. So I said, if that is so, then perhaps we can find another way of working on that road.  But I am very happy; now it is openly stated that tomorrow or next week, the road is going to be tarmacked. Thank you very much.

4.45
MRS JANE ALISEMERA BABIHA (Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to express my disappointment to the Ministry of Luweero Triangle because all along they have been deceiving the people of Bundibugyo that they belong to Luweero Triangle. When I read the whole list, I did not find Bundibugyo and Kasese, yet these districts since 1962 have gone through conflicts. We had the Rwenzururu, we had the Liberation War, we have had ADF, we have had all those sorts of wars. Now I wonder where the people of Bundibugyo belong.

It is no wonder that even after the ADF war, we have not seen the trace of Government in trying to rehabilitate the people of Bundibugyo. I have always told the Prime Minister’s Office; I have said the people have suffered, the women are living like chicken, those who lost their dear husbands have continued to be supported by World Food Programme, the children have left schools, they are dropouts, but I wonder where you want the people of Bundibugyo to belong. So, when even we make certain statements we are right because even after the war, nobody is trying to see what the people of Bundibugyo should also access.  

I want also to express my disappointment to Government today that after all these wars the people of Bundibugyo and Kasese have not felt a tangible programme. Look at the Northern Region; they have had NUSAF even up to Pallisa. If the people can have NUSAF up to Pallisa, why can’t Bundibugyo and Kasese have a programme and yet the former Minister of Luweero here was telling me, “I will come to Bundibugyo,” and now they are so many years after the war. Is it their fault that they ended the war so quickly? So, the people are supposed to continuously fight so that the Government can continue looking at their problems.  I am really disappointed on this issue; the people have suffered enough.

I want also to register my disappointment to Government. We express our needs to Government every time but Government does not respond very quickly.  For example, two years ago, we have been talking about the border of Bundibugyo and Kasese.  A Commission went there, they have been telling me that the programme was done, the report is about to be put out and the Minister of Local Government told me that he is writing to the Prime Minister’s Office. But we are wondering, how long do the issues of Bundibugyo take when other people can take a few days?  Why should –(Interruption)

MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA: Thank you, hon. Alisemera, for giving way. The way I look at this document, it seems Kasese and Bundibugyo is already struck off the Luweero War Triangle and yet we are supposed to be there. Now, I want to put a specific request to Government, there are certain things we lost directly; hon. Kiyonga knows because he was the Secretary for Cooperatives. Our coffee for Nyakatonzi, our vehicles were taken by our freedom fighters, and I think also Bundibugyo Cooperatives; this is an open secret.  

Hon. Katirima knows very well, hon. Muhwezi Jim knows very well that Nyakatonzi Cooperative Society lost property, aided the fighters to come and override Kampala and we arrived. If you have removed us from the programme for Luweero Triangle, then pay our property. This is the request I am putting to you. Thank you very much.

MRS ALISEMERA BABIHA: Thank you, hon. Kibanzanga, for giving me that information. I also want to give more information to the Minister that even recently when we were fighting ADF, the people who gave their land to put up barracks and detaches have gone to the RDCs, they have written and taken claims, nobody is listening to them; what should they do? Those who were contact people during the liberation war, one time told me they got some bags of posho and beans and that was all. What should we do, honourable minister? 

I want the Minister through the Prime Minister’s office to handle Bundibugyo and Kasese comprehensively like you are handling other districts. If we are cut off, we better be informed. Thank you.

4.53
MR WADRI KASSIANO (Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin by thanking the honourable minister for her maiden ministerial statement. Having said that, as she rightly put it in her statement, in any development undertaking, especially after a disaster, be it man made like it was the case in Luweero Triangle or be it through a natural disaster, there are the three stages that we must go through in as far as the development of that area is concerned. 

In 1986/87, the Luweero Triangle attracted a lot of relief aid.  Immediately thereafter, there was the rehabilitation programme and finally we assume there has been the development programme. All these are supposed to be time bound, and Luweero Triangle Development programme was not the only thing in the first place, we have had other development programmes in this country before. You will agree with me that in 1979, immediately after the overthrow of President Amin’s regime, there was Uganda Reconstruction programme. And my senior brother, hon. Andruale Awuzu, was privileged to have served in that programme, and that again was time bound. 

But ever since 1986 this programme of Luweero Triangle, as the minister told us, has run for the last 12 years; and yet other areas, when you look at Northern Uganda Reconstruction programme it was a programme for five years, it came to an end.  Then when you talk about NUSAF, again it is so specific, five years and it winds up. When is this Luweero Triangle programme winding up, because in the first place the minister is complaining about resource constraints? 

Again she says the areas have again been expanded by taking on board two other districts, Mbale and Kapchorwa leaving –[Ms Nankabirwa: “Point of information”] - I know you were one time minister responsible for that, but I think I am a little bit well equipped with some information, I would wish to continue. Mbale and Kapchorwa districts have now been taken on, jumping Jinja, Iganga, Mayuge, Tororo and Busia. 

In my own simple knowledge of what a triangle is, I know that a triangle has got three corners, and I wonder whether this description given to Luweero Triangle really befits it. It would have been more prudent for government to come up with a programme, they can code-name it anything, but they should not hoodwink us by coming up with such an amorphous programme which has no end, which has no beginning, and yet they are complaining that there are resource constraints. Is this a political programme? 
In no way am I trying to say that the ministry should be scrapped so that my senior sister is left without a job; all I am saying is that programmes of that nature must have a time frame and that is when we will know that really there is something happening. But otherwise, the way things are, come 2006, come 2007, I do not think such kind of programmes should continue. 

We do appreciate the people of Luweero Triangle contributed immensely, sacrificed a lot in as far as the liberation efforts were concerned. But I would prefer that a programme designed for that purpose should not be misleadingly code-named as Luweero Triangle when actually it is not a triangle, when it is not doing what it is. How can you say Kapchorwa is in the triangle, how can you say Masindi is in the triangle? I think there is something wrong. I put my case to rest.

4.57
DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the statement, but I also have a few issues to raise. I think there seems to be some information in this ministry or this office, which seems to be either withheld or not clear. I thought that originally the district of Masindi and the district of Hoima then, where Kibaale was, were originally part of the triangle; and the list really excludes the two districts, Hoima then, and Masindi. 

Mr Speaker, I would have wished the minister to have given – because when I look at page 2 from page 1, some of the centres and schools and so forth, it gives me the impression that that is the exhaustive list of the projects, which were embarked on by the ministry. I would have wished the minister to also give us some of the unfinished projects and where they are allocated, maybe the pending projects and where they are allocated because, when you look at page 1 and page 2, you get Kiboga, Mubende, then you bring in Masindi, then you jump to Kabarole, as hon. Wadri Kassiano says, then how do you describe the triangle and so forth? How do you jump to Kabarole and you jump Kibaale, which was under Hoima? There is a problem and I think we need an explanation as to why we are moving that way. (Interruption).

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I have been listening to my colleagues contributing, but it seems there is a problem that Members took this list to be the list of districts belonging to Luweero Triangle, which is not the case. This is just a list of some of the activities done in Luweero Triangle, mentioning schools, mentioning health centres, and the minister was answering a specific question. The minister does not have any mandate of removing any district; it has to be a Cabinet decision. I was very uncomfortable, Mr Speaker, when colleagues started saying that their districts were struck off the list of Luweero Triangle and yet it was not the intention.

THE SPEAKER: I suspect the cause of this is that no activities were carried out in some districts, or were mentioned to have been carried out in some of the districts, which have been taking themselves as part of the Luweero Triangle. That is the problem.

MS NANKABIRWA: I am the one who delivered the animals and the venue was in Mubende. Mpigi is missing; and Mpigi and so many districts of Luweero Triangle benefited. In Mbale, I went there myself, I addressed Elgon 13, they benefited. So, I am just giving this information genuinely to allay the fears of Members of Parliament, who are thinking that their districts have been struck off the list.

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Indeed, you have guided rightly. If this list is detailing the projects, which have been undertaken, then we have reasons to ask why certain districts, which are claiming to be in the Triangle, do not feature on the list.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe what is required now is to have a very comprehensive list of what has been done in all the districts of Uganda since this idea of Luweero Triangle started; maybe Members then will be satisfied. But if they think this is the comprehensive statement, then they come in, “But when do we feature, have they neglected us?” I think that is the reason. As you have said that you delivered some animals to Kasese, such a list should include such activity then I think it will help to clear the situation.

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and that means we would appreciate better that certain things have happened in our areas, which we represent. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, I was looking at the list of the mass graves, and there is this place called Buhimba in Hoima District. Is it also not possible that some information could be misleading? In Buhimba, Mr Speaker, there was a fierce battle, which was fought –(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you very much, colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I think that this statement was intended to answer specific questions that were put to the minister. Now that you have advised that probably the Members did not want specific answers, they wanted comprehensive ones, is it procedurally right that we continue to debate? I would think that we conclude this debate and then the minister is given new instructions in order to respond.

THE SPEAKER: But how many times shall we be dealing with this one? What we can do, we can debate as far as time allows us, and some few people on this side conclude. But meanwhile, you work out that comprehensive list, you just deposit it here and then we shall see what to do with it. We shall not have a further debate, but it is a question of informing us by giving us that in such a district we carried out this activity just for our information.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, when you look at this statement, it would have been quite informative and would help us to get clear information about what is being done if there are quantitative figures of the amount of money spent. May I propose that when the comprehensive statement is brought, the impression of how much is spent on these projects is also included for our information? That is what I wanted to raise. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, that is a detail, which can be catered for. 

DR KASIRIVU: Mr Speaker, I wanted the minister to carry out some good research because, as far as I am concerned, this mass grave which was constructed in Buhimba, was constructed by an individual and not the ministry and this can be verified. But the way it has been reported, it says the ministry is responsible for its construction yet it was constructed by Brig. Kyaligonza on his own money.  Has the ministry now owned it as one of its expenditures?

MR TIM LWANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The expenditure spent on Luweero Triangle is not necessarily 100 per cent on the building. For example, that particular place might have been constructed by Brig. Kyaligonza, but you would be surprised to find that the iron sheets, the cement, could have been provided by Luweero Triangle Ministry. 

So really, it does not mean that Luweero came and constructed a full school, there were places where the need was cement, so they were given cement; there were places where it was iron sheets, there were places where it was bricks. The idea is reconstruction, and when you are reconstructing it does not mean that you have to reconstruct the whole thing as government. Mr Speaker, people’s houses, which were reconstructed were constructed by people, but iron sheets were given by Luweero Triangle. It was teamwork in many cases. Thank you.

DR KASIRIVU: Mr Speaker, I thought the minister was giving me a specific answer because I raised a specific question but he is giving me generalities, and I am sure of what I am saying. The issue of Buhimba mass grave, I know, so you cannot beat about the bush to say, “We could have provided” because it was not!

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you, colleague. That is one grave that was built by an individual; I can also give you another grave that was built by Capt. Zizinga in Gombe. But the grave ceases to be your own property because it is a national monument.  The people in the grave are Ugandans; and whether the process delayed, the Ministry of Luweero should have maintained these graves for posterity because this is a national archive.

DR KASIRIVU: Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But please wind up.

DR KASIRIVU: I am winding up. Mr Speaker, what I am challenging is for the ministry to say, “We have constructed.” Then you should have said it was constructed by so and so, but now it is a national archive, that is okay. But what I am challenging is somebody could have put it in the books of accounts as an expenditure of the ministry, which is not true.

5.10
MR MURULI MUKASA (Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement that she has brought to the House. I would also like to express admiration for the right focus that she has given towards the end of that statement. It is true that Luweero Triangle now needs sustained development so that the effects of the war can be forgotten, we can heal all those wounds of the war and we people in the Luweero Triangle become like any other citizens of the country who never suffered from this war. 

Mr Speaker, the question of settling the war claims is indeed very crucial, and I think every effort must be made so that these claims are settled once and for all.

We appreciate the efforts, which the minister has done, or the ministry, over time to settle these claims, but sometimes the settlement is not satisfactory as indeed the statement reveals.  There is a case, for instance, of the war claimants in Nakasongola District, many of them put in their claims over the time. 

There have been various war debt committees over time since 1986, but unfortunately these people – they are not very many, they are about 400 - have not been treated conclusively simply because some of them subscribe to a unit, which was on the other side of the road, on the southern side, they were answering to Kiwanguzi. Others were answering to the other side, the northern side of the main road to Gulu, Ngoma, and then when the committee meets obviously they can pick a few they know then they leave out the others. 

Another committee comes, it picks a few they know, they leave out the others. So, I think now after 20 years of the war, and there is every effort to settle these claims once and for all, these little concerns should be taken into account so that all these claims are settled once and for all and there is no other misgiving.  

Mr Speaker, I thank the minister for the right focus; development is the focus and I hope we shall give the minister every support that she needs. We must give the minister every support, as the august House, that she needs so that she can fulfil this focus, she can develop the area of Luweero Triangle. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.13
MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this statement, and I would also like to say that it will be very important that you add the figures to this statement because in your opening statement you said that there was an observation that the Ministry of Luweero Triangle has not done anything significant in the areas under its jurisdiction.  

Mr Speaker, page 2, number 16, Ikoba Girls Secondary School did receive 50 iron sheets, that was in 1999, and on page 21, Ntoma Catholic Church did receive 10 bags of cement and 15 iron sheets.  I do not know whether to call that really a significant contribution, but when you are in need, anything you receive you are thankful. But the people of Masindi contributed significantly to this struggle and recently when the President came to Masindi, and I had the opportunity to travel with him from Bulima to Masindi town, he did retrace the route he took from Masindi via Ikoba, Ntoma, and this route is known in the higher circles of the liberators across Kafu and in Kiboga District towards Kyankwanzi.

When hon. Nankabirwa was the Minister of State for Luweero Triangle, this issue was raised and she did pledge but up to today that pledge is being reminded. I am told to remind government that, that road when worked on to connect Masindi District and Kiboga District, it would be a shortcut and there are a lot of resources including cows. But up to today it has never been done, and the people of Masindi thought that it would be really something significant they would have got from Luweero Triangle for their contribution. I need to be assured that the people of Masindi District will be catered for.  

Currently, we are hosting the internally displaced persons to the tune of 60,000 and above. All these are sharing our resources, but when we say we should be included in rehabilitation programmes including NUSAF – at least Pallisa is covered under NUSAF but Masindi we have not been covered and you can see the significant contribution of 50 iron sheets, 10 bags of cement and 15 pieces of iron sheets. So, Mr Speaker, my appeal is to government to give affirmative action to Masindi District for the past contributions, and the current contribution of hosting the internally displaced people and other affected persons. Thank you very much.

5.17
MR NELSON WAMBUZI GAGAWALA (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): I thank you, Mr Speaker. We must follow the presentation of the minister from a point of view that we are now in development. I think it should be government policy in future that one area has had a problem, it should give relief, reconstruction and leave development. Now that Luweero Triangle has had relief and has had reconstruction, we should straight away now say programmes should go to other areas, which need relief and reconstruction, as a matter of policy.

Mr Speaker, I will not listen to the Minister of Energy. This morning I was supposed to speak to her –(Interjections)- But the issue I am trying to put is that, really Luweero Triangle is the centre of all the major important activities like NAADS, research, health, even fisheries. It is a pity that up to now the area of Luweero is not circulated with fishponds when we are in the periphery of the events - the Minister of Energy would like to stand up, but it is a pity she wants to stand up because what I am going to say she will not like it. She has distributed mango seedlings to all her constituents instead of actually extending it to Buwenge, which took care of people who ran out of Luweero Triangle at the heat of everything. Right now the people of Buwenge are killing each other because of abject poverty; there is no electricity.  So really, I have to spare my words very carefully, not to say too much because you are my friend.

Mr Speaker, the issue about development. It is a pity that the minister is suggesting to ‘import’ some people from Britain or from India to come and help us. I think if we are really serious about making a paradigm shift for our peasants, we must remember what all scientists and professors of research and understanding have done. They have studied the people who are to be developed and you should approach development from their point of view, not from foreign points of view. Developing indigenous entrepreneurship, developing indigenous skills and then coupling them with modern techniques is the way forward. 

I can agree if the minister suggested that she was going to import pilot projects for Luweero for industrialization, then the villagers would copy.  You can see when they learnt how to hull coffee, they only observed these hullers and they started making it themselves. It is no longer an issue of hulling coffee, we can do that in mango, we can do that in tomato, we can do that even in milk. But we are importing wholesale, even manpower itself we are importing it; this is very unfortunate. We should really dwell hard on the Prime Minister, that he must call the ministers to change the thinking and we start approaching the thing in a fundamental way, in a micro way. 

We would like Ugandans to have an extra Shs 100 to spend, just Shs 100 for 24 million people, that would be something like Shs 4.8 or 2.8 billion.  Until we have shifted our way of thinking and started approaching things humbly and with simple tools and simple formulas, we cannot change our people out of poverty. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.21
MR DANIEL OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): I thank you, Mr Speaker. The Minister in charge of Luweero Triangle has given a catalogue of physical rehabilitation and development. But, the war, which took place in Luweero, devastated not simply hospitals, schools and roads but it destroyed human life. So, I am interested in the minister coming back to this House and telling us areas of psychosocial programmes. 

The life of the people of Luweero and their attitudes have suffered greatly because of this war and, therefore, I would like to know the institutions of rehabilitation, simply not schools built and roads constructed, but I would like to see a situation in which the people of Luweero are able to move from the psychology devastation, from the trauma they went through in this war and coming to integrate themselves into the rest of Uganda.  

My experience with the situation in Northern Uganda and with the programmes in NUSAF, which has input of psychosocial programmes, teaches me a lot about the issue of rehabilitation of human beings in war situations and, therefore, when it comes to Luweero, Mr Speaker, I would like to hear from the minister at a later stage how the people of Luweero are simply not being reminded of skulls of their dead ones and so on, but how positively these traumas they have gone through are being counselled and they are going through institutions, which will not make them just remember just the negative aspects of the war, but also reconcile with the rest of Uganda and also be in a state of forgiveness. 

I know there are a lot of politicians who are ready to exploit the situation of Luweero to their benefit, but the Luweero people will be a victim of that situation of remembrance rather than the people who are there being able to say, “We lived in Luweero in this situation. How are we able not only to benefit from the social structures, which are being built, but also to live with our children who may not have gone through, but to live in a new Uganda?”

Mr Speaker, finally, I want to inform this House that certain Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) are actually involved in these psychosocial programmes at the moment. I was privileged recently to be in a programme in which the peasants of Luweero were brought into direct contact with the peasants from Acholi, and I watched them talking to each other in Hotel Africana, each one relating the story of the war in Luweero and the other people from Gulu also relating their story of war in Gulu. 

The psychosocial workers were able, at a certain stage after relating their stories, to bring them and say, “What stage of reconciliation do we reach now?” I think these are the programmes, which the government should support. I was privileged to participate in this programme and, honourable minister, I would be happy to see you supporting these programmes so that the people of Luweero do not just get into physical structures, but they rehabilitate themselves also in a humane way. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.26
MAJ. (RTD) JIMMY WILLIAM KINOBE (Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to add my voice to my colleagues to thank the honourable Minister of Luweero Triangle for coming out with this statement that has helped us to discuss the issues that relate to Luweero. Luweero Triangle, as other Members have indicated, is a very important area. It is one of the departments that have had the highest turnover of ministers because in the last 12 years it has had seven ministers. 

Mr Speaker, what I observe as the problem is the lack of support to the honourable Minister of Luweero. I urge Members, if you feel sympathetic to the plight of the honourable minister, then let this Parliament support the Minister of Luweero Triangle. When you look at her statement on page 8(3.0), the minister says that government was recognizing that Luweero actually had special needs having gone through the war. She goes ahead to tell you that the programme started with relief, then rehabilitation where she accounts on page 2 to page 5, but when she reaches development she tells us this is a long process; and the paragraph that brings out the complication is on page 9, towards the last sentence. She says, “In essence, I can say that the development phase of Luweero Triangle has not taken off, though there is widely a false belief that Luweero Triangle has gained so much.” 

Mr Speaker, even when you listen from the submissions of many Members here, there is that impression that Luweero has actually gained so much. But if you want to prove this, look at the budgets of the successive years of the Ministry of Luweero Triangle and see how much, other than the fuel for her to move - by the way, which is not even enough to run the minister throughout the 17 districts of the Luweero Triangle. (Interruption)  

CAPT. MATOVU: Thank you colleague, Maj. Kinobe. Just look at page 9(1.3), the budget since 1993/94 has dwindled up to Shs 40 million per year for the whole Triangle. This is a budget for a sub-county in Kooki called Yakabanda.

MR MAWIYA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, concerning supporting Luweero Triangle, I think this House actually has done enough to support Luweero because many of us actually do benefit from the said Luweero Triangle.  This financial year you remember we even had to pass the budget without the minister then even responding to the queries that were raised, but we went ahead because it is a very important ministry and supported it. So, what kind of support should we really give Luweero Triangle?  

THE SPEAKER: We have the Minister for Luweero Triangle. Does it mean that other ministries do not provide services in this triangle?  

MAJ. KINOBE: Mr Speaker, I do not know, maybe the minister will respond to that. My understanding, when the ministry was created, it is found on the last page, where the minister says that she was supposed to be an advocate for Luweero Triangle. The understanding from that is that at least other ministries should have had a line item.  

I remember last Parliament in 2000, we were debating here the budget of Ministry of Works. We even suggested that let the Minister of Works create a programme within his ministry for Luweero Triangle roads, so that when the minister comes to advocate for roads within Luweero there is a programme to access the funding. That was never actualised. 

I remember in Ministry of Local Government there was an aspect of Luweero Triangle.  When they came to the sessional committee one time I asked them, “How does this programme serve Luweero?” Other than appearing in the policy statement, it did not have funds that could address the Luweero Triangle aspect.  

Hon. Lule Mawiya, was asking how Parliament can help. I think, one, the minister should develop something comprehensive, and then when it comes to Parliament, Parliament should support it. Having a ministry that does not have adequate funding, there is a bad word we use in my language, which I did not want to use –(Interjections)- well, they call it in the areas that keep cows “kigumaza”. When you have a cow near a fireplace, you hear it blowing and you think the fire is on, but by morning you find there nothing. To have a ministry when the minister is really not given funding to run her programmes, we will blame her at the end of it when actually she is a performer. Two –(Interruption)

MRS BALEMEZI: Thank you, for giving way and I thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I want to give is that the minister informed us that Luweero Triangle is supposed to operate in phases, and this is where I would have expected her to reflect these phases, in that we would be seeing what was supposed to be done in each phase, maybe including a budget for that phase, and we would be knowing what is supposed to be done by this ministry. 

Otherwise, from what we have been shown, the ministry is just supplementing on what other people do. Like they talked of a church in Kawolo in Mukono; all the churches I know in Mukono, we do fundraising and these are community-based contributed churches. So, if the ministry could show us these phases with at least the measurable and observable indicators so that at the end of each financial year we could see whether they have achieved or not, and where we could help. But these are ad hoc programmes, I would say.

MAJ. KINOBE: Luweero Triangle has about 17 districts and over 60 Members of Parliaments. So, I would advise the Minister of Luweero Triangle to invite these 60 Members of Parliament, I believe we can form a formidable block to persuade other Members to support your programmes.  

Another point, I wanted to raise, honourable minister – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MAJ. KINOBE: Hon. Wagonda Muguli talked about the Luweero Reconstruction programme. It is true that programme was developed. In the last Parliament I approached one of the ministers who was there then; the reasons why that programme was blocked was because of the inquiry in the US$67 million that is attributed to the late Kisekka. 

The committee of inquiry report came out, I happened to look at a copy of that report. So many years down the road that report has never been tabled, and that is one of the major roadblocks for you to access substantive donor funding because they insist that the money that was given to us was misappropriated and government has never come out to clear that aspect. The programmes stopped only at rehabilitation and that was so many years ago. If that report does not come out and gets debated, this Luweero Reconstruction Programme will always have problems.

Finally, honourable minister, I want assurances, I am worried when I read the report about the tomato industry. My people in Luweero have been banking a lot on the tomato industry, but the submission in your response is worrying. 

Before hon. Lwanga Timothy left, he assured us that an investor had been identified; your statement says that Mukwano and another one had indicated interest, then three other donors have again come up and indicated interest, then finally you say, “When a viable investor is seen we shall let you know.” We have been waiting for the last three years. We thought that these three years were enough for the project to mature, but the hope is almost getting crushed.  Can I have that assurance whether that thing will ever come up, or if it is not there then we also forget it? Thank you very much.

5.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE (LUWEERO TRIANGLE) (Mrs Beatrice Magoola Zirabamuzale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First, I would like to thank Members for their contributions and advice. I hope and pray that I should be able to follow some of those advices, more especially when they have given me some monies.

Mr Speaker, the first Member to ask or to raise a point was hon. Kiwanda, about the graves in Wakiso and Luweero, then documents in Kikandwa and so on being in poor state. It is in plan that we look after those mass graves, and right now I have already planned my trip to go round to see those places. As for the documents, those I am sure are going to be written and they will be availed.

The claimants who have not been paid, I want to assure the Member that the verification committee went down to the grass root and verified a number of claimants and we have already submitted their names to the relevant ministry, which is going to pay them.  

The next Member of Parliament was asking, “Is Luweero Triangle going to develop at all, has government got a plan for it?” I want to say, yes, because in the first place the districts, which are within the Triangle, have been supported by the government and that is part of what government is supposed to do. So, what the ministry is going to do will be a way of supplementing what is on the ground. 

He mentioned that Northern Uganda has been getting and continues to get external aid. But you will recall our last speaker has said something went wrong and we need to rectify it. So, I hope and pray that when I get hold of the papers, I will take them to the relevant people and we see how we can revert what has gone wrong.  

The next speaker was talking about Pallisa as part of the triangle maybe. I would like to say that the areas that I am supposed to look after are of historical nature, and Pallisa does not come in.  But I suppose that the ministry, which has the relevant attachment with what went wrong in Pallisa, should be able to assist. 

One other thing, which I would like to mention here is, according to what hon. Mallinga said, these areas which require special treatment really need to be assisted by Parliament. The budget that comes to the committee, and then the Ministry of Finance should really look into our problems so that we can be enabled to go through them so that we do not have to continue claiming -(Interruption)

MS GRACE AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank my honourable sister for giving way.  I wanted to help her a little by telling her that actually for Pallisa it is in Northern Uganda in NUSAF and the complaint against Pallisa from the other districts is that, it is the seconded highest funded of the districts as far as NUSAF is concerned, so it has something like Shs 16 billion for projects in Pallisa.  

Further information I would like to give is that, the people of Butebo and the people of Pallisa counties should actually be mobilized by the Members of Parliament to demand for this money, because until the population demands they will not get anything from NUSAF.

MRS MAGOOLA: So, you have heard that. Now, the Bundibugyo District and Kasese. I must apologize because you did not see yourselves here and therefore you took it for granted that you are not part of Luweero Triangle. But our main interest here was concerning the observations that were given to us, and if you did not appear probably it was an oversight or maybe we were not much concerned with the districts as we were with the others where they had made questions. But I know that for Bundibugyo and Kasese re-stocking was done, some iron sheets were taken and, therefore, count yourselves to be my children. The ADF area, the land, which was used and so on, I want to advise you that write to my ministry and then I will extend that to whoever is concerned so that we can see how we can handle that land issue.  

The Mbale people and others who were skipped, I think let us forget about that. When we say triangle, we bring those who come anew and put them in the triangle and we shall still remain with a triangle.  

Masindi, Hoima, are you in the triangle? Were you scrapped? I want to say no, you were not scrapped, but I think you were treated in the same manner as Bundibugyo and Kasese. I either forgot or you were not – you did not come onto the list as I was planning.  

You did say I should give you some information and maybe make even a research. I should say it here now that since many things are required of me, which were not particularly to be included in this paper, give me some time, maybe a month, I shall give a very comprehensive paper and I am sure I shall satisfy you. (Applause)
  
THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I think we do that.

MRS MAGOOLA: Hon. Kabakumba, I am sorry about the -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, what you can do, as you have said you want a month, we give you a month to deal with all this in one report. Thank you very much, honourable minister.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PHARMACY PROFESSION AND PHARMACY PRACTICE BILL, 2005

5.45
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Maj. Gen. Jim Muhwezi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Pharmacy Profession and Pharmacy Practice Bill, 2005” be read for a first time.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. Where is the certificate, honourable minister?

MAJ. GEN. MUHWEZI: Mr Speaker, under section 10 of the Budget Act, I wish also to lay on Table a certificate of financial implications for the Bill.  (Applause).

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate sessional committee for consideration, then a report will come to us eventually.

RECONSIDERATION OF A MOTION MOVED ON 21 APRIL 2005 UNDER ARTICLE 74(1)(a) OF THE CONSTITUTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT REQUESTING THE HOLDING OF A REFERENDUM FOR CHANGE OF POLITICAL SYSTEM

5.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Colleagues will recall that on the 21 of April this year, I moved a motion for a resolution of Parliament under Article 74(1)(a) of the Constitution to request the holding of a referendum by the Electoral Commission for the purpose of changing the political system. The motion was duly seconded and debated. When the question was put for the resolution, 142 Members voted in favour, 17 against and one Member abstained. 

The effect of the above pattern of voting, Sir, was that the motion was not passed because the standard of voting required under Article 74(1)(a), which is half, more than half of all Members of Parliament, who must support the motion succeed, was not made.  Parliament fell short of this standard by only six votes. The conclusion reached by Parliament, therefore, was that Parliament did not pass a resolution to request the Electoral Commission to hold a referendum.  

Mr Speaker, on the 27 of April 2005, I moved another motion under Rule 53(3) for rescission of the conclusion of Parliament on the motion for a resolution to change the political system. That motion was passed, as amended by hon. Bitangaro Sam, with a record vote of 189 votes.  For the record, Sir, allow me to re-state the resolution, which was passed by this Parliament on that motion: Now, therefore, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:

That the conclusion reached by this Parliament on the 21 of April 2005, in regard to the motion under Article 74(1)(a) of the Constitution, seeking a resolution to request the Electoral Commission to hold a referendum for the purpose of changing the political system be rescinded to allow this august House to reconsider the said motion during the current session of Parliament. 

Sir, the effect of the above resolution was that the conclusion on the motion for the change of political system was rescinded. I have read Blacks law dictionary and other authorities, which have attempted to define the term rescission as having the retrospective effective of annulling or quashing a decision from the time that decision was made as if it had never been made.

It is my submission, Sir, that the resolution for decision revived the motion, which I had moved on 21 April 2005, for reconsideration; reconsideration of any matter presupposes debate to resume. I will, therefore, invite this House to reconsider the motion I moved on 21 April this year under Article 74(1)(a) of the Constitution for a resolution of Parliament requesting the holding of a referendum for change of the political system from the Movement to the multiparty system.  

Mr Speaker, on those two dates, 21 April 2005 and 28 April 2005, I gave my reasons why I thought this august House should be pleased to request the Electoral Commission to hold a referendum on the change of the political system. 

As I request the honourable members to reconsider the motion and the reasons I gave, let me re-emphasize again that the existing Movement political system was adopted by the people in the year 2000. It is, therefore, owned by the people, whom we are honoured to represent in this House. It is fair and just, therefore, that the people of Uganda be consulted on this historic change on the transition from the Movement to the multiparty system of democracy. It is, therefore, my prayer that this august House proceeds to reconsider the motion and pass it on its merits. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.52
MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I do rise to support the motion as moved by the minister. Mr Speaker, on the 21 April 2005 and on the 27 April 2005 respectively I did support the position of the minister as put then, and these were my reasons and they still remain the reasons that I am convinced about.

We all know that the Ugandan population was de-enfranchised and the 1995 Constitution enfranchised them and gave them the power to be part of the decision-making. For that matter, you find that all important provisions within the Constitution are entrenched, which calls for people to be consulted over those matters if there is anything to deal with those matters. 

The referendum is provided for, just like the minister has said, and the present mandate of the Movement was given to it through a referendum that was held in 2000. Therefore, it becomes imperative that the same people are consulted so that they make a decision as to whether they want to change their mandate and be governed in a different system.

Accordingly, a referendum to change that mandate, the Movement is a product of a popular people’s revolution, hence moves along with the people.  Therefore, it is in our interest that the people are involved, that the people own the process, that the people get involved in decision-making of important aspects of our governance; and good governance, which we all cherish entails political transparency, accountability, political involvement of all people.

 If we are to take a common definition of democracy to be a government of the people, for the people and by the people, how then do we make a democratic decision to change the system without involving the people? If we are to go by that definition, would any equation of decision-making that excludes the people be democratic? It would not. Can we sustain democracy without having democrats? Does democracy only apply when it is in our favour or outside the favour?  So, democracy should apply at all times, and in this case we must go to the people and consult them. (Applause)

There are two types of democracies: One type is indirect democracy, which is practiced through representatives. The second type of democracy is direct democracy, where the people are supposed to take part of the decision, and my view is that we should apply direct democracy and ask the people in this case. When the idea to change the political system came to NEC and the Conference, it was only accepted by the organs of the Movement on condition that it is referred to the people for consultation and, therefore, we have a mandate to go back to the people, consult them, and let them be part of the decision-making.  

For that matter, Mr Speaker, I do vehemently support the motion and call upon all progressive democratic and well-intentioned Members of Parliament to religiously support the motion for the good of our country, and for God and my country.  Thank you very much. (Applause).

5.55
MRS MARY KAROORO OKURUT (Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When the mustard seed of democracy was planted in this country, the people watered it, they nurtured it, they are the ones who looked after it; and this mustard seed of democracy did not fall on barren soil, it fell on fertile soil. 

Those who read the Bible, Matthew 13:18, we are told about the sower who went out to sow; and so this is how the seed of democracy was planted in Uganda. In 1994, it became a youthful fig tree, and it came to that when the people participated in electing delegates to the Constituent Assembly. And when they did that in 1995, we got the Constitution. 

Therefore, Mr speaker, nobody should be deceived in this House and in the whole country, the Constitution belongs to the people as a whole. It does not belong to Members of Parliament, it does not belong to President Museveni, neither does it belong to the government of the day; it is the document of the people, and the people must participate when a fundamental issue like the change of the political system is under review. I am urging the opposition, my brothers and sisters, who may not –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is no opposition in this House. 

MRS OKURUT: So, Mr Speaker, I am talking about people who have been saying that they have not been allowed to go and put their point of view. Maybe I used the wrong word, I am sorry, I apologize. These people now have the opportunity, let them go out –[Members: “Which people?”]- I am saying those who have been saying they have not had the opportunity –(Interjection)- no, I do not have the time I am about to finish.  Let us go out, let us talk to the people, let us put our points of view and let the people decide. This must go to a popular mandate of the people. We shall not de-enfranchise the people of Uganda, Mr Speaker.  

So, Mr Speaker, on that note, I support the motion, we should all support it, and nobody should despise our people and say that these people do not know what they are doing. If they do not know, why do we go there for our votes? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, everybody should support the referendum.  Thank you.

6.00
MR JOHN KEN LUKYAMUZI  (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have attentively listened to the views of the other side –(Interjections)- the mover’s side and I have been saddened. Those who sat in the Constituent Assembly proposed –(Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, I did not want to interrupt hon. Lukyamuzi, but a few days ago, when we were voting on this motion he vehemently opposed it completely and he said he would not speak when the motion comes forward. Is he in order this afternoon to stand here and request to speak?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I will not say he is out of order, but if he said so, he is expected to honour what he said. (Laughter)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Since the mover of the motion has had to rescind something, which had already been resolved on, it should not surprise him if I come back to change.  (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, the Constituent Assembly made several proposals on how a system of government can be changed. I want to submit that those who argue that after trying option one, which is Article 74(1), we now try option two which is Article 74(2), should not necessarily be looked at as anti-people. So, I have come to beg you to change your opinion so that you abandon that framework.  

Mr Speaker, why I am I saying that Uganda does not need a referendum on a political system? If people say no, and the Parliament says no, we must be able to defend the decision we made. I would like to quote you a distinguished political philosopher, who is prescribing the role of Parliament. When you are legislators, you are legislators, you must lead by your word, you do not simply change overnight.  

Who is that legislator I want to quote? He is Edmund Buck. Edmund Buck, one of the most distinguished conservative Members of Parliament, had the following to say, and I quote: “The elected Member of Parliament should be a representative and not a delegate. The electors are capable of judging his integrity, and he should attend their interest.  But more importantly, he must address himself to the general good of the whole community acting in accordance with conscience and judgment. Above all, the Member of Parliament must own, defend sustainably what he has resolved.”  We resolved what we resolved, we must honour what we resolved because we are representatives of the people; people are watching us we cannot simply change all of a sudden.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, why am I saying that we do not need a referendum? The National Executive Committee (NEC) in Kyankwanzi recommended that we open political space; the National Conference in the International Conference Centre recommended that we open political space. The biggest component in NEC is Parliament. If we resolved that we open political space in NEC, why not now? 

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have resolution number one of the Movement National Conference, as was passed. What was resolved at Kyankwanzi and eventually at the International Conference Centre was as follows: “Noting that the Movement political system is the best system for a non-industrial society like Uganda;

Convinced of the need for Movement to purify itself in order to be more efficient and effective;

Concerned that a minority of Ugandans feel conscripted into a system they do not accept; 

Aware that opening political space for political parties and organizations will enhance our relations with our development partners;

Now, therefore, we members of the National Conference of the Movement hereby resolve as follows: 

(1) That the voiles, principles and programmes that have been pursued under the Movement political system shall continue to be pursued by the National Resistance Movement.

(2) That the political space be opened to allow all those who feel conscripted into the Movement political system to freely organize and operate as political parties and organizations in accordance with the law.

(3) That any change of political system be referred to the people to decide through a referendum.”

Mr Speaker, is hon. Lukyamuzi Ken, in order to mislead this august House on a resolution he himself participated in passing as a Member of Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Well, are you suggesting that what you have read is something, which was passed here in the House?

MRS MWESIGYE: No, Sir, I am not suggesting that at all. But hon. Lukyamuzi Ken had quoted the resolution of the National Conference, which he is a Member of, that we passed and was avoiding to actually say the truth that we passed this resolution subject to a referendum by the people.

THE SPEAKER: Was hon. Lukyamuzi at the place where this resolution was made?  These are simple questions.

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, by virtue of the Movement Act, and I am aware, I was present, that hon. Lukyamuzi did not dissent at all.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think I conclude this in this way. Honourable members, the problem is, it is the first time you have brought this document in the House. It is better that it becomes part of our documents.  But I suspect that hon. Lukyamuzi might have gathered the gist from newspapers and therefore he is –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: So, maybe now he knows. I think he will be able to –(Interruption)

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  It is my pleasure and opportunity to lay on Table the Movement National Conference Resolution No.1, Resolution on Political Systems.  I thank you, Sir. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, now he is informed, so you can proceed.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Now that you have clarified the matters, I need not comment on what she has said. 

Mr Speaker, why am I saying that it is not necessary to resort to the change of a political system under Article 74(1)?  Article 69 of the Constitution states the political systems we are going to vote on or we have been voting on, the Movement system, the multiparty system and any other. “Any other” implies the likes of communism, unitalism, federalism and socialism.  

Mr Speaker, if that is so, is it easy to change a political system and include the alternatives? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, let me guide you.  As far as the question- assuming you pass this resolution, we shall not be setting the question that will be put to the people, that question will come later.  I do not know whether it will be change from Movement to – I do not know. Electoral Commission will deal that with.  You can proceed. I just wanted to assist you.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. So, what I was saying in a nutshell is that all over the world- I have attempted to study politics of various dimensions- political systems in a modern community generally evolve, emerge and develop out of political programmes of men and women.  You do not need to be worried as to how a political system will develop if you ensure a genuine good general election.

MR KAKOOZA:  Thank you, honourable colleague for giving way.  You have said here in this august House, you always demand accountability and transparency. I have got a report written by a scholar A.H. Milacham. He says that to have accountability and transparency it needs a physical verification.  

Hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, you have been demanding transparency and accountability whereby there is physical verification.  You always go in a constituency to consult and even you demonstrate.  Now time has come that you involve stakeholders, who are the people. The role of a Member of Parliament is to consult.  How do you now come and turn around and you say it is unnecessary to involve stakeholders to have physical -(Applause)

MR LUKYAMUZI: I thought you had gone a little step further by re-defining what Edmund Buck said about the same.  When you consult and you make laws, you should be proud of the laws you make.  So, it is not a one-way traffic -(Interjection)- I do not have the time. 

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, why am I saying we do not need a referendum on a political system?  I will give just three points of a scientific nature.  

One, Mr Speaker, suppose we have this referendum.  Last time the Movement used a bus as a symbol and the parties used a dove. Now the bus has already been owned by the NRM/O, which is a political party and the dove has been taken over by Mr Ocheger under Action Party. What a quagmire? 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, all of you respect justice and law.  The Constitutional Court recently ruled that a semblance of a Movement is not different from a political party.  If we vote after the definition of the court referring to the Movement as a party, we will be voting to the equivalence of a party.  What a situation?  If we vote on the semblance of a party we would be negating Article 75 of the Constitution which says: “Parliament shall have no power to enact a law establishing a one- party state.”  

I have come here finally to bring you light so that you change your mind because I believe you can change.  We are saying that in 2000 we put up the same framework, it backfired when we lacked quorum; it has also backfired, that is why you are rescinding.  Why don’t you revise your mind so that you follow the side I advocate?  Thank you very much.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise to seek your guidance. When I read the Constitution, Article 29(e), it states that: “Every person shall have a right to freedom of association which shall include freedom to form and join associations or unions, including trade unions and political and other civic organizations.”  

Now, Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance in interpreting Article 29(e) and Article 74.  I do not know which one takes precedence over the other. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, this I can only comment as a Speaker not as a lawyer. If a lawyer will go to the court, he will help the court to see my side on the case.  But as of now what we are doing is a motion under Article 74(1)(a). I am not aware that the court has declared this particular provision not operating.  It is a valid provision, which we are operating.  So, I do not have to go to Article 29 to deal with Article 74.    

6.15  
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Bbumba Syda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In 1981 when the people of Uganda were denied an opportunity to express their opinion freely, the people joined the liberation war in order to restore their powers provided under Article (1) of the Constitution.  

Mr Speaker, the people from my constituency, Nakaseke, which became the nucleus of the liberation war, lost lives.  They lost all their property, they lost their dignity, they suffered and there is no value whatsoever which can be attached to the amount of lives which were lost.  

Today as we speak there are seven mass graves in Nakaseke county alone where the skulls of hundreds of thousands of people were buried while fighting to restore their rights, Mr Speaker. 

Mr Speaker, through successive elections the people of Nakaseke felt rewarded because they saw the right, which we had won being recovered.  

Mr Speaker, when we went to the people in 2000 under the referendum to ask them whether to stay in the Movement system and they choose the Movement system, it strengthened their confidence in the NRM Government as the protector of people’s rights.  

Mr Speaker, when we conducted the consultations on the White Paper recently the people of Nakaseke came out clearly and said that they wanted to participate in choosing which way to go, whether to stay under the Movement system or to go multiparty.  It is just fair that we respect the people who sent us here.  We need to respect our bosses; we should not usurp the powers of our bosses, Mr Speaker.  

It is good manners that if your boss sends you to deliver a message, you need to take back the results.  We need to go back to the people.  According to Socrates, “Democracy is the people, by the people and for the people.”   Mr Speaker, by not going back to the people we are leaving out a very important element of the triangle.  Let us fulfill the democracy.  

I want to conclude by saying that accountability is very important.  Let us go back to the people, be accountable in a transparent manner and allow the people to make a free choice.  Let us give to Ceaser what belongs to Ceaser. Let us take back the powers to the people.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.20
MRS MIRIA MATEMBE (Woman Representative, Mbarara):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I thought I would not say anything on this motion, but in Ankole we have a proverb. “Ngu ekinyonyi kukiguruka kitagambire nibakyeeta ekyaana.”  This means - you know birds stay in a nest, when they grow, if it flies out without at least making some noise, they will think it is still young. Since I am not young and I have lived in this country through thick and thin, I thought I should make a comment.  

Mr Speaker, before National Resistance Movement (NRM) came to be, the statement was that politics is a dirty game. I never joined the dirty game. When NRM came with a definition that politics is the science and art of managing society. It impressed me, I embraced it and I went there with the intention to clean the dirty game and make it clean.  But, alas, the dirty game is really dirty and I have found out that unless you run away from it, it will swallow you.  

Against this preamble, I want to say that I stand here very sad, not that I do not like the people because they are the ones who elect us, they elected us to make the Constitution and gave us the views.  

I, the person you see here with hon. Khiddu Makubuya there, we did a great job traversing this nation to get people’s views.  Therefore, we love the people, we do not oppose them.  But for me when it comes to using the people for the sake of it, it really hurts me; it hurts me because I know what I am talking about.  

I have listened to people here, “We must ask people, we should not usurp their authority.”  Of course we should not, but when they wanted prices of cotton to rise, what happened?  When they did not want to sell Uganda Commercial Bank, what happened?  When they did not want VAT, what happened?  So, what makes me sad is using the people and in the name of the people simply because you want to achieve what you want. 

I feel sad because I was a Commissioner in the Constitutional Commission. I was a Constituent Assembly delegate together with my colleague, hon. Hope Mwesigye, the honorable Minister. We were on the Legal and Drafting Committee, whatever went in there was our final stamp. In that Constitution we wisely put different methods of amending the Constitution – yes, of changing the political system. We were very observant or taking cognizance of circumstances.  

The first referendum was actually as a mandatory. We said, “We must hold it”.  Then we said, “What about next time?”  We said, “Well, depending on the finances, depending on what, we could use these other systems”. We said it very clearly.  

Now against this background, we go to Kyankwanzi. We as the Movement people resolve that we change the political system. I want to tell you that what you tell the people is what they tell you.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I was here listening to Members of Parliament who traversed this country requesting views on the White Paper.  In fact the majority of the people came here and said, “Our people do not like the regional tier.  They submitted here one after the other, I was listening, that they do not want the regional tier in the Constitution, but where is it?  It is there.  

We are the people in the National Resistance Movement who used not to want the political parties and we resolved at Kyankwanzi that now we want them.  So there is no other side because if you really have intentions of telling our people what we want, we would achieve it.  But because of some kind of- I do not know, God will know when time comes. We come here; we want to spend all this money. “Kwezina kwesoma” - in Runyankole we have a proverb. “Ngu tokwezina okesoma.” You cannot be the drummer and the dancer.  

You are the very people who said we go to multiparty; you are the very people who are asking, “Do you want-?”  These tricks of political dirt - I am sorry. I am so sad that this is happening when we know the level of the poverty of our people and when we have an alternative to change a political system and want to sink billions of money to “Kwezina tukwesoma,” katemba proper!  

I used to read a book called “Kalulu the hare.”  I am telling you, honourable colleagues, Members of Parliament, this Government has turned into Kalulu the hare.  It used to do certain things, you people who read that book, you dance and you drum. Why all these tricks?  Shame on this good National Resistance Movement that I loved so much, that it has turned into tricks.  

I want to remind you that one day in the Animal Farm of George Orwell, the pigs looked at man and looked at pigs -(Interruption) you are shouting, I am not hearing what is going on. What do you want?

MRS SEBAGEREKA: Thank you, hon. Matembe for giving way.  Mr Speaker, I would like to put my Sister and colleague in order.  Is it in order for her to incite the House about the Constitution, which we both made? The first Chapter says, “Power belongs to the people of Uganda to choose the leaders that they want to choose.”  

Two, is she in order to ignore that the Constitution says when we are changing a system of Governance we should go to the people and ask what system of governance they want.  

Three, is she in order to persistently pocket and speak in an un-parliamentary manner and shout at the people?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think the last point is a point of mannerism. I cannot rule on that.  

Another one is vigorously opposing the motion. What I have seen is that we are mixing two things, that is the problem. It is a question of understanding what is at stake here.  The issue here is not about the Government, it is about choosing your options that are provided under Article 74 and decide which.  

The motion is opting for option one. You are free to go with it or suggest another option.  I would suggest, honourable members, these differences in assessing this or other should not really prompt you to raise a point of order because you will be wasting a lot of time on deciding on this when these are personal differences.  I think she is about to finish, let her finish and then we see how we proceed. 

 It is clear, as I mentioned- it is in the Constitution- this motion is based on Article 74(1)(a).  The mover is saying let us go with that, but in debating it you may say this or the other. At the end of the day we shall decide whether to go with the motion or not.  I understand at the time you were interrupted by the point of order actually you had run short of time.  Can you conclude, please?

MRS MATEMBE: Finally, I know what I am talking about. I know the Constitution very well. I participated in making it. I said here that when we are putting different alternatives, we are being mindful of circumstances or situations. 

Therefore, I was saying that the National Resistance Movement went through the Conference and chose that they go multiparty, and it is the same Government which was refusing multiparty.  Therefore, what the National Resistance Government tells the people is what they take. 

So I was saying why go to that expensive alternative of a referendum when we have the other alternative, which is cheaper, more convenient and involves the people. Why not go along that?  

Therefore, I was saying I smell a serious rat. I am seeing tricks in whatever is going on. I must be on record for saying that.  Thank you my Sister, hon. Victoria Kakoko. We shall meet outside there and sort out that.

MR KUTESA: Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance.  There has been repeated argument against this motion proposing that we should proceed under Article 74(2) rather than Article 74(1)(a).  But on critical examination of Article 74(2), this Parliament has no capacity to implement it unless Councils initiate it.  

In other words, in the absence of the petition from District Councils, this Parliament whether it has two-thirds or not, it cannot pronounce itself- (Applause)

 So, it only seems to be logical to me that you will proceed under Article 74(1), which is within your power; that which is not within your power you cannot handle.  

Article 74(2) requires that you get a petition to Parliament supported by not less than two-thirds majority of the membership of each of at least half of all District Councils.  Once you get that petition then you as Parliament can pass a resolution with two-thirds majority.  Unless and until you have such petition the hands of this Parliament are tied; you cannot do anything. 

So, I would like to understand how anybody would want Parliament now to turn itself either into councils and initiate petition and therefore proceed under two.  So, I have a problem, to-date I have not heard of any council that has even attempted a resolution.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think the point is this. You have heard the honourable member in her contribution was talking about the Movement Government, the Government, which is in control under the system that was adopted in 2000.  I think her thinking may be that since the Government is just not only here in Parliament, but is just down even in the district, it can prompt the districts to start the resolutions so that other options can also be adopted. I think that is her thinking.  

But anyway, honourable members, feel free to contribute.  The motion that I have here is for a referendum.  But anybody contributing can, in his/her contribution, suggest an alternative but at the end of the day we shall decide.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, Article 74(1) says: “A referendum shall be held for the purpose of changing the political system-

(a) if requested by a resolution supported by more than one half of all Members of Parliament; or 

(b) if requested by a resolution supported by the majority of the total membership of each of at least one half of all district councils; or 

(c) if requested through a petition to the Electoral Commission by at least one-tenth of the registered voters from each of at least two thirds of the constituencies for which representatives are required to be directly elected under paragraph (a) of clause (1) of article 78 of this constitution.”

The clarification I am seeking, Mr Speaker, if none of the three requested, what would happen?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is not mandatory to invoke the provisions of Article 74. It is not mandatory that in the fourth year people decide that we test whether people want to change.  If we do not take any action by invoking Article 74, we shall not have breached the Constitution.  

What will happen is that the system in operation will continue until interrupted by invoking Article 74.  I think there is an impression that it is mandatory under the fourth year to invoke Article 74; no, it is not.

The other thing, the issue of Kyankwanzi, as I have said before and I want to repeat, had no effect of changing the Constitution.  The Constitution may be changed by the organs that were set up in the Constitution to change it.  Initiating a change of the Constitution or amendment of the Constitution is by this Parliament.  So, Kyankwanzi was an expression of intent; it may be persuasive to you to follow it, it may not.  

So, you just follow the Constitution, if you agree with the motion we go that way, if you do not agree we see what to do. You may find that these Councils are also doing their work, but we do not know.  But let us address ourselves on the merits of this motion.

6.37
MS ROSE NAMAYANJA (Youth Representative, Central): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  As Members of Parliament and the entire institution of Parliament, we have a mammoth challenge of steering this country through the transition process.  

Mr Speaker, transitions, especially in Africa is very complex.  They bring very complex situations, tensions and uncertainties. Therefore, Mr Speaker, in this situation, it calls for the highest level of sobriety as Members of Parliament for us to steer this country across the turbulent waters.  

Mr Speaker, we must avoid by omission or commission creating a constitutional paralysis.  One can change a political affiliation, one can change a religious thinking or a religious affiliation, but one cannot change nationality.  So, we may have political differences –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, I know there are certain situations where one changes citizenship or nationality, but these are very minor.  

Mr Speaker, the gist of what I am saying is that as we sit in this House we are all Ugandans, and as we deliberate Uganda must be at the forefront.  

Mr Speaker, I beg to support the motion on the Floor for basically three reasons.  One is that we must avoid an elite-driven transition. We must allow all Ugandans to own the transition process.  This country has never enjoyed a genuine multiparty political situation.  It is therefore important for us to allow Ugandans. 

Mr Speaker, in the whole transition process I look at change of political system as the key element. Our Constitution is very clear that people must decide on how and who should govern them. It is important that, Mr Speaker, we allow people to make a voice.  All Ugandans must pronounce themselves on this issue and their voice must be heard very loud and clear.

Mr Speaker, I find it double standards for us to say - like last time I was listening to my colleagues here. Some of them were saying that Ugandans are going to be manipulated; if you go to a referendum, they are going to be manipulated, their egos are going to be massaged, and all that type of thinking.  But I call it double standards because when they are electing us, they are very right-thinking Ugandans, they are very competent, and that when it comes for them to decide how they should be governed, then they become incompetent.  That is double standards, Mr Speaker.  

Today Ugandans are more politically conscious than ever before, thanks to the liberalization of the media.  So, we cannot, Mr Speaker, sit here and erode the sovereignty of the Ugandans.  Whereas we represent them, they cannot relinquish their sovereignty.  

Mr Speaker, there is an argument that we all agree that we open political space.  This is mere political goodwill at national level, but the people down must decide, the peasants themselves – and in any case, we might have the political goodwill to open political space here, but when we go to a referendum and people say, “No, even those parties including NRM/O and the rest shall stay in abeyance and we move as per the people’s decision”.

Mr speaker, the other issue that has been raised is the issue of the expensive nature, the economic sense of the referendum.  It is true it is very expensive. It is true that we have economic and financial deficiencies everywhere.  But at one time in this country, Mr Speaker, financial deficiencies were not the issue; the issue was survival.  

The cost of us moving from a brutal dictatorship to a fair democracy today was blood, and like the Member of Parliament for Nakaseke said, we cannot put a price tag on anybody’s blood.  So if bringing stability, unity, harmony and democracy in this country requires UShs 30 billion, Mr Speaker, let it be if it will bring everybody on board.

Finally, Mr Speaker, however good a leader can be, for as long as the system that leader is operating in is not acceptable to all people, that leader is bound to have problems.  That is why I am saying it is of historical necessity that Ugandans’ voices must be heard on this very important issue. 

Mr Speaker, why I am calling for this is that however good the leaders of the NRA revolution could have been, without the unsurpassed capacity and willingness of the people of Luwero and elsewhere in this country coming up, sacrificing their lives and services, that revolution could not see the light of the day.  

So the reason, Mr Speaker, is that I am passionately appealing to my honourable colleagues to give Ugandans a chance, to allow Ugandans to make their voice very loud and clear.

Mr Speaker, I just want to once again appeal to my honourable colleagues to give Ugandans a chance to make their own decisions and to determine their destiny.  I thank you so much. (Applause)

6.44
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): I thank you, Mr Speaker.  A number of people have been emphasizing the financial cost of changing the political system by referendum.  But what about the political cost of not involving the people in the referendum?  The political cost is very important because if people are alienated, it will be even more difficult to quantify the consequences of not involving them.  So, it is important to consider the political cost.  

Let me also point out that we have 11 million people who are eligible to vote. I have been given this information by the Electoral Commission.  Now, if we spend Ugshs 23 billion to consult them, we shall be spending about only Ugshs 2000 per person; Ugshs 2000 to consult these people who are eligible to vote.  Is it not worth spending Ugshs 2000 to consult these people and avoid the political cost?  (Applause)

Let me also point out that when you involve the people they will own the decision.  When they participate in the referendum, they acquire civic competence because they weigh the different systems, they make a decision, they participate and their civic competence is enhanced.  

I am a man of few words. With these few words, I would like to support the motion.  I thank you. (Applause)

6.46
MR WADRI KASSIANO (Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity that you have given me to make my contribution to this very important motion.  

Mr Speaker, for the last two weeks this Parliament in one way or another has been on a day-to-day basis more or less concerned with this motion. Whenever anything came about or connected with this motion, there were voices heard in the precincts of Parliament and even in these Chambers to say, “Well, we have the numbers, this motion will go through.”  

I would also like to say that much as the numbers may be there, let us borrow a leaf from our past history.  Mr Speaker, while we are in this House many of us keep making reference to the Pigeonhole Constitution, which was single-handedly written by the then Attorney General, Binaisa Godfrey, QC. Many of us by that time were either not yet born or did not know what was happening; and even to the extent that those who were born thereafter keep making mention of the name of Binaisa Godfrey, QC, and Dr Apollo Milton Obote, who was the President that time.  I would not like a situation where tomorrow when we are all long dead, that people will come and begin making reference to us collectively and individually for having taken a wrong decision.  

Mr Speaker, when this motion comes the way it has come, there are a number of issues that we need to consider.  I would wish to link my reasoning to what the first person, who talked, that is hon. Sebalu Mike said, he was only being shy in the sense that for the purpose of this motion and other motions we Members of Parliament have been very selective in using Article (1), which says, “Power belongs to the people.”  We are only so shy because we do not want to finish what that motion provides. It provides that power belongs to the people and this power shall be exercised in accordance with the provision of the Constitution. 

 The Constitution is not shy about that because when you look at Article 71, it makes two important decisions or recommendations, and you have only for your own purpose relied on Article 74(1)(a) and yet there is a provision of Article 74(2), which hon. Kutesa tried to read.  But at the same time, I do not think his interpretation will appeal to my own personal interpretation. 

If you look at Article 74(2) it says: “The political system may also be changed by the elected representatives of the people in Parliament and the District Councils by resolution of Parliament supported by not less than two thirds of all Members of Parliament upon a petition to it supported by not less than two thirds majority of the total membership of each district.”  

While you are looking at that, we also at one time did make reference, especially hon. Lukyamuzi, made reference to the Kyankwanzi meeting.  He made a reference to the National Executive Committee meeting. What was the composition of the membership of participants at that meeting?  

The composition was the elected Chairmen of the District Councils, the elected Chairmen of Local Council IIIs and the elected Chairmen of the Movement system.  Since these were people who were elected leaders, who had already agreed with you in principle that the political space be opened, I do not see what difficulty it will cost us to go back to these same people and say, “Can you please petition Parliament in order to do that?”  

Mr Speaker, as if that is not enough, we are people’s representatives.  Democracy, if it were to involve direct democracy, will be too expensive.  That is why one Member of Parliament represents one constituency.  That is the importance of indirect democracy, which therefore means that in designing the indirect democracy, it did take into consideration the resource implications.  

Although the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister here has been telling us that it only costs Ugshs 2,000 per person in Uganda to undertake this referendum, I am afraid Uganda is a poverty-stricken country with 52 per cent of its resources of each development budget being supported by development partners.  

I will have logically thought that it would have been much wiser on our part to be very thrifty with use of the scarce resources that we have, which therefore will mean that it will be easier and cheaper if the political system is changed through the participation of Parliament and the District Councils.  I, therefore, strongly oppose this motion and urge every Ugandan who is concerned about use of scarce resources to vehemently oppose this motion.  

Mr Speaker, even when you look at the petition against the Political Parties and Organizations Act by Dr Ssemogerere and four others, the court did pronounce itself that after all the Movement system is a de facto one party organization. It did because I was one of the petitioners in that particular petition.  So whatever it is, now what is the purpose for us to again come and say we will wish to seek the opinion of Ugandans as to whether we should move from one political system?  What other political system are we moving to now?  That therefore means we are already in political pluralism, let us be in it, so be it.  

In which case, therefore, Mr Speaker, taking into consideration the fact that political parties have already been encouraged and they have registered, beginning with NRM/O, and many others that followed thereafter, their conscience and thinking has already been changed, including the public. When we went out to consult people on the Government White Paper, it was expressly stated in the Government White Paper that Government had committed itself into allowing us to go into multipartism.  My fear therefore is -(Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, is it in order for hon. Kassiano Wadri, Member of Parliament, Terego, to mislead the House by making a claim that the Movement system does not exist by pronouncement of court when in fact in the case of Dr Paul Ssemogerere and hon. Zachary Olum v. the Attorney General on appeal in the Supreme Court, the Supreme Court made the following ruling. 

I read, page 12: “As a consequence of the Referendum, the Movement political system was retained in place and the affairs of State have been conducted on the basis for over four years.  To declare the referendum a nullity would have far reaching consequences.”  Is it in order therefore -(Interjections)- I can read the whole judgment, Mr Speaker, if they want.  It says: “To declare the referendum a nullity would have far reaching consequences.”  

In our view these were compelling circumstances in respect of which the Constitutional Court ought to have exercised its discretion to decline granting the second declaration, which is the declaration hon. Kassiano Wadri is talking about.  Is he, therefore, in order not to know that when a Supreme –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable members, speaking as a lawyer this time. I have seen so many people not appreciating that in the court system we have the hierarchy of courts.  The case they are talking about as we said did not stop with the Constitutional Court, which was a court of first instance in as far as the Constitution is concerned.  

The court of first instance, the Court of Appeal, ruled that there was no referendum because of a bad law. Therefore, if there was no referendum there was no choice, which was made. In passing one Judge the said, “Well, I think it may not even be necessary to change a system, which is no longer there.”  But the holding of the Supreme Court, in fact the full judgment has not been written, held that the referendum was held and the system was adopted.

It is true that in the first court of first instance they said the Movement under Movement Act is behaving as if it is a party.  But the Movement system was not a creature of a Movement Act; it was a creature of the Constitution.  

I do not want to be as if I am expanding the law. But the point is, in dealing with this issue we should deal with the hierarchy of the court.  You cannot quote the authority of a court of first instance when there is an authority of the Supreme Court. (Applause)

About being not in order, I think he has the right to get information and he has got it.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, thank you for saving me from the claws of hon. Amama Mbabazi.  While he came to that point of order, Mr Speaker and honourable members, I was expressing my fear about this motion. 

Mr Speaker, there can be a lot of manipulation if the decision to hold a referendum on whether to go multipartism or not is left entirely to the people.  Why do I say so?  I say this because it will all depend on as to who designs the questionnaire.  It is not being defensive, Mr Speaker, these are realities.  If you are a social scientist and you have involved yourself in research, the way you design a questionnaire will determine the output. 

MAJ. (RTD) KINOBE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the Member for giving way.  The honourable member has eloquently quoted the Constitution, and I want to draw his attention to Article 74(1).  Article 74(1) outlines three means through which you can start the process of a referendum.  We are privileged that we are in Article 74(1)(a), but we do not have the monopoly to start the process, am I right? 

 It means that the framers of the Constitution could have anticipated that at one time leaders at our level may be complacent about involving the people and provided Article 74(1)(c) where you get one tenth of registered voters petitioning direct the Electoral Commission.  Supposing you managed to convince Parliament to abandon this, how will you stop the people if they chose to go direct when the people’s representatives have abandoned them? 

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I have what the honourable member is sighting, Article 74(1), which reads as follows: “If requested through a petition to the Electoral Commission by at least one tenth of the registered voters from each of at least two thirds of the constituencies for which representatives are required to be directly elected under paragraph (a) of clause (1) of Article 78 of this Constitution.”  

The point I was bringing unfortunately has not been well grasped by my colleague.  I was expressing fear about manipulation at the designed process of the questionnaire to elicit the opinions of the people. It is at that point that subject to anything, whoever designs that questionnaire can have his own personal interest safeguarded. I do not think that will be able to really give the electorate a clear picture of what they want for themselves.

MR OULANYAH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and honourable member for giving way.  I just want to read to you section (3) of the Referendum and other Provisions Act that was passed by this Parliament. Section 3(2) provides: “Where a referendum is to be held under this section, the Commission shall in consultation with the sides in the referendum frame the question to be used in the referendum.”  3(3), “Any question submitted to a referenda under this section shall be framed so as to enable the voters to make a choice.” So, there is a participation process in the framing of the question.

MR WADRI: Mr speaker, while I appreciate the information, which has been given by hon. Oulanyah Jacob, I think at the beginning of my contribution I did allude to the common say in this House and in the precincts of Parliament that, “we have the numbers.”  

Therefore, regardless of that process, as long as people are not going to be objective and they are only priding about numbers, it is a useless process.  So, it is not a matter of process, but it is a matter of a good heart.  Thank you very much, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is now past 7.00 p.m., this is the time to stop transacting business as by our rules.  The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 7.01 p.m. and adjourned to Wednesday, 4 May 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)

