
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Tuesday, 3 May 2021

Parliament met at 1.58 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this session and we welcome you back from the Labour Day and Eid celebrations. Thank you for standing with our brothers and sisters during this fasting season. 

As we join the whole world in celebrating the Press World Day today, we have a duty to protect the freedom of the press and create an environment that is enabling for our journalists. As Parliament of Uganda, we want to commit ourselves to the journalists out there, the fourth estate, that we will make sure the constitutional requirement is upheld. We will make sure we protect their interests.

Honourable members, the first session of the 11th Parliament is soon coming to an end. The success of this session is dependent on how many Bills, motions and petitions we have passed and how many resolutions have come out of this House that help the common man out there. I am reminding the chairpersons who have the Bills, the motions and petitions still in their possession to ensure that they present them to the House and we process them. 

I also want to congratulate the medical team from Mbarara Referral Hospital that was able to separate the conjoined twins. We thank them for the work they have done. It gives us pride that our referral hospitals can do that. (Applause) Congratulations to the doctors in Mbarara. We are proud of you. This makes you understand that next time, as we do the budgeting, these people will need money to ensure that such hospitals are well equipped since they can do what Mulago does. We need to support the referral hospitals. Thank you very much. 

2.01
MR HASSAN KIRUMIRA (NUP, Katikamu County South, Luwero): Thank you. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for being inclusive and extending love towards the Muslim community. In the month of Ramadan, you went beyond the call of duty to extend support towards the Muslim community. We appreciate that. (Applause)

In the same vein, as we were celebrating Eid yesterday, many parents were crying because their children are still under arrest, especially the Muslims. Some mothers did not celebrate Eid because their husbands and their children were arrested; some are Muslim clerics. 

On that note, we know, you can probe into these cases. Some of them have not been presented to courts of law. They have been detained for years and years without being presented to court. We know you can speak to the leaders in the other arms of Government to present these Muslim brothers in the courts of law so that there can be justice. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hassan. Next time, please, bring that issue as an issue on its own. Do not smuggle it in. Do not start by thanking me. (Laughter) There is no relationship between what I have done vis-a-vis what happened. Next time, bring it as a matter on its own, especially when the Attorney-General is here. 

Government, you need to tell the Attorney-General that we need to know the status of the people who are in courts and prisons. You need to give us that information. 

2.05
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate you very much for the gesture you showed towards our Muslim brothers. In your communication, you hinted about the rights of journalists and their privileges. I think you are on the right track. The only issue that is still disturbing this country and East African countries is the rights of journalists. Good enough, the Attorney-General is around. Many times, we have seen the rights of journalists being abused, although there is always a cover of a football match between journalists and Generals, but it has never saved the face of journalists. 

In addition to that, I call upon media houses to ensure good pay for the journalists because they are the lowest earners in this country. I know that can be enhanced by Government allowing the law for our people to have a living wage so that they are able to take care of their economic needs in such a situation where the prices of almost everything has been hiked.

MR MUGEMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure. Last week, but one, you directed the minister for local government to come and give us the status report about what was happening at the green belt in Iganga. Even last week, the Speaker who was in the Chair, Rt Hon. Tayebwa gave the same directive to the minister and they said they would be bringing the report the following day. 

Incidentally, the Prime Minister, in her capacity, said that they should stop immediately. She gave the directive in her own words here. She said that by Friday, they would have stopped. 

I would like to share my fear, Madam Speaker, that even as we speak now, they are still going on. I do not know whether it is contempt of Parliament or we have incompetent people on the other side who have failed to come to my rescue. I really use my money. I am now almost contemplating going to court to defend Government land, yet, it should have been people on the other side defending Government land. That is not my grandfather’s land. It is Government land that is supposed to be useful to all, but people have encroached on it. What do you need me to do? 

2.08
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank Hon. Mugema for following up on that issue. As far as I am concerned, a letter was sent to Iganga by the Clerk to Parliament who appraised them on what happened in Parliament, directing that the construction should stop. And as far as I am concerned, the construction stopped. They said that they were waiting for the committee to come on the ground and get a report and then, other things can follow.” So, that is what we are looking at right now. I do not know if there is any other thing going on right now.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Panadol, you needed feedback on that, but the information that Panadol had was that the construction has not stopped. Can you instruct the Permanent Secretary of Local Government to go to the ground and ensure that we have that work stopped? A letter was sent by the Permanent Secretary to all the Chief Administrative Officers in regard to that; why are these people acting with impunity? Can you order the police in Iganga to ensure that no works go on in that area? That is contempt of Parliament. 

We cannot allow an abuse of Parliament and we are protecting Government land; it is not Panadol’s land or someone else’s land. Let me hear from the Prime Minister.

MS NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, I have been talking to the Permanent Secretary, but I will take the decision like you are instructing me to. I checked with the PS and he said that the construction had been stopped.

He talked to the District Police Commander, the Resident District Commissioner and they said that construction had stopped.

THE SPEAKER: Please, call and find out what is happening on the ground. We need solutions; it is not about mere words.

2.08
MR NABOTH NAMANYA (FDC, Rubabo County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the constant outage and load-shedding of electricity in Rubabo Constituency and Rukungiri District in general. For the last 12 months, people in my constituency – Rubabo - have just been receiving power for less than two months. Every time the Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Limited (UEDCL) come to bill, they bill people who are struggling to buy essential commodities, a lot of money in form of service fee. My prayer is that UEDCL, through the Ministry of Energy should come and rescue people from Rukungiri. 

Otherwise, they have no way to substitute power with anything. I am praying that Government comes up to tell them the direction to take or suggest - like they have told us to substitute bread with cassava; what they should substitute power with, through you, Madam Speaker.

2.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Hon. Naboth, for raising that issue. I also come from Kigezi Subregion and it is true that we have a problem of power, but Government is taking the following actions to rectify that problem:

First, the subregion lacks a substation to support power and we have already secured funding. We have been having an issue of where to locate the substation which is being sorted out. We hope that very soon, the substation will start being constructed and probably, in the next six months or one year, power should be restored. It is a big problem, but we are working on it. Thank you.

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In our rules, the Executive is supposed to return to Parliament and brief it on the implementation of its decisions. I hope Hon. Bahati is familiar with that. We had a debate here on the closure of the Ugandan border with Rwanda, which remained unattended to. What we see is the President of Rwanda visiting Uganda to attend a birthday party of a serving UPDF officer.

Since Government is aware that they have an obligation to brief Parliament, may they brief us on the visit of a head of state to attend a birthday party of a General of the military. 

Since we also have UPDF officers here seated - not very far from me - they can also help to tell us whether it is now a policy of UPDF to go playing football all-over because there is a General who has made either 48 years or something like that. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I would be surprised if you never said anything about that. I do not think there is any law, which bars a serving officer from having a birthday bash. He had a birthday party just like if you had a birthday party tomorrow; all of us would attend, as Members of Parliament.

President Kagame came as an uncle, not as a President of Rwanda and the football match was played by Members of Parliament versus the UPDF. So, first start blaming yourselves; why do you get involved in those kinds of things if they are wrong? However, having football is okay and that is why we have a football club in Parliament. Hon. Ssemujju, let us look at more serious issues than birthday parties.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, the football match was just an illustration. The point was the visit of a head of state of a country that we discussed here and the decisions remained pending.

Under the rules, Government is supposed to update Parliament on that specific matter of the relationship between Uganda and that country that had closed its border at one stage. The only reason I brought in UPDF was because we did not pass money here for UPDF to go and make parties in State House and begin moving around, but if it is okay with you, we will be attending parties of other UPDF Generals. 

THE SPEAKER: The birthday party at State House was by the father. I hope you are aware that Muhoozi is a son of the President of Uganda. And secondly, the President of Rwanda was here as an “uncle” to Muhoozi; he did not come here as the President of Rwanda. We treat him as Muhoozi’s uncle.

2.17
MR WILSON KAJWENGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In your communication, as you have previously said that this is a Parliament for the people. I would like to put it on record that the people of Nyabushozi that I represent are very grateful for your visit on the 30th of April with a big delegation of the Members of Parliament. We appreciate the work you did in contributing to uplifting the education standards in Nyabushozi, specifically in science and technology. This goes to confirm that this is indeed a Parliament that serves the people.

Having said that, I rise on a matter of national importance, which the local leaders raised to you while you were in Nyabushozi. This regards the tsetse flies’ infestation and resultant loss of cattle and decline of economic life in Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura District.

Madam Speaker, for five years now, my constituency has fought tsetse flies infestation at an exorbitant cost, borne by the farmers. Unfortunately, we are losing the fight. The burden of the disease caused by tsetse flies is high. The Ministry of Agriculture has intervened, but minimally. The disease is chronic, so animals lose weight and production. It is estimated that 100,000 herds of cattle in the subcounties of   Kanyaryeru, Kikatsi, Sanga Town Council, Sanga Rwabaraata, Nyakashashara and Akayanja have suffered the burden.

The farmers in these subcounties keep dual-purpose cattle for milk and beef, whose productivity has tremendously gone down. When productivity goes down, the country fails to achieve its development goal agenda and this goes contrary to the national development goals.

Madam Speaker, Nyabushozi contributes, daily, an undeniable percentage of milk and beef to the economy. It is estimated that the district has lost approximately Shs 26 billion, per annum from the sale of milk, and Shs 15 billion from the sale of beef.

My prayers are: 
One, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, together with the Ministry of Tourism, should intensify the study of tsetse flies control measures, including development of an appropriate acaricide that kills tsetse flies. Or without prejudice to the above, the ministry should allow others to import that acaricide. The previous interventions with the chemical methods by use of vectocid acaricide, which is a pyrethroid, failed to kill the ticks and hence, the farmers abandoned it.

Two, the ministry should urgently procure and distribute tsetse fly traps to reduce the incidence. These are easy to use and are environmentally friendly.

Three, the Government should urgently provide equipment and other necessary lab consumables to Kiruhura District Veterinary Laboratory. This will improve surveillance of the parasites and suggest quick scientific responses, treatment and reduce death.

In the event that the Government continues to fail to control tsetse flies and their attendant cattle hemorrhage and the economic decline, I pray that the Government considers urgently compensating the farmers. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister -

2.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Hellen Adoa): Madam Speaker, the last time I stood here, you were the Deputy Speaker. Today, you are the Speaker and so, I want to congratulate you and pray that God gives you more wisdom and knowledge and blesses you to bless this House and the nation. 

Back to the concern of tsetse flies, allow us to come back next week with a statement, after consulting with the technical people. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what you need to do is to send a team to assess the level of damage that has been caused. I was there and I got that complaint from the locals. So, let us see how we handle it. 

2.23
MR GEOFREY KAYEMBA-SSOLO (NUP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Madam Speaker, I am the Shadow Minister of Sports and I am rising on a matter of national importance concerning the sports sector. 

Uganda has ten sports teams that qualified for the Commonwealth Games in Birmingham, which is starting in a two months’ time. However, the Minister of State for Education and Sports, in particular, Hon. Hamson Obua, has failed to get funds for preparation of the teams.

THE SPEAKER: The minister does not give money from his pocket and so, he has not failed. This is a Government programme. Can you withdraw that statement?

MR KAYEMBA-SSOLO: I withdraw the statement. The Government has failed to give funds to the teams that are going to participate. Many countries, especially our neighbours, started preparations as early as January, but for our country, up to now, the participants are not yet prepared, yet, we need good results from them.

I appeal, through you, Madam Speaker, to ask this Government - We want results and performances, yet, we do not participate in the preparations for better results. We request the minister and the Government to expedite funds for the sportsmen and women, especially those going to participate in the Commonwealth Games in a two months’ time from now in Birmingham. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, who has failed? (Laughter)

2.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Hamson Obua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the Shadow Minister –

MR SSEMUJJU: As far as I am concerned, the head of that ministry is not Hon. Obua. (Laughter) Hon. Obua is a state minister, but it is in their habit that each time they ask the minister, they are the ones; either it is Dr Muyingo shooting up or Hon. Obua.  

Can the Government tell us whether the minister, who was approved by Parliament, got tired and abandoned that ministry so it is now run by her juniors? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I like the way Hon. Ssemujju likes the Minister of Sports. (Laughter) That is a sign of love. He really loves the Minister of Sports, but it is a collective responsibility and the Minister of Education and Sports, specifically sports, is Hon. Denis Hamson Obua. Let us hear from him. If you want the Minister of Education in particular - the head of the sector – 

Honourable members, this is why we have a number of ministers in a sector. Where one is not able, the rest are there. Now, we have two ministers from the Ministry of Education and Sports. Congratulations education ministry for having two ministers in the House. (Applause)

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, let me also join the others in congratulating you as the Speaker of the 11th Parliament. Congratulations.

On the subject matter of the Commonwealth Games 2022, Madam Speaker, the games are slated for 27th July to 8th August 2022 in Birmingham in England. The Honourable Shadow Minister indicated that the minister has failed. I want to state on record that funding to the sport subsector of the Republic of Uganda relies entirely on funding from the Government. 

Madam Speaker, the country is organising to participate. There exists a local organising committee, chaired by the Minister of state for sports on behalf of the Minister of Education and Sports, who doubles as the First Lady of the Republic of Uganda. We have been holding meetings and Uganda is set to qualify athletes in 13 sporting disciplines. 

As I speak now, Madam Speaker, we have already qualified athletes in the following sports disciplines; athletics, netball, rugby, table tennis and badminton, to mention, but a few. The pending qualifications are in weightlifting and 3x3 basketball, to mention, but a few.

On the specific subject matter of funding, the funding for the Commonwealth Games is Shs 7.1 billion, which is meant to handle three phases in the qualification process.
 
Phase one is that teams from the 13 disciplines must move to the respective venues of qualification and compete and qualify. Phase two, Madam Speaker, is that, after Team Uganda qualifying, the country must embark on the road for preparing the team for the actual participation and competition.

The final phase is the presentation of Team Uganda for the games in the city of Birmingham.

As I speak now, Madam Speaker, we have held quite a number of meetings. We have written – I think the last letter is dated 25 April 2022. As I was preparing to come to Parliament, I was informed that another meeting has been called for tomorrow – which will be chaired by the First Lady and Minister of Education and Sports – involving the Minister of Education and Sports and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to find a solution of getting the required funding for Team Uganda to participate. 

Madam Speaker, that is the state of affairs.
 
The teams that have qualified are training under the circumstances. We are optimistic that so far, from the teams that have qualified, Uganda, just like in the Olympics, will present the highest number of athletes. As you can see, all these areas are team sports; netball is a team sport, rugby is a team sport, badminton is a team sport, athletics is both team and individual sport. Therefore, we shall end up with the highest number of athletes.

We hope and pray that within the remaining time, Government will be able to find money – not Hamson Obua, the fisherman from Ajuri. If I had the resources, I would have pulled it out a long time ago. This is an activity fully funded by the Government of the Republic of Uganda. We hope we will get the required funding. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, fisherman from Ajuri. Can you report back to the House on what you will have resolved in tomorrow’s meeting in regard to the funding for the team that is supposed to go? The good thing is that the finance minister is here and you will have a meeting with them.

MR MWIJUKYE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Over the weekend, I went to my constituency of Buhweju. I also visited other constituencies of my colleagues – I was in Nyabushozi and Rwampara and I went through Mbarara.

Wherever I went, I was bombarded with questions to do with coffee – Where are you taking our coffee? Why did you allow that agreement? –

THE SPEAKER: Which coffee?

MR MWIJUKYE: This, I construed to be coming out of the coffee agreement we have had in the recent past. The voters think that we, Members of Parliament, are keeping quiet while their coffee is taken away through an agreement they do not understand.

When I went back home, Madam Speaker, I got more than 500 people who had come to my home. It is the same question they were asking: what are you doing as Members of Parliament? Some were even threatening to cut the coffee trees. It is becoming risky for me to go back. (Laughter)

Therefore, the procedural guidance I am seeking, Madam Speaker, is on how we who come from coffee-growing areas will be going home under these threats and what we can do, as Parliament, to save some of us who come from the coffee-growing areas. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. When you said they were asking where you had taken the coffee, I thought you had picked some coffee from the farmers. That is why I was asking, “Which coffee?” (Laughter) 

Honourable members, this matter came up in the last two weeks and we referred it to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. What has happened to the report?

2.34
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Mwine Mpaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to, first, thank the Parliament of Uganda, through you, for the support we were given throughout the investigation.

I would also like to inform the House that the report of the sectoral Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry in regard to the agreement between Vinci and the Government of Uganda is ready – fully signed – and only waiting to be allocated time on the Order Paper. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We will give you time to –

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I thought the committee chairperson was going to put a request that since you have powers to amend the Order Paper, the Order Paper be amended and we have this report.

THE SPEAKER: The fact that he has not prayed for amendment, we cannot amend. (Laughter) Therefore, we will have it on the Order Paper at the appropriate time.

2.35
Mr GEOFFREY LUTAAYA (NUP, Kakuuto County, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise on a matter of national concern about the compensation of our residents living along Masaka–Mutukula Road.
 
On 21 April 2022, the Prime Minister visited my constituency. While addressing the populace, she talked about the compensation of our residents and told us that only those people living along climbing lanes were going to be compensated. She also mentioned that Uganda National Road Authority (UNRA) was no longer interested in the rest of the land that was demarcated before. 

Remember that those people lost interest in their land after waiting for compensation from UNRA. At that time, a bag of cement was Shs 29,000, but it is now at Shs 40,000. Remember that whenever UNRA takes interest in your property and demarcates it, automatically, whatever programme you have on the property must be put on cessation.

The likes of Moses Kagwisage of Mitwebiri, Kusein Lubega of Kasasa and Matia Kamunye of Kakuuto also had to pause their businesses, waiting for the response from UNRA.

Madam Speaker, I request UNRA to consider those individuals for some compensation for them to be able to rejuvenate their businesses. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Government, you can give us a response to that and to Iganga.

2:37
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, maybe, I can start with the Iganga issue. I have talked to the district police commander (DPC) and the Resident District Commissioner (RDC). These people are not in the same office, but all gave me the same answer.

The DPC said that the construction stopped on Saturday. The RDC also said the construction stopped on Saturday. The DPC went ahead and reached the venue and got pictures, which he has sent to my WhatsApp to show that there is no construction going on; right now, he has just sent them on my phone, there is no construction going on in Iganga. 

Therefore, I request the hon. Mugema to wait for the report of the committee so that we follow up on what is going on from the report of the committee of Parliament? 

Regarding the issue of honourable - yes, about the compensation- (Interjections)- let me finish,

THE SPEAKER: Let her finish.

MS NAKADAMA: Let me finish and then, I will take up the information. Regarding the compensation of those people, I am going to follow it up and see what has been done and then, I can answer you back and then also inform Parliament. I can tell you what is going on, and then, I can also report to Parliament, what has been done about the composition of those people. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Mugema, I am also going to do my oversight role. And I will go there myself. (Applause) 

2.39
MR LUTTAMAGUZI SSEMAKULA (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the matter of national importance regarding the heavy hailstorm and very heavy winds that destroyed the two subcounties of Semuto and Kapeeka in Nakaseke District. 

As I speak, very many people from Kapeeka and Semuto were left homeless and their food crops were destroyed. Yet, there has not been a quick response from the Government. And, even some roads have been cut off, especially those, which are linking Semuto to Wakiso District.

Therefore, my prayer is that the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness should rescue these people of Semuto and Kapeeka because they do not have food to eat and their shelters were destroyed. So, they should come to these people's rescue. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Government.

MS NAKADAMA:  Sorry for the people in Kapeeka -

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: In Kapeeka and Semuto subcounties in Nakaseke District -

MS NAKADAMA: Sorry for that problem. However, I request that we get the report of the District Disaster Committee and then, we can follow up. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemakula, can we have a report from the District Disaster Committee on what is happening, the level of the damage and then, all will act on that? And Prime Minister, this is where we have always said that we need a disaster commission that will be able to plan for this. And it is a constitutional requirement. I do not know why we are not following the Constitution. 

2.42
MS ETHEL NALUYIMA (NUP, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. For example, Wakiso was able to submit a disaster report in November. I keep inquiring from the ministry, but up to this day, it is not yet handled. Therefore, are we proceeding well when we were requested to ensure that we contact the Prime Minister's Office and our districts should be able to submit disaster reports, yet up to this day, some of these reports are not handled? 

THE SPEAKER: You submit the report and give my office a copy and I will make a follow-up.

MS NALUYIMA: Much obliged.

2.42
MR RICHARD SEBAMALA (DP, Bukoto County Central, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to congratulate you upon attaining that position. On Thursday, 28 April 2022, the Infrastructure Committee left Parliament at 8 am and went for a field visit to Mbarara youth meat projects. It also continued to the constituencies of hon. Kangwagye and hon. Nathan Byanyima in Isingiro District. We later traversed the Isingiro-Rakai Road that is up for pre-financing and later, continued to Bukoto Central in Masaka District, which is in Kyanamukaka along Bukunda-Buyaga Road. 

Madam Speaker, as we arrived in Kyanamukaka, shortly after passing the subcounty, the police stopped us; the policemen took their positions and demanded that we get out of the constituency. The two buses of Parliament with their Parliament number plates “UH” were along with the convoy and the vehicles for UNRA that were also with us and also two private vehicles, mine and one of the chairmen, hon. David Karubanga.

We tried to talk to them and then, to the OC, but he said he had orders from the DPC that the RDC had ordered that they stop us from traversing that route from Bukunda to Buyaga as the Infrastructure Committee. I understand they had - I do not know what intelligence they had in any way.

Madam Speaker, my prayers are;

    1. Can the Government provide training for the new RDCs to know where they are supposed to stop? Because as far as I am concerned, this is not the first -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, do you want to tell me that the Committee of Parliament was stopped from doing oversight? 

MR SEBAMALA: Yes. 

THE SPEAKER: By who?

MR SEBAMALA: By the OC police who got orders from the DPC that the RDC had told us to leave the constituency. Therefore, it was the RDC of Masaka District.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister, can we have the RDC, DPC and OC of police, whoever -(Applause) One of our roles as Members of Parliament is to do oversight. And if my Members go out to do oversight, they have no power to stop them from doing whatever they are doing. 

How can that happen? We need a report in this House by Thursday on why that happened.

MR SEBAMALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: No, I do not need the information. What I want is an action taken on those people. (Interjections) I want action on those people. If they cannot be able to handle Members of Parliament, then they should leave those areas. 

(Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose.) I thought I had ruled on that matter. Nathan, can you resume your seat? It seems you are the leader of the RDCs. (Laughter)

2.47
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, nobody is allowed to interfere with parliamentary work. Nobody in this country is allowed to do that. I am going to investigate and we will bring a report about what happened to the Members of Parliament and why the RDC had to do that. 

THE SPEAKER: We want to hear the action you have taken as the Government on those people.

MS NAKADAMA: And action will be taken. Thank you. 

2.47
MR POLYCARP OGWARI (Independent, Agule County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. About seven years ago, Pallisa District in Agule County, danced to the tune of happiness to receive electricity in the villages. In 2015, the installation of electricity in some villages was completed. In 2017, two transformers blew off from the places called Omuroka and Nyakoi in Agule County. In 2019, another transformer blew off from the same village in Agule County and another in February 2022. 

Having worked hard as people of Agule and Pallisa in general, they only managed to replace one transformer in a trading centre called Kameke. I have written this to the Ministry of Energy as well. Today, I delivered a copy to you in your office. 

Madam Speaker, we are fighting poverty. In 2017 - this is 2022, about five years –

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers?

MR OGWARI: The poles are standing without any electricity. Our prayers as Agule and Pallisa District are:

    1. Let the Minister of Energy help us and make sure they put back the transformer that blew off.

    2. The poles that have fallen down - they are over 10 – should also be erected and the power put back. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, it is not about helping. It is their right to have electricity. 

2.50
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, I want to sympathise with my colleague for the delay by the Minister of Energy to replace the transformer so that our people can have power back. However, I am going to follow up with the Ministry of Energy and ensure that action is taken. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We need feedback in a week's time on the action taken. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE NATIONAL LOCAL CONTENT BILL, 2022

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, pursuant to Article 94(4)(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Rule 121(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, this House granted leave to Hon. Nsamba Oshabe, MP Kassanda North, on 03 November 2021 to introduce a Private Member's Bill entitled, “The National Local Content Bill.”

In line with Rule 122, the Member was accorded assistance by the Clerk to Parliament in seeking a Certificate of Financial Implications in fulfilment of section 76 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. 

However, at the expiry of 60 days of the request, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not issued a Certificate of Financial Implications on that Bill. This House has severally guided that the Minister of Finance has no authority to deny a Certificate of Financial Implications. 

I, therefore, invoke the statutory authority comprised in Section 76(4) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, which in the circumstance, provides that - and I am reading verbatim:

“Notwithstanding subsection (1), (2) and (3), a Certificate of Financial Implications shall be deemed to have been issued after 60 days from the day the request has been issued for that certificate.” 

I, therefore, invite the Member to table his Bill since there was no response from the Ministry of Finance. (Applause)  The presumption is that they have given it. We are acting under the law - What is it? 

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, you have in your ruling indicted the Ministry of Finance and they are present. Hon. Musasizi was with us here - a very good MP. I do not know if he has also now learnt the bad manners of the Ministry of Finance. 

Most importantly, I remember during the removal of the age limit, Hon. Magyezi presented a request at lunch time and in three hours they had issued the Certificate of Financial Implications. Maybe, Madam Speaker, we may benefit because the people you are talking about are here. Hon. Bahati may tell us why they do not want to give us certificates of financial implications.

2.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: By the way, for the new Members – just for information - he used to be one of the best chairpersons of a committee. He was the chairperson of finance committee and so, he knows these things very well. He is the one who brought the amendments in the Public Finance Management Act. Chair, please. (Laughter)

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, most importantly for recognising my contribution in the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which I chaired for five years. It is true we received the request from Hon. Nsamba –

THE SPEAKER: It is actually from the Clerk to Parliament, but not Hon. Nsamba. The rules provide that it is the Clerk who writes, not a Member.

MR MUSASIZI: As a ministry, we are still looking into it –(Laughter)- But Madam Speaker, as you have clearly stated, the law is very explicit. Where we have not – (Interruption)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Procedure, Madam Speaker. The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda guarantees the right of a Member to move a Private Member's Bill. Our Rules of Procedure entrench that provision of the Constitution. 

You have already ruled that the Minister of Finance has “sat” on the application for a Certificate of Financial Implications for the 60 days allowed by law and granted the Member leave to read the Bill for the first time. 

Is the honourable minister procedurally in order to continue studying a matter that they should have dealt with within 60 days?

THE SPEAKER: I think the minister was just making a clarification. He had reached somewhere. Can you complete your sentence?

MR MUSASIZI: What I am saying is that in the circumstances that we are still studying the implications, the law applicable can apply. 

2.57
MR PATRICK OSHABE (NUP, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I have not had the chance to get a microphone since you were elected to that position and so, I would like to congratulate you. I wish you the best. 

We are talking about the National Local Content Bill, which was processed in the 10th Parliament and passed. The President just returned it over a few issues. The honourable minister, my good friend, Hon. Musasizi, was then the Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and he processed it. He only missed an opportunity to present it in the 10th Parliament. 

When he became a minister and we were seeking a certificate of financial implication, we were sure that the man who processed the Bill would grant the certificate. Unfortunately, when it reached there, he is still studying it. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Local Content Bill, 2022” be read the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Patrick Oshabe. The Bill is referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The 45 days prescribed in rule 129 (2) applies. Please, lay the Bill.

MR OSHABE: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I beg to lay on the Table the Bill entitled, “The National Local Content Bill, 2022”.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Committee, take up the Bill and since it was already processed, the 45 days may be too many. Let us go to the next item.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023

THE SPEAKER: Committee on Education and Sports, can you come and lay your statement? Hon. Kajwengye, please, come back. Do not raise your issues and go away. Members, we have a very important Bill coming up.

3.00
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr John Twesigye): Madam Speaker, let me also take this opportunity to congratulate you and your deputy upon the election to the position of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of Parliament.

In accordance with rules 31 and 32 of our Rules of Procedure, I beg to lay on the Table, the report of the Sectoral Committee on Education and Sports on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for the Financial Year 2020/2023. I lay it together with the corresponding minutes of the various meetings we had while processing the ministerial policy statement. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson of the Committee on Education and Sports. The report is referred to the Committee on Budget for harmonisation and reconciliation. 

MS KUNIHIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate you and your deputy for reaching that level. May God always guide you. 

Madam Speaker, I thought the chairperson was going to give us a summary of the report. Now that he has not done it, I would like to bring to your attention that a team of science teachers have petitioned Parliament. I would like to inquire from the Chairperson of the Committee on Education and Sports whether the amount of money required to enhance the salary of science teachers is catered for in this ministerial policy statement. 

Madam Speaker, the House should take note that arts teachers are not comfortable with increasing the salary for only science teachers. They would be happy to achieve that first requirement, like the President suggested. Thank you so much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. What you are asking is provided in the report. As a representative of the workers, I implore you to follow up this report with the Committee on Budget and have your people represented effectively. Next.

RESPONSE BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION TO THE DRAFT ANNUAL BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023

THE SPEAKER: The Leader of the Opposition is away for a burial. He has left the Chief Opposition Whip to act on his behalf. 

3.04
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe):  Madam Speaker, under Rule 53 (1) of our Rules of Procedure, the Office of the Leader of the Opposition is mandated to make a response to the draft annual budget estimates of the Financial Year 2022/2023. As usual, it is a written response. In a nutshell, our able line minister of finance is going to take us through. I thank you and usher in the minister to speak.

THE SPEAKER: Shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, can you lay your report on the Table. We will refer that report for harmonisation to the Committee on Budget. 

3.05
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Muwanga Kivumbi):  Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity. I am going to lay it on the Table, but I want to draw the attention of the House to a small - maybe we shall need to amend our Rules of Procedure. 

In the former regime, before we amended to have the budget read on 31st, it used to be presented here in full detail. By virtue of that, the Opposition would come and respond to it, before the debate ensues in the entire Parliament. 

With our new rules, where the budget is first brought here in parts, through ministerial policy statements, before they bring the whole budget proposal, the rules provide that the Leader of the Opposition may respond to a budget proposal among other statements. It is not clear how to house that response. By coming here and making a very elaborate presentation, then having a debate after the budget framework paper - in a way, you pre-empt the debate. We shall have to find a way. 

Madam Speaker, we regard the budget as a cardinal tool for us to be able to respond to Government and put proposals first. Then, the budget report comes here - unless we generate a minority report, there is no other room for us to formally respond to the budget. Otherwise, the Leader of the Opposition cannot have a response to a report of the committee. We shall obey your ruling, Madam Speaker, but note that it leaves a big gap in our ability to provide alternatives to the budget proposal.

THE SPEAKER: I think that needs to be amended because we need to have alternative figures in terms of the budget. That rule needs to be amended by the rules committee. 

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As it is right now, I will play by the rules. I, therefore, beg to lay the Opposition’s response to the annual budget estimates for Financial Year 2022/2023, moved under rule 31 and rule 53(1) of the Rules of Procedure, signed by the Leader of the Opposition, today, 3 May 2022. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, for fulfilling your statutory obligation. I refer that report to the Budget Committee for harmonisation. I also urge you to be in the committee to ensure that issues that have been raised are captured so that we come up with a final report to this House. Thank you. 

The Shadow Attorney-General, you are welcome – and congratulations. I can see all the attorneys-general are here. Can we now go to the next item? I was waiting for the attorneys-general. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE BILL, 2021

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill, 2021 was tabled for first reading on 29 September 2021 and referred to the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. The committee has considered the Bill and the Bill is now due for second reading. Honourable minister - 

3.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Hellen Adoa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill, 2021” be read for the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Hon. Bahati, Hon. Musasizi, Hon. Okaasai, the Attorney-General, Hon. Solomon, Hon. Esther, Hon. Kangwagye, Hon. Isodo, MP for Bbale, – all the fishermen and fisherwomen in the House. (Laughter)

Members, I want to tell you that you need to be here to listen to what is happening to this Bill. This Bill is as important as the mining and minerals Bill. When you go away, there will be a problem. 

I also want to warn you people. You cannot have a Bill and you have over 100 amendments. What happened to the other Act? Next time, we are not going to handle any Bill that has more than 50 per cent of the provisions amended. 

Would you like to speak to your Bill? Just focus on the principles of the Bill. 

MS ADOA: Madam Speaker, the object of the Bill is to consolidate and reform the law relating to the management of fisheries, fisheries products and aquaculture. There are a number of challenges emerging in the fisheries sector – in the regulation and management of fisheries sector – which are not addressed under the current law. There is urgent need to reform the law governing the fisheries sector. 

As you have rightly put it, fisheries is one of the hottest items wherever you go now. In every village, the youth want to do fish farming. The challenges facing fisheries need to be urgently handled. I would like to thank you for giving us this opportunity. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister for fisheries. Can I have the chairperson of the committee on agriculture to present her report? 

3.13
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Grace Okori-Moe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on Table a report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill, 2021. I beg to lay. 

In the same vein, I beg to lay on Table minutes of the meetings of the committee while considering the Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill, 2021. I beg to lay. 

Madam Speaker, rightly, as you put it, the Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill, 2021 was read for the first time on 29 September 2021 and referred to the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. The committee has considered it and now begs to report.

The Fish Act was amended in 2011 through the Fish (Amendment) Act, 2011, to provide for the establishment of the Chief Fisheries Officer for the issuance of licences, permits and other fisheries activities under the Act, for the effective development and management of the fisheries subsector. 

The Fish Act, which has been guiding the sector, is now obsolete and cannot adequately cater for the current realities, including the changes in the fisheries structure, aquaculture development, limiting of overcapacity and ensuring community involvement in enforcement. 

There have also been tremendous changes in technology, some of which require regulations. Therefore, the proposed new law is intended to realign emerging issues and provide regulations necessary for the orderly development of the fisheries subsector as listed under 3.1. 

Madam Speaker, this report has been with colleagues for some days and I believe they have gone through it. So, I will not read it word for word. 

I will move straight to page five. On page five, 4.2 is about the methodology the committee used in processing the Bill. This includes the stakeholders that the committee met physically and interacted with and those who made written submissions to the committee. There were a total of 16 teams of stakeholders that the committee physically met while 11 gave their written submissions. That is captured on page five and page six. 

Madam Speaker, 5.1 and 5.2 on pages six and seven are about the status of fisheries and aquaculture sector in Uganda, giving supportive statistics. Worthy to note is that the European Union remains the leading market for Uganda’s fish. This has been so because Uganda managed to meet the EU quality assurance requirements.

Fish has been identified as one of the 18 priority agricultural commodities to foster sustainable agro-industrialisation agenda in Uganda because of its contribution to National GDP.  An item of priority under the Parish Development Model.

The committee was concerned that despite the enormous potential for fish production, with approximately 44,000 square kilometres; that is 20 per cent of Uganda's total surface area, covered by freshwaters, the fisheries resources are currently under-exploited due to over-reliance on capture fisheries and limited investments in aquaculture. 

The committee observed the need for the promotion of diversified fish production systems and fish products in order to fully realise the benefits of fish.

The Government has set a target of increasing capture fisheries and aquaculture production to 1.7 million tonnes annually by 2030 as a measure of contributing to food security, nutrition and economic growth. 

On page 8; 5.3 is the list of key challenges in the fisheries and aquaculture subsector:

There is underfunding and the obsolete law under which we have been operating that cannot offer guidance as far as fisheries and aquaculture is concerned. 

Number 6.0 is about the Bill's compliance with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs): The Bill is compliant with SDGs 12, 13, 14 and 15 that set targets for responsible consumption, production and combating the effects of climate change, sustainable management of water resources, land, terrestrial ecosystems, forests and the environment. 

Fish production is mostly affected by over-reliance on fisheries with limited investment in aquaculture. This is further compounded by the deteriorating quality of water sources resulting from aquatic pollution coupled with challenges of enforcement of regulations and the resultant decline in fish stocks.

As earlier mentioned, the Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill, 2021, is therefore intended to consolidate and reform the law relating to fisheries products and provide for the conservation and sustainable management of the fisheries sub-sector.

Therefore, the Bill complies with all the targets and recognises sustainable management and protection of marine ecosystems for sustainable development.

The Bill complies with human rights

a) 	Right to a clean and healthy environment; in clause 3, human rights principle of participation; in clauses 2 b, c, d and e 2019. Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the application of the environmental and social impact assessment - in clause 67 of the Bill.

Prohibition of bribery; clause 114 provides for the offence of bribery, which is punishable by payment of a fine or imprisonment. This will help fight against corruption tendencies, which significantly hamper the sustainable enjoyment of human rights and freedoms.  

The Bill is also compliant with the right to access to information; clause 135 of the Bill recognises the need for the right to access of information for all citizens. 

The right to food; Clause 136 of the Bill provides for the formulation of several regulations that will facilitate the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms of all Ugandans.  

I now move to page 12 on the committee observations and recommendations:

Clause 96 of the Bill provides for licensing of the fish maw, processors and exporters. Fish Maw is a by-product of Nile Perch which is said to be very lucrative.

During its interaction with the traders, the committee was informed that the Bill in its current form would create monopoly powers for the individuals already trading, processing and exporting fish maw. 

The committee also learnt that there is no gazetted size of fish maws because it is impractical to determine the size of a body part of fish. 

The committee further learnt that there is an import duty of 6 per cent and export permit of 8 per cent introduced on fish maw business in Uganda. This was causing some investors to shift to Tanzania which shares 5l per cent of Lake Victoria and Kenya 6 per cent of shoreline, thereby affecting export earnings in Uganda with 43 per cent of Lake Victoria.

The committee is concerned that if this is not checked and controlled, the fish maws exports in Uganda will decline. Local industries will close leading to loss of employment and export revenue will decline since most industries were already migrating.

The committee, therefore, recommends that in making the Regulations, the Minister should ensure that there are clear provisions relating to fish maw gutting and gazetted places for purposes of buying and selling of fish.

The regulations should ensure that there are friendly licensing procedures and that local Ugandans with limited capital are able to stay in the fish maw business.

The country should aim at harmonising its tax laws with other East African countries in relation to fish maws in order for it to compete favourably in the fish maw trade.

Incentives like tax holidays and VAT exemptions for importers of fish maw should be given in order to encourage more investment in the fish maw business.

On illegal fishing, unreported fishing and illegal gear: the committee observes and recommends that the Uganda National Bureau of Standards and Uganda Revenue Authority should crack the whip to ensure that no illegal fishing gear is imported into the country. 

There should be a total ban on illegal fishing gear, and those already in the country should be confiscated and destroyed. That the importers and users of illegal fishing gear should be penalised according to the law.

The committee also recommends that Government should increase funding for fisheries and enforcement activities to boost fisheries management. In particular, Government should provide adequate financial support to enable the provision of patrol boats to monitor and control illegal fishing operations. 

It should also install reliable communication systems on existing Government surveillance boats.

Community-based fisheries management committees need to be strengthened to enable effective monitoring of nearshore fishing activities and;

Inspection needs to d be conducted on transit trucks suspected to have contraband goods either in the country or at the point of exit and culprits be punished according to the Law.

Government should come up with a strategy to give technical assistance to fisheries on equipment maintenance, since they seem to be struggling.

Fisheries Management and Governance

Madam Speaker, this is about how the fisheries subsector was managed. The committee observed that before decentralisation, the sector was run on the centralised model, with teams of regional and local officers policing the use of fisheries resources while the centre decided policy and drafted laws to fishing communities. But the enforcement of the decentralisation policy later weakened the fisheries governance and it has, since then, undergone changes in management and control, whereby in 2004, the Beach Management Units (BMUs) were established to co-manage the fisheries resources. 

Later on, parallel fisheries enforcement agencies came into place, which led to the breakdown in law and order in the sector. In addition, implementation of national laws became subservient to local interests in the absence of clear roles and mandates. 

During this time, the Association of Fishers and Lake Users of Uganda, commonly known as AFALU, was also formed. It was purposely established to create an awareness platform, but later, turned into an enforcement agent.

Madam Speaker, in 2015, following a presidential directive, most of these management units were abolished and suspended and an interim measure, the Fish Landing Site Committees, was put in place. Government later put in place the Fisheries Protection Unit, consisting of Uganda People’s Defence Forces officers, who have been carrying out the enforcement work. Since then, a number of fish industries that had closed have since reopened, but reports of torture and gross human rights abuses continue to be received.

Madam Speaker, when the committee interacted with the Ministry of Defence over this bill, this allegation of torture by the FPU was denied, but the fact that the FPU officers are too few and poorly facilitated came out strong in the interaction with the Ministry of Defence.

The committee notes that after the presidential directive, no efforts were made to legalise the FPU. Its establishment is not supported by any law.  

The committee recommends as follows:

    i) The personnel who will be charged with enforcement of the law under the Fisheries Sector be equipped with requisite knowledge in fisheries and aquaculture and their training be done by the Uganda Police Force, since the police is charged with preservation of law and order and to detect crime. 

    ii) The offences under the law should be strictly tried within their respective magisterial jurisdiction. 

Fish Licences and Levies

The committee notes that the Bill focused on centralising all licences, making accessibility to the services very inconveniencing and extremely expensive. 

It, therefore, recommends that some fishing licences like movement permits, bicycle permits and motorcycle permits, among others, should be decentralised to local governments to ease accessibility. This will be cost-effective because districts or local governments are near the communities. 

Aquaculture 

The committee notes that Uganda has a gradually expanding aquaculture subsector. Aquaculture has continued to grow at an estimated rate of six per cent, with an estimated total production of 110,000 metric tonnes from 3,000 cages and 20,000 from an estimated 13,000 fish farmers. The source of information is indicated there.  

Madam Speaker, the recommendation by the committee is that Government puts in place investment incentives and ensure that there is a conducive environment to strengthen commercial aquaculture. 

The committee also recommends that extension services be expanded to help in capacity development because aquaculture demands knowledge, technology and a lot of skill. 

Government should ensure availability of quality inputs like feeds and fingerlings that will help to improve the quality and quantity of feeds available to the fish farmers. 

Support to the Fisheries Research Institutions 

The committee observed that in order to support research and innovation in all aspects of fisheries and aquaculture, there is need to support research in fisheries. The committee notes that research is critical in achieving increased and sustainable fish production, especially under the changing fisheries environment.

The committee noted that currently, the National Fisheries Resources Research Institute (NaFIRRI) is the only institute mandated to generate and disseminate appropriate technologies, knowledge and information through conducting fisheries research yet it is not adequately funded. 

The committee recommends that Government should support promotion of research and innovation in all aspects of fisheries and aquaculture. Researchers need to be supported to research on several fisheries activities that include fish breeding, fish feed formulation, nutrition, disease management, improved fish processing technologies such as the solar tent dryers and high tech specialised equipment, use of ICT for data collection, marketing, monitoring and surveillance. 

Types of Fish and Net Sizes for Capture Fisheries

Clause 109 of the Bill provides for undersize fish. However, the committee observed that there are different capture fisheries in the different waters in the country. The types are Tilapia (Ngege), Nile Perch, Bagrus Docmark – that one –(Laughter)- Semutundu, Clarias Gariepinus (Emale), Proptopterus Aethiopicus (Emamba) and Nkolongo. 

The committee notes that the ministry considers only two types of fish - Nile Perch and Tilapia - leaving these other species mentioned above. The Bill, therefore, seeks to regulate these concerns. 

The committee recommends that in coming up with regulations, the minister should ensure that all fish species are regulated.

Funding of the Fisheries Sector 

The committee noted, with concern, that the agricultural sector has a lot of challenges of underfunding, with fisheries being the most affected - with the lowest portion of the sector budget.

The committee notes that at the 5th Special Session of Lake Victoria Fisheries Organisation Council of Ministers, held on 28 May 2010, where Uganda participated and approved establishment and operationalisation of a Fish Levy Trust Fund by March 2011. The meeting urged Partner States to put in place legislations and guidelines for establishment and operationalisation of the Fish Levy Trust Fund. 

Subsequently, the other Partner States, with whom Uganda shares Lake Victoria, have come up with legislations to support sustainable financing mechanisms. Uganda is yet to take steps.

Madam Speaker, the committee was concerned that the Fish (Amendment) Act 2011, introduced the fish fund, which the Bill is repealing without providing an alternative.

The committee recommends that the Government should ensure adequate allocation of resources to support all activities of all the fisheries value chain.

Inadequate knowledge on the status of fish stocks in the water bodies

The committee noted that although Uganda has an array of water bodies which contribute to the national fisheries sector, fish stocks data from most of these water bodies and swamps is largely unavailable.

The committee recommends that funding be provided to facilitate collection of statistics of fish stocks in all water bodies. The necessary deep water research equipment be provided to enable proper survey and procured.

The committee also recommends that public education and community management programmes on fisheries resource management and utilisation be established. 

The committee further recommends that there should be a routine carrying out of fish stock surveys for all species of fish on all water bodies be done.

Wetlands/fishing breeding areas

The committee noted that wetlands play crucial roles in water purification, act as breeding areas for fish and provide refugia; a place of refuge for threatened fish species. However currently, wetlands are facing serious encroachment and degradation thus affecting aquatic lives. 

The committee recommends that specific breeding areas be identified and gazetted so that access to them is restricted. 

The committee also recommends that the use of marine protected areas in an efficient and effective way of achieving various fisheries and biodiversity conservation objectives in most aquatic eco-systems.

The committee further recommends that the Government should protect the water catchment areas and water quality in general that are endangered by activities such as agriculture, urbanisation and industrialisation that pollute the rivers, lakes and wetlands.
 
Disease outbreaks in fisheries

The committee observed that clause 75 provides notice of diseases. The committee also noted that currently there are cases of disease outbreaks in capture fisheries. 

The committee noted that the Bill has only two clauses under Part VI; Regulation of Aquaculture, aimed at management of diseases in aquaculture establishments. It omits management of diseases in capture fisheries, yet wild fish are also vulnerable to introduction of pathogens with very devastating social, economic and political effects. 
 
The committee recommends that the Government, through the Chief Fisheries Officers should constitute a team to undertake the aquatic animal health activities on water bodies. The team will be responsible for developing and regularly updating the national list of aquatic animals disease-causing agents, undertake a regular monitoring and surveillance of the listed disease-causing agents, develop biosecurity and biosafety measures and support stakeholders in the implementation of the measures and monitor compliance including aquaculture establishments and fishing grounds Plan, respond and manage emerging or re-emerging of pathogens in all aquatic systems.

The committee also recommends that measures to control diseases should be all encompassing to include all factors affecting fish, aquatic plants or aquaculture products, given the impact of any disease on the aquatic organisms and ultimately on people. 

Landing site management

The committee observed that clause 37 provides for establishment of landing sites throughout Uganda. The committee was cognisant of the fact that there are very poor sanitary conditions at most landing sites. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Government ensures improvement of hygiene at landing sites by ensuring that there is provision of sanitary facilities. There should be stringent measures and penalties for noncompliance.
 
The committee also recommends that indigenous fishing communities be considered and empowered to contribute to the use and conservation of lakes. Landing sites authorities should be allowed to constitute village committees. This will help to empower communities around the lakes and also ensure sustainable use and management of lakes within their jurisdiction. With such enforcements and regulations in place, issues like dumping and other forms of misuse of lakes will be mitigated.
 
Infrastructure for post-harvest management

The committee observes that Part VII of the Bill provides for post-harvest management (fish safety and quality assurance). The committee was informed that post-harvest losses range between 15 to 20 per cent, mainly due to weather dependence and poor handling technology. The challenge has been the high cost of cooling facilities as well as the price of ice itself. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Government comes up with mechanisms and interventions to support local manufacturers to invest in value addition and fish grade packaging materials to prevent contamination of fish products.
 
The committee also recommends that the Government constructs ice making machines at gazetted landing sites. It should also subsidise on the cost of cooling facilities to enable more private investment in the coolers.
 
The committee further recommends that proper facilities like drying racks, smoking kilns and fish handling slabs be installed at landing sites to address the problem of post-harvest handling which leads to aggravated post-harvest losses.

Fish laboratories

The committee was concerned that currently, there is only one fish laboratory, which is located in Entebbe. The laboratory is used to test microbiology and pollutants to ensure safety and quality of the product to the consumers. The committee wishes to report that when fish is exported and the content of the microbiology and pollutants is above the limit, the product is returned.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Government considers establishing regional laboratories to save fisheries stakeholders from having to travel all the way to Entebbe, whenever they need fish laboratory services. 

The committee also recommends that this laboratory should be used for testing feeds for fish farming, temporary fish storage and fish exhibits in a bid to ensure proper fish safety and quality assurance.
 
Overfishing

The committee observed that there has been overfishing on the water bodies, which has led to decline in fish stocks. Overfishing is partly attributed to increased population pressure combined with rapid commercialisation of the sector.
 
The committee, therefore, recommends that lakes and other water bodies be given a break to allow the fish resources to regenerate to avoid depletion. The committee notes that fish holiday is one of the best practices already implemented by other countries globally. The fishing holiday will give room for aquatic species to multiply and grow steadily without interruption.

The committee also recommends that the Government implements restrictions on fishing in closed areas.
Regarding trans-boundary resources, the committee noted that many of Uganda’s water bodies are shared with neighbouring countries and there is inconsistency in implementation of appropriate fisheries and aquaculture policies, especially across these shared water bodies, both within the country and those shared with other countries. 

The committee recommends that:

    i) In the spirit of Pan-East Africanism, there should be regional cooperative efforts of managing inter-jurisdiction/trans-boundary fisheries through regional fisheries bodies, like the Lake Victoria Fisheries Organisation. 

    ii) The Government should ensure adherence to the law through cooperating with the lake management organisations and fisheries management organisations at regional and national levels as well as local governments and landing site fisheries management committees in the management of trans-boundary resources. 

    iii) The Government should negotiate and implement appropriate instruments between the fish management authorities of concerned countries in the region and their stakeholders. Clause 33 provides for cooperation with lake management organisations, fisheries management organisations and landing site fisheries management committees in the management of trans-boundary resources. \

    iv) Trans-boundary resources are subject to international law. Therefore, the committee should be trained and equipped with the requisite knowledge to ensure that Uganda doesn’t breach its obligations under international law.

    v) There should be a clear definition of common regional principles that guide cooperative fisheries management. The responsible bodies should formulate and distribute the principles. 

On the insecurity on the water bodies, the committee was informed that there is a big threat posed on water bodies by armed groups/gangs from within and outside the country. The committee learned that armed groups of fishers from the DR Congo – a neighbouring country – attacked and killed some officers and some fishers on Lake Edward in 2018. 

The areas most dominated by foreigners include Kiyindi, Katoosi, Kalabi, Buvuma, Kasaali, Lwazi, Bukakata, Dolwe and the rest. The committee was informed that non-Ugandans do not obey the laws in Uganda; they fish during prohibited hours and anytime they feel like fishing. 

    i) The committee recommends that the Government initiates negotiations of enforceable trans-boundary protocols. 

    ii) The committee also recommends that the Government explores anti-corruption measures, including whistleblower arrangements that can be applied at all levels of the fish subsector. 

Abuse and torture of fishing communities

On abuse and torture under fishing communities by the enforcement unit, the committee was informed that communities have continued to experience this. 


    1. The committee recommends that the Fisheries Monitoring, Control and Surveillance Unit should enforce compliance in accordance with the law and any other written law relating to the activities under the Act. 

    2. The committee also recommends that the management of fisheries, fisheries products and aquaculture be in favour of the ordinary citizens. This will contribute to equity, quality and sustainable fishing sector. 

Traditional fishing communities

The committee observed that people who derive their livelihood and existence on water bodies, with no alternative or incentives given, must be considered in order to protect and preserve some cultures of the fishing communities.

The committee recommends as follows: 

    1. Human rights of marginalised people should be respected, as per Article 32 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

    2. The vulnerable groups be included in lake management organisations, which coordinate the planning and management of lakes. 

    3. The fishing communities be encouraged to come up with alternative means of earning a living instead of solely depending on fishing. The alternative source of income will enable the fishers to implement a fish holiday.

Environmental degradation and climate change

Madam Speaker, the committee noted that the Bill provides for the control and regulation of all fisheries and aquaculture production activities and practices in an integrated manner to achieve conservation and sustainable economic, social and environmental benefits for the present and future generations. 

To achieve this, the committee observes that fish breeding and nursery areas should be focused on as critical areas for conservation. Some of the districts affected by degrading and sand mining in the lake are Masaka, Kampala, Wakiso and Buikwe districts. 

The committee is further concerned about the factories, flower gardens along the shores as well as sand mines, which are destroying water bodies and affecting aquatic lives. 

The committee recommends that the Government should ensure that fish breeding and nursery areas be protected by gazetting them. The committee also recommends that the Government ensures that the responsible agencies protect fish habitats by stopping sand mining in the lakes, which has greatly affected aquatic life. 

The committee further recommends that human activities be regulated to prevent destruction of the environment along lake shores, as well as carrying out wetland restoration activities.

Resurgence of water hyacinth and other aquatic weeds

On resurgence of water hyacinth and other aquatic weeds, the committee noted that when the Uganda-Egypt Aquatic Weed Control Project was phased out in 2016, the water hyacinth resurged, covering most of the landing sites on Lake Victoria. There is also a fast-growing Salvinia molesta (Kaliba weed), which forms dense mats that affect the fish and fishermen activities.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries comes up with sustainable financing mechanisms to enable plough back of revenue from fisheries into fisheries and aquaculture management and development. Some of the funds, if raised, could be used to control invasion of water bodies by the weeds.

On illegal settlements on the suds, the committee learned that there are several illegal settlements on the suds and floating vegetation on some water bodies. Such settlements greatly contribute to illegalities and pollution on the lake. 

Furthermore, there is a concern that such settlements harbour criminals with destructive fishing methods and high risks to the lives of the fishing communities. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that such settlements on suds be taken as illegal and criminalised by law.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the fisheries subsector in Uganda is a major source of food, employment and economic benefits. However, aquatic resources, although renewable, are not infinite. Fisheries need proper management if the continued contribution to the nutritional, economic and social wellbeing of Uganda’s growing population is to be sustained.

The Bill, therefore, provided for a harmonised and progressive legal framework to enable the fishers and aquaculture subsector to develop and address persistent emerging issues.


The Bill provides for the conservation, sustainable management, utilisation and development of the fisheries sub-sector as well as conserving the environment. 

Lastly, it is the committee's considered opinion that efforts be put towards the promotion of a diversified fish production system and fish products in order to realise the full potential of the fisheries sub-sector. 

The provisions in the Bill aim at building a sustainable fisheries sub-sector, which will boost the incomes of those engaged in fishing and ensure more foreign currency earnings for the country. 

Madam Speaker, and honourable members, thank you for your attention. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much Hon. Okori-Moe, Chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture. Thank you for the comprehensive report. 

As you have heard from the chairperson that the fishing industry is a source of income, employment and food, it is upon that, that we are bringing in this Bill. 

I am opening a debate under rule 130 sub-rule (3) - a minimum debate on this report. Do not forget that you have the clauses to look at. All of you want to debate the report instead of looking at the clauses, one by one. The Bill is just helping you to understand what it is – a minimum debate of five people.

3.59
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much –

THE SPEAKER: I can see all the fishing people standing.

3.59
MS BETTY NALUYIMA (NUP, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, some of us have issues. We wanted to wait for a clause-by-clause consideration and we also make our comments -

THE SPEAKER: Yes, now you are talking, Hon. Ethel. Now, we are reducing to only three people and we go clause by clause. 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start by applauding the committee for the good report. On the issue of enforcement, whereby the committee is encouraging and urging you URA and Uganda National Bureau of Standards to scale up operations to mitigate the importation of illegal fishing nets or materials; I want to say this is the way to go. Most of our people who do business have lost a lot of money. They get cleared by URA, these nets are imported and allowed in shops, then all of a sudden, traders suffer when their products are being confiscated and being burnt yet they already paid taxes on this.

Therefore, I want to urge and encourage our minister that this is the way to go. Let us do it once and for all. If we are talking of gauge number gundi, let it be that instead of us beating about the bush.

There is also an issue to do with the administration of fisheries. The issue of having committees at different levels, I think it is also going to involve very many implementers - stakeholders or players in the entire process; right from the village, the parish, the subcounty and the district. I think it will put sanity in the management of the entire process or chain. I want to thank you for the opportunity accorded to me. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, did you hear a request from the Member? What is important in this Bill is for us to look at clause by clause. If we are going to waste time debating the report, it is not going to help us, but the clauses. 

Therefore, fishermen and fisherwomen, just wait for the clauses. I can see Hon. Iddi there. Do not worry, you will contribute to the clauses – there is a procedural matter from Mama.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I think following your guidance, it would be advisable for us to go straight to the committee level because the report has been very clear. I have been following. It is in detail. Therefore, all we need is for us - if it is acceptable - to go straight to the Committee stage then we can deal with clause by clause as we are desiring. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal for the good suggestion. I now put a question that the House adopts a report from the Committee of Agriculture. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that the Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE BILL, 2021 

Clause one

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are looking at the clauses starting with clause 1. I kindly request that you listen to the chairperson on the amendments that have been brought on the clauses and the justifications. 

MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  Clause 1 is amended by substituting for paragraph (a), the following:
“To all waters where fish is found or can be farmed within the jurisdiction.”

Justification; it is for clarity. I beg to submit

MS ADOA: It is okay, honourable chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put a question that clause 1 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that clause 2 be amended as follows:

By inserting a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (d) as follows;

“To promote the competitiveness of the fisheries and aquaculture sub-sector and the diversification of fish and fish products.”

In paragraph (f), by substituting for the words, “fishery products,” the words, “fish products” and thereafter wherever the words appear in the Bill. 

The justification is that the insertion of a new paragraph is to enhance productivity and encourage innovation. The substitution of the phrase, “fishery products” with the words, “fish products” is to achieve consistency since the Bill uses the words, “fishery products” and “fish products” interchangeably, yet, the Bill defines the phrase, “fish products”. I beg to move. 

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4

MS OKORI-MOE:  The committee proposes to amend clause 4 -

THE CHAIRPERSON: You can bring clause 4 at the end.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, that was the reason because we have many definitions we are going to bring at the end. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I thought you were going to talk about coffee.  (Laughter)

Clause 5

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 5 stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend clause 6 as follows: 

(a) 	In subclause (1)(a), by inserting the words “in consultation with stakeholders” immediately after the word "subsector"; 

(b) 	In subclause (1)(c), by substituting for the words “the National Fisheries and Aquaculture Policy, 2018”, the words “policies on fisheries and aquaculture”.

The justifications are: 

    1. To require the involvement of stakeholders during the formulation of policy and legislation. 
    2. The amendment under subclause (l)(c) is to avoid being restrictive.

I beg to submit. 

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 6 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend clause 7 - 
    a. By deleting paragraph (b). 

    b. By deleting paragraph (c).

    c. By inserting a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (c) as follows - “Monitor and inspect aquaculture establishments under this Act.” 

    d. in paragraph (d), by substituting for the words, “Uganda fishery waters”, the words “fishing waters”. 

    e. in paragraph (e), by substituting for the words “control” and “public waters”, the words “regulate” and “fishing waters” in accordance with this Act, respectively. 

    f. in paragraph (f), by deleting the words “provide education to”.

    g. that paragraph (d) is deleted.

    h. in paragraph (i), by substituting for the words “and analyse” the words, “analyse and disseminate”.

    i. the committee proposes to delete paragraphs (k), (o) and (p).

    j. in paragraph (t), insert the words “fisheries and” immediately before the word “aquaculture”.

    k. delete paragraph (v).

The justifications are: 

    1. Paragraph (b) is a duplication of the powers of the minister under clause 6(1)(c).

    2. Paragraph (c) is a duplication of paragraph (a).

    3. The insertion of a new paragraph after paragraph (c) is as a result of transferring clause 78 which is a function of the directorate for better chronological flow.

    4. Paragraph (d) substituting the word “Uganda fisheries waters” and the word “fishing waters” is to ensure consistency.

    5. The amendment proposed under paragraph (e) is a consequential amendment arising from transferring some licensing functions to local governments.

    6. The words “provide education to” in paragraph (f) are redundant. The requirement for creation of public awareness is sufficient enough.

    7. On the deletion of paragraph (g), setting goals is an internal administrative strategy that does not require to be legislated upon.

    8. Paragraph (a) is sufficient.

    9. The amendment proposed under paragraph (i) is to require the directorate to disseminate the data collected. 

    10. Paragraph (k) is the repetition of paragraph (w).

    11. The deletion of paragraphs (o) and (p) is to avoid inconsistency with the Ratification of Treaties Act, which vests the ratification of treaties in Cabinet and Parliament. According to the same Act, the instrument of ratification of a treaty is signed, sealed and deposited by the minister responsible for foreign affairs. 

    12. The amendment proposed to paragraph (t) is to make the provision all-inclusive to cater for both fisheries and aquaculture.

    13. The deletion of paragraph (b) is to avoid conflict of interest that may arise as a result of the Directorate of Fisheries Resources engaging in investments within the subsector it regulates. 

I beg to submit, Madam Chairperson.

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson. 

MR NIWAGABA: I have carefully listened and also talked to our colleague who was our representative. The amendments have no fundamental defects.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 7 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend clause 8 – 

    a. by substituting for subclause (1) the following –

“(1) the Director responsible for fisheries resources in the ministry is designated as the Chief Fisheries Officer for purposes of this Act.

    b.  By substituting for subclause (2) the following – 

“(2) The Chief Fisheries Officer shall be a person with qualifications and considerable experience in fisheries sciences.”

    c.  in subclause (3), by deleting the words, “including the issuance of licences, permits and any other authorisations under this Act.” 

The justifications are:

    1. To ensure specificity, since the position of director already exists in the ministry. 

    2. To ensure clarity as regards qualification of the Chief Fisheries Officer. 

    3. The Chief Fisheries Officer is not an advisor to Government, but to the minister on matters relating to development and management of fisheries and aquaculture. 

    4. The words proposed to be deleted under subclause (3) are redundant since the issuance of licenses and permits is part of the mandate of the Directorate under clause 7(e). 

    5. The amendment to subclause (3) is also a consequential amendment arising from transferring some of the licensing mandate from the Chief Fisheries Officer to the District Fisheries Officer.  I beg to submit.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The chair of the committee has stated that there is a directorate and usually, heads of the directorates are called directors. 

Now you are creating somebody to become a Chief Fisheries Officer. If a directorate has a head, it means there are those who report to him. In this case, if the so called chief fisheries officer is going to report to the directorate, then it should run – maybe he should be at the rank of an assistant director or something like that. The moment you create a chief fisheries officer, it will become very dangerous for the institution. Some will walk as the chief and they will not want to report it to institutions. 

Madam Chairperson, if there is no director, let us create a position for a director in charge of fisheries so that the technical persons can work under him/her.

The committee is proposing that there will be officers under, which means you are creating a directorate of fisheries, where we will have officers who report to the chief. Therefore, I want to propose that clause 8 is Director of Fisheries. Under it, there will be other officers who are qualified in the area of fisheries. 

The other point the chairperson of the committee raised under clause 8 (1) is “…shall be designated…” No, public service does not designate. Public service appoints people according to qualification. When a person is being designated to certain institution, they say: “in addition to your work, we have designated you to be taking our minutes”. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, Chair? Does someone want to help the chairperson? Attorney-General?

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, I want to concede on the issue of resignation, on my brother's submission. On the creation of the position of Chief of Fisheries, it is a creation of the Bill and I think it should be carried as such. It does not necessarily have to become a Directorate. This position is created by this Bill, as Chief of Fisheries. It should be carried as such. I beg to submit.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, when you look at the wording in the Bill, it still remains a directorate, save for the nomenclature used in the Bill for this specific officer. Therefore, as far as our side is concerned, honestly, we have no problem with it.

MS ADOA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I concede to the committee’s amendment. 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, I wish to restate that the Bill’s position is creating the position of Chief of Fisheries and with all the justification presented, I would rather we maintain that. I beg to submit. 

NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you are right to talk about fish and coffee. If you look at memorandum three, which is about the remedies proposed to deal with defects, particularly (j) says  “a sustainably financed Directorate for the management of the fisheries subsector - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is (j)? Which clause is that?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, in the principal Act, it is page - the pages are not numbered and it says –
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Chair Bugisu Cooperative Union, we are looking at clauses – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I am looking at the memorandum. There is memorandum one, two and three of the principal Act. Memorandum 3(j) says “a sustainably financed Directorate for the management of the fisheries subsector…” Madam Chairperson, have you seen it? 

If you are talking of the directorate for the management of the fisheries subsector, you are not just talking about a section. Are you, therefore, telling us, that there will be a director of fisheries and then there will be Chief Fisheries Officer?

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is just a title of the directorate.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Exactly, Madam Chairperson. So if it is a title of the directorate – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: …who will be a technical head as per clause 8.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Exactly. The moment you say the technical head, then effectively, he is the head of the directorate.

MR NIWAGABA: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I think it is really a question nomenclature. It is like the technical head of the Ministry of Justice, who is called the Solicitor-General. He remains the director in that ministry. This one is saying it is still a directorate, but the name of that particular head is Chief Fisheries Officer. It really has no harm.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chair Bugisu Cooperative Union, we are talking the same language. I put the question that clause 8 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that clause 9, be amended: 

    a. by substituting for subclause (1) the following: , “(1) there is established a Fisheries and Aquaculture Advisory Committee within the ministry”

    b. In subclause (2) –
    i) paragraph (a), by deleting the words “who shall be the chairperson”.
    ii) paragraph (f), by substituting for the words “National Fisheries Research Institution”, the words “Fisheries Research Institute”.
    iii)  by substituting for paragraph (h) the following –
 	“(h) one representative of fish processors”
    iv) by inserting immediately after paragraph(h), the following new paragraphs:
 
	“one representative of aquaculture subsector;”
	“two representatives of the capture fisheries subsector”;
	“one representative of the ministry responsible for transport”;
	“one representative of the academia with considerable experience in fisheries sciences or aquaculture recipe”

(c) 	by inserting a new subclause immediately after subclause (2) as follows:

 	“the minister shall appoint a chairperson of the committee from amongst members of the committee”. 

(d) 	by substituting for subclause (4) the following:
	 “(4) A member of the committee shall serve for a period of three years and shall be eligible for reappointment for one more term only.”

Justification 

    1. The committee, by its composition and functions, is not a technical committee, but an advisory committee within the ministry. 

    2. The removal of the Chief Fisheries Officer from being the chairperson of the committee is to avoid conflict of interest, given that the Chief Fisheries Officer heads the directorate responsible for overseeing the implementation of the decisions of the committee.

    3. The amendment made to paragraph (f) is to ensure consistent usage of the phrase “Fisheries Research Institute” as defined under the interpretation clause.

    4. The insertion of new representatives on the committee is to enhance the role of the private sector needs in the fisheries and aquaculture subsector, since each fisheries subsector possesses peculiar challenges.

    5. To enhance the role of the private sector needs in fisheries and aquaculture planning and management. 

    6. The inclusion of the representative of the ministry responsible for transport is to ease collaboration in matters relating to fishing vessels or vehicles used for transportation of fish.

    7. The representation of the academia on the fisheries on the aquaculture advisory committee is to facilitate the promotion of capacity building in fisheries and aquaculture research and innovation, which is critical in the conservation and management of the fisheries resources.

    8. The new subclause after subclause (2) is to provide for the appointment of a chairperson, having removed the Chief Fisheries Officer as chairperson of the committee.

    9. The amendment proposed under subclause (4) is for clarity given that the tenure applies to members of the committee and not the committee, and two years is such a short period for the members of the committee to learn and serve effectively. I beg to submit.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have no problem with the amendment, but if you say the Chief Fisheries Officer will be a member, it means that he will be there as long as he is appointed the Chief Fisheries Officer.

The limitation will be on others except for the Chief Fisheries Officer. So, the amendment I would like to raise is that the committee should add “with the exception of the Chief Fisheries Officer”.

MS PACUTO: Thank you. I, too, do not have a problem with the amendment. However, for continuity of business in this committee, we could include the position of vice-chairperson to allow business to run in the absence of the chairperson.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, I am agreeable to the proposal of my senior colleague because the Bill creates the position of the Chief Fisheries Officer. If he is a member of this committee – he is a permanent member of the ministry. The others will serve for three years, but he remains a member. So, we need to create that exception, as he said.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, put the amendment as it is.

MR KAFUUZI: I suggest that we say, “… except the Chief Fisheries Officer”. The others will serve for three years. 

On the submission of Hon. Jane Pacuto on the minister appointing the chairperson, it is also proper for the same minister to appoint the vice-chairperson or for the committee to be allowed to appoint the vice-chairperson in the absence of the chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, is that okay?

MS ADOA: That is okay, Madam Chairperson.

DR BATUWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The proposed committee is not gender sensitive. I do not know whether women -

THE CHAIRPERSON: How sure are you that the fisheries officer will not be a woman? 

DR BATUWA: There is no statement dictating to -

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is there in subclause (3).

DR BATUWA: Much obliged, Madam Chairperson. 

MR TWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Under subclause (2), I propose that we add one representative of district fisheries officers. The reason I am saying this is that when you look at the composition of this committee – and given the current circumstances – there is a coordination gap between the directorate of fisheries resources and the district local governments.

MR NIWAGABA: Subclause (2)(d) has a representative from the ministry responsible for local governments and I believe that suffices. 

MR TWESIGYE: I concede.

MR OSHABE: Madam Chairperson, I have an issue with the Chief Fisheries Officer being the chairperson. In most of the -

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, they said that the minister will appoint. He will not be the chairman.  

MR OSHABE: Madam Chairperson, in other advisory committees of this nature, technical officers are the secretaries.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Who is a technical person there? It is the fisheries officer and it is provided for.

MR OSHABE: My proposal is that whoever is a technical person will be the secretary. The committee can appoint a chairperson and this technical person remains there to take and track the record, like it is in other agencies.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, the Chief Fisheries Officer, being a permanent member of this committee and a technical person, can be the secretary, but the minister should retain the power to appoint the chairperson. That means, automatically, that the Chief Fisheries Officer will not be a chairperson at any given time.

MR OSHABE: I have a problem; that we are giving a lot of power to the minister.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where did you want the power to go? In the Mines and Minerals Bill, we gave powers to the minister and it is the same in all the Bills. It is for consistency. Where do we take those powers? Are we the ones to appoint the chairperson? That will be too much for us as a House.

MR OSHABE: This being an advisory committee, they can find a chairperson from among themselves.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. Imat?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, clause 9(2)(a) specifically says, “(a) The Chief Fisheries Officer, who shall be the chairperson.” Does that mean the minister can appoint a person other than -

THE CHAIRPERSON: That has already been amended. You have just come in. (Laughter)

I put the question that clause 9 be amended as proposed by the committee, Hon. Mafabi and Hon. Pacuto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clause 11 - You see now, a person from Minakulu; she does not have any lake near her. (Laughter) She is a cassava grower. (Laughter) Honourable chairperson?

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that clause 11 be amended as follows:

a. 	In subclause (1), by inserting the words, “developed and” immediately before the word “managed”; and
b. 	In subclause (2), by deleting the words “through the Chief Fisheries Officer”.

The justification is to ensure sustainable exploitation of fisheries resources and to allow the committee to report to the minister directly, since, according to clause 9(5), the committee operates under the guidance of the minister.

I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister?

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 11 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the minister is appointing his committee and therefore, the minister must also regulate the committee in meetings. In all the laws we make, the minister makes a regulation - a schedule on how meetings are conducted. In this case, if you allow the committee to be like this - and mark you, you have made the Chief Fisheries Officer more or less the secretary; he even calls meetings. He might refuse to call meetings.

So, Madam Chairperson, we are saying the minister, by regulation, shall put in place how meetings are held, called and conducted. It can be a schedule. In URA, it is a schedule. In NEMA, it is a schedule. Maybe, you can create schedule 2 on how meetings are held.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I agree with the amendment because there will be abuse if you do not put some controls. They cannot regulate themselves. 

MR NIWAGABA: Actually, Madam Chairperson, we shall, at the end of this, apply to recommit clause 10 because we have passed it in error. It should have been deleted as a consequential amendment because we had already created the secretary to the committee, being the Chief Finance Officer. We shall do that at the end, at recommittal.

I also support what Hon. Nandala-Mafabi said; if we allow the committee to regulate its own procedure, if the secretary is a stubborn one and has issues with the chairperson, there will be no meetings. However, if the minister directs, he or she may prescribe the number of times this committee may meet, the remuneration and the like. So, let it be the responsibility of the minister to prescribe, in regulations or the rules of procedure for this committee. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Counsel, a secretary does not need to be a member of the committee because you can have a scenario where the technical person is not there and the minister will choose a person to take minutes.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, this particular section 11 comes immediately after section 9 - this particular committee we have created - and we have already prescribed and provided that the Chief Fisheries Officer will be the secretary. So, it is the secretary referred to in this particular section 11.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, I agree.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, you have also brought a different scenario, which I want us to consider; that in the event of the absence of the secretary, maybe we should also empower the minister to appoint, from amongst the committee members, a sitting secretary for that meeting, in the event of the absence of the Chief Fisheries Officer.

MR NIWAGABA: That does not need to be in the Act; it can be in the regulations.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We shall recommit that. 

MS ADOA: I concede to the amendments, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, Hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

MS ADOA: I concede to the proposal of Hon. Nandala-Mafabi. 

MR BAHATI: Honourable minister, according to Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, he is making an amendment to clause 12; that the minister should make regulations for the committee. However, Hon. Niwagaba came in with -

THE CHAIRPERSON: On recommittal of clause 10.

MR BAHATI: Okay, that is okay. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, can you repeat? We are recommitting clause 10 la ter. Have you seen clause 10, where they say the minister shall designate the secretary? Remember, we had already said that the secretary shall be the Chief Fisheries Officer. So, we are making a recommittal on that to delete clause 10.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Attorney-General, my young brother, we shall do that one at the end. On this one here, we are saying that the minister shall put a regulation on how meetings - because this is meetings - of the committee are to be held. This will describe – 

The justification is to determine the number of meetings per year, to determine the quorum, and to determine the remuneration, among others, as per the laws.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I wanted to seek the wisdom of the Attorney-General and the shadow Attorney-General. Given that this Bill will have regulations by the minister, do we need to emphasise the regulations of the committee or the minister can actually, as he draws up the regulations of the Bill, include the regulations of the meetings, so that we do not have to be repetitive?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, what we wanted – I will just maybe give you an example. Under Schedule 2 of the URA Act, it is about meetings – it is Schedule 2. Under NEMA Schedule 3, it is about meetings. So, what we could say here is that maybe if you do not want it to be a regulation, it shall be a schedule of how meetings are to be held.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, my understanding is that we have empowered the minister to make regulations pertaining to the sitting of the business of the committee will be part of the regulations that the minister will make. I beg to submit.

MR NIWAGABA: Maybe just to add, for the benefit of my younger brother from Ndorwa West, clause 12 is specifically about meetings of the committee. The proposal by Hon. Nandala-Mafabi is that instead of allowing it as is, we amend it to reflect that the procedure for meetings and whatever happens will be prescribed in the regulations so that meetings become statutory. But how they will be conducted is through the regulations.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, will it be possible for the Attorney-General to formulate the amendments so that – because I can see Hon. Nandala-Mafabi having difficulties. You can give –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi has done it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, that younger brother of mine, Hon. David Bahati – the only exception is that you are a minister - but I would like to quote here, under schedule 2 of the URA: meetings of the board, which is now a committee; 

    1. Meetings of the committee. That's number one. 

    2. It says - now, which we would like to procure - “the committee shall meet at least once quarterly –”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chairman of BCU, give us an amendment.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay. Madam Chairperson, what I would like to put across is that it will be a schedule, let us say, schedule 2 which will be meetings of the committee, which will consist of one meeting of the committee – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Give me an amendment on clause 12.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So Madam Chairperson, I have brought an amendment that meetings of the committee shall be by regulation by the minister in charge of fisheries.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, shadow minister?

MR TEBANDEKE: I propose we go by this amendment; the minister, by regulation, shall have to schedule for committee meetings. And it ends there because at the moment – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: A schedule is just a timetable for the meetings. Can I have a better amendment? 

MR TEBANDEKE: But madam Chairperson, that is the only need because in other regulations, we have already empowered the minister.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, the principle is that we have agreed to the amendment. Ideally, we should leave it to the drafts-people to formulate the language. I resubmit

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. That is clause 12. I put the question that clause 12 be amended as proposed by Hon. Nathan Nandala?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, we have a new clause.

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, there is a proposal by the committee to insert a new clause immediately after clause 12 as follows: “Removal of a member of the committee. A member of the committee may be removed from office on the following grounds: 

    A. Misconduct or misbehaviour. 
    B. Dishonesty. 
    C. If the member is declared bankrupt. 
    D. If the member is withdrawn by the organisation or institution that he or she represents on the committee, or 
    E. If he or she is convicted of an offense under this Act. 

The justification is to make provision for the removal of a member of the committee. I beg to submit.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we must make the offense criminal. A traffic offense has never been criminal. If you cannot say any offense, just say “if a member is convicted of a criminal offense”.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, I will be okay with this new clause except for the first two, (A) and (B). Misconduct, misbehaviour and dishonesty, one; by virtue of this clause, who removes this member? Two, who determines misconduct, misbehaviour or dishonesty? If we leave it to the minister, and we do this in it can also be grounds for victimization. The day I am tired of you, I declare you dishonest. So, I will go with the C, D and E and remove A and B, I did submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you are suggesting that we should have a tribunal for this case? What is your suggestion?

MR KAFUUZI: My suggestion is that the grounds of misconduct, misbehavior or dishonesty should be removed because they cannot be determined unless that person is tried in a competent court, and charged and convicted of an offense, if it exists that that person is dishonest, misbehaved or there was misconduct. Other than that, these two would be vague and would lead to abuse.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, I totally agree with my senior colleague that we do away with grounds of misconduct and dishonesty because they are so subjective; that to determine whether the person has misconducted himself or whatever would require a tribunal, and that would be taking the principles of this particular Bill too far. 

However, the other ground is, for example, if you have been convicted of an offense under this Act, that offense could include ingredients of misconduct, ingredients of misbehaviour and the like. So, I support the position of the learned Attorney-General that we delete those and retain them in the three.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What about the issue of the criminal act? 

MR NIWAGABA: The criminal act is in respect of this particular Act because the particular amendment -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi was amending.

MR NIWAGABA: If convicted of an offense under this Act, definitely every offense is criminal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, can you rephrase?

MR NIWAGABA: We go by the amendment of the committee save for A and B, but the rest, A member of the committee may be removed from office on the following grounds - we begin with if the member is declared bankrupt, (B) is withdrawn by the organisation or institution that he or she represents in the committee, (C) if he or she is convicted of an offense under this Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a new clause be inserted immediately after clause 12 as proposed by the committee and amended by Hon. Niwagaba.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, inserted.

Clause 13

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that clause 13 be amended in subclause (1) by deleting the words “to protect fish and their environment, fish products and aquatic flora and fauna, against fisheries malpractices and generally to enforce the provisions of this Act and any other applicable law.”

(b) 	by substituting for subclause (2) the following, “The surveillance unit shall comprise persons with the qualifications in fisheries sciences, appointed by the Public Service Commission and trained by the Uganda Police Force.” 

(c)	In subclause (3), by substituting the word “defence” with the words “internal affairs”. Then 

(d) 	by inserting a new subclause immediately after subclause (3) as follows:

“Where the terms and conditions of service of an officer of the surveillance unit authorise him or her to possess firearms in the course of his or her duties, the officer shall, in addition to any other terms and conditions that may be imposed under this section, wear a uniform and be governed by regulations made under this section regarding –

    (a) powers of such an arrest;
    (b) training;
    (c) discipline; and
    (d) use of firearms.”

Justification

    1. The words proposed to be deleted under subclause (1) are a duplication of the functions of the surveillance unit under clause 14. 

    2. The Uganda Police is best placed to conduct the training of the surveillance unit since it is responsible for preserving law and order and the protection of life and property.

    3. The replacement of the Minister for Defence with the Minister for Internal Affairs is a consequential amendment since the Uganda Police Force is under the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

    4. The new subclause inserted after subclause (3) has been carried from clause 103 to ensure better chronological flow. I beg to submit.

Ms adoa: Madam Chairperson, with due respect to the committee, this is the part on which I disagreed with them the day we had the retreat. We need a lot of discussions on this.

Madam Chairperson, I do not know if you can give me a minute or two to add why. As the current minister in charge of fisheries, I have had a lot of hard time on the issues of enforcement on the lake. 

As much as we have issues with the soldiers on the lake, if we compare with the marine police - in most cases, I have had challenges in different districts, where soldiers arrest defaulters on the lake, but when they take them to the police - I have personally witnessed and handled an issue, where the police gets money from the victims and the next morning, they are back on the lake. They give information before – (Interjection)

The Chairperson: Let the minister finish. We are at Committee Stage. We shall also hear from you.

Ms adoa: Yes, I understand the committee wants the police to be in charge of enforcement – (Applause) - We shall agree in this House - but I believe the discipline that the soldiers have compared to that of the police has already been manifested. 

In this clause, we are talking about a new team, not even the police -

The Chairperson: Honourable minister, do you want to tell us that the police is does not have discipline? Does that mean that they are indisciplined?

Ms adoa: Yes, Madam Chairperson. I have had a lot of challenges with the police conniving with victims that have been arrested many times –(Interjections)

The Chairperson: Honourable minister, which institution is mandated to keep law and order? [Honourable members: “It is the police”] If all of you stand up, I will put the question. I am still asking the honourable minister.

Ms adoa: Madam Chairperson, my argument is that getting a new independent surveillance team, as the clause is proposing -(Interjections)– would not be advisable because it will lead us to training this new team afresh. 

If we are talking about the police, then let us allow them to head the enforcement. However, if we are talking of the new team, it will take us time to train them. They will go back to the same system like the beach management unit. That is my problem. If we are talking of the police, then let us give them to head it.

The Chairperson: Honourable member, I like your lack of respect. When someone is speaking, sit. After the person has finished, you get up. Now, we have all become fishermen and women. (Laughter)

Ms adoa: That was my point. If we are saying the soldiers are not good enough, let us give the police. However, if we say we get a new surveillance team headed by –

The Chairperson: Honourable minister, I do not want us to say the soldiers are not good enough. We just want every institution to play its role; what they are mandated to do by law. That is what the committee is saying. Can I hear from the Shadow Attorney-General?

Mr niwagaba: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am actually surprised that the minister is opposing a very good amendment from the committee. When you look at the other bodies – we now have the Environmental Police Protection Unit and the Mineral Police Protection Unit. Everything is used under - on this particular amendment for fisheries, why are you against the amendment of the committee that is invoking the police in training a specific unit?

Honourable minister, I wish you could withdraw your objection and we proceed because the committee did good work and my team on this side is happy with its amendment. (Applause) 

Mr bahati: I am building on what the Shadow Attorney-General has said vis-a-vis the amendment. The minister says she has no problem allowing the police to do the monitoring, control and surveillance of the fisheries. However, what the committee is proposing is actually different from what the minister is saying, which I thought was a straightforward thing. 

The committee is proposing that the surveillance unit shall comprise persons with qualifications in fisheries sciences, appointed by the Public Service Commission and trained by the Uganda Police Force. Whereas the minister is saying, why can't we have - like we have a police unit specialising and handling the environment? We have a police unit handling tourism and oil and gas. All these units are already there in the police. I thought the minister was actually making a very good compromise between the committee and what the Members want. 

Therefore, I think the amendment of the minister is very good. To get people and train them, when actually, we can have a specialised unit under the police to do this work, would be better. I beg to submit.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, the committee is saying that the Uganda Police Force is best placed to conduct the training of the surveillance unit since it is responsible for preserving law and order and the protection of life and property. 

The replacement of the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs – remember, we have had the army, but now they are saying, replace it with the Minister of Internal Affairs. I do not know where the whip is getting what he is saying from. The committee is recommending the police vis-à-vis the army. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson if you can read the amendment of the committee – the one that you want to put the question to - amendment on clause 13(2)(b). It is suggesting a creation of recruitment and then training – “…appointed by the Public Service Commission and trained by the Uganda Police Force”. 

Actually, we already have precedence. We already have police units in the environment and oil and the gas sectors – they are specialised units for these natural resources. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: The one you are talking about is in clause 14. When you look at the functions of the Fisheries Monitoring, Control and Surveillance Unit, that is what is in -

MR NIWAGABA: The information I would like to give the minister is that it is actually the minister’s Bill, itself, which suggests the idea of these officers being appointed by the Public Service Commission. What the committee is only doing is to say, yes, let them be appointed by the Public Service Commission, but let the training be by the Uganda Police Force, instead of the UPDF. 

They are also saying that for consultation purposes, let it be with the Minister of Internal Affairs instead of the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs. It is a very simple and innocent amendment. Honourable minister, I ask you to concede to this amendment and we move forward. 

MR BAHATI: I think the Attorney-General has reminded us of the original Bill vis-à-vis the amendment. What is coming in is just a replacement of having the Ministry of Internal Affairs instead of the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, which, in my opinion, would be fine. 

MS ADOA: Madam Chairperson, I concede. (Applause) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 13 be amended as proposed.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 14, agreed to.

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to substitute for clause l5, the following – 

"Power of arrest 

(l) 	An officer of the surveillance unit may, without a warrant, arrest a person who is suspected of having committed an offence under this Act. 

(2) 	In the exercise of his or her powers under subsection (l), the officer of the surveillance unit may request from the person arrested, his or her name and address." 

The justification is that it is for clarity since the power of arrest is all-inclusive.

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 15 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to substitute for clause 16 the following – 

“16. Powers of inspection and search 

(l) 	The officers of the surveillance unit shall have powers of inspection and search, which shall include the power to-

(a) 	require any person to produce a licence or permit;

(b) 	inspect fishing gear, fish, fish products and similar items;

(c) 	require any person to provide name and address, and produce identification; 

(d) 	stop any vehicle, aircraft, vessel or other means of conveyance, and enter and inspect and require production of manifests and similar documents and answers to questions relating to cargo; 

(e) 	inspect and search or authorise any person subordinate to him or her to inspect and search any baggage, package, vehicle, vessel, tent, premises or property belonging to or occupied by that person or to anyone in his or her employment;

(f) 	require persons to produce records for inspection and copying; 

(g) 	seize fishing gear and other things suspected of being used in the commission of on offence under this Act; 

(h) 	seize fish and fish products suspected of having been reared, caught, processed, exported or imported illegally or possessed in contravention of the law, or unfit for human consumption, and;
 
(i) 	take possession of, or with a court order, demolish any structure, barrier or trap that has been erected or constructed illegally for purposes of fisheries or aquaculture activity. 

(2) 	An officer of the surveillance unit may seize anything under the powers conferred on him or her by this section, whether or not the owner can be found and the officer may– 

(a) 	break open any hold, container or compartment; 

(b) 	use any data processing system found on the premises, and;

(c) 	reproduce any record in the form of a printout and take it. 

(3) 	An officer of the surveillance unit shall provide a written receipt for any fish, fish product or goods seized by him or her under this Act.
 
(4) 	An officer of the surveillance unit shall exercise the powers of arrest conferred under this Act in accordance with the Criminal Procedure Code Act. 

The justification is: 

    1. To merge clauses l6 and l7 to avoid repetition of similar provision. 

    2. To ensure the use of the correct nomenclature since persons recruited to the work in the surveillance unit are public officers. 

    3. Lastly, the demolition of any construction barrier or trap should only be done under a court order and not on mere suspicion of commission of an offence to avoid abuse. I beg to submit. 

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 16 be amended. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes deletion of clause 17. The justification is that it has been merged with clause 16 to avoid repetition. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 17 be deleted as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 18 stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19

MS OKORI-MOE: The proposal is to substitute for clause 19 the following,
    1. An officer of the surveillance unit shall not exercise the powers of entry and search in respect of a dwelling house without a warrant obtained from a magistrate.

    2. The search under subsection (1) shall be carried out in the presence of the area local council officials. 

    3. An officer of the surveillance unit may, after notifying an area local authority, erect a temporary barrier on roads for the purpose of carrying out a search of a vehicle or person. 

The justification is to achieve clarity and also to guard against excesses of power during the implementation of entry and search. I beg to submit

MS ADOA: Madam Chairperson, I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 19 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20

MS OKORI-MOE: The proposal is that clause 20 be amended by substituting the word “against” with the word, “under”. Then (b) by substituting for the words “authorised officer” wherever the words appear under this clause, the words, “officer of the surveillance unit”.

The justification is for clarity and to ensure consistency and specificity since the clause falls under the subpart that deals with the fisheries monitoring, control and surveillance unit. I beg to move.

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 20 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 21

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that clause 21 be deleted. The justification is that the provision is susceptible to abuse. I beg to submit.

MS ADOA: I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 21 be deleted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22

MS OKORI-MOE: The committee proposes to substitute for clause 22 the following, “identification of officers of the surveillance unit. An officer of the surveillance unit shall, before exercising any powers under this part, produce official identification, showing him or her to be an officer of the surveillance unit”. 

The justification is to ensure that the identification of officers of the surveillance unit to a suspect is done before exercising any powers under this part without waiting for the suspect to demand for it. 

Then paragraph (b) of clause 22 has been included under clause 16 for better chronological flow. I beg to move.

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 22 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 23

MS OKORI-MOE: The proposal is that clause 23 be amended by inserting the words, “and aquaculture” immediately after the word “fisheries” and wherever the word appears under paragraphs (a) and (b). 

Then in paragraph (c), by inserting the words, “and aquaculture” immediately after the word “fisheries” appearing in line 3, and by inserting the words “and aquaculture development” immediately after the word “resources”.

The justification is to ensure the provision addresses both fisheries and aquaculture. I beg to submit.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have no objection to what the chairperson of the committee has raised, but I want some assistance. We are making a law for fisheries, but the beginning of clause 23 says, “For the purposes of ensuring the implementation of national policies with respect to the fisheries subsector, and the adherence to performance standards by local governments and in accordance with the Local Government Act…” They are trying to say that there will be another law under the Local Government Act, as far as the fisheries sector is concerned. 

My proposal, Madam Chairperson, is that the law should be in adherence to the performance standards by this Act. The justification is to avoid somebody acting and saying I acted under the Local Government Act. We should have only one Act to manage the fisheries.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, we are looking at part three. That is the role of the local government in the implementation of the Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill. Remember that there are some local government staff that are attached to this monitoring unit - yes, the district fisheries officers. These must act in accordance with the law. Remember the local government has bylaws. So, they must be consistent with the law that we are making.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, that is why I am raising this. The moment we have – the Local Government Act is a law. If you look at this one under clause 23, they are talking about standards by – (Interruption)

MS ADOA: I think Hon. Nandala-Mafabi has gone to clause 24 and we were discussing clause 23.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Order, Madam Chairperson. (Laughter) Is it in order –? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are on clause 23. We are looking at the mandate of the directorate in relation to local governments, and we are looking at part three: the role of local governments in regard to the Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I am reading the beginning of clause 23”: “for the purposes of ensuring the implementation of national policies with respect to the fisheries subsector and adherence to the performance standards by local Government and in accordance with the Local Governments’ Act” my worry is that as we make this law, they are bringing in another Local Government Act.

We do not know what the local Government Act talks about on fisheries. The moment we give this to local government, they must follow the law we are making, and not the Local Government Act. If we make a mistake to pass with this, someone will hide under the Local Government Act.

That is why we should delete the “Performance standards in accordance with this Act…” for which the directorate shall be responsible, but not in accordance with the Local Government Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, we should leave “in accordance with this Act.”? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Exactly and that is why I want to tell the minister that I am one of the best readers in this House.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, Hon. Nandala is saying is that we delete “the Local Government Act” and leave “in accordance with this Act”; which I agree with.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, reference to the Local Government Act, for purposes of this particular Act, in my view, is to complement and cross-reference because whereas we recognise that there is decentralisation and the offices created under the Local Government Act may have an impact on the Central Government, this clause, as is, would not enable a person to act under it and feign ignorance of the subsequent clauses, which we are going to look at in respect of functions and offices under the local Government.

THE CHAIRPERSON: In reference to cross references, the Local Government Act, Cap 243 is referred to.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have not refused the Local Government Act; they are even going to appoint people under the Local Government Act, that could be in reference, but here, we are looking at, “for purposes of ensuring implementation of national policies in respect to the fisheries subsector.”

We are not doing anything; the fisheries subsector has a law now. Thank you.

MR NIWAGABA: Honourable, if you read (a), (b) and (c), they are very clear on what the directorate is supposed to do in connection with the Local Governments. Let us not read too much English in this clause; it is innocent and good as it, let us allow it to pass, Hon. Mafabi. 

MR KAFUUZI: Let us maintain the clauses.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, I put the question that clause 23 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 24

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is that clause 24 be amended in paragraph (h) by substituting for the words, “which shall be in consonance with the relevant fisheries and aquaculture sector strategic plan,” the words, “in accordance with this Act.”

The justification is that it is a consequential amendment arising from the proposed deletion of clause 30. I beg to submit.

MS ADOA: Madam Chairperson, I concede.

MR OLANYA: Madam Chairperson, there is something important that I wish to add. Clause 24 is where the issue of bylaws and ordinances fall. Therefore, what Hon. Nandala was talking about - 24(e) where the subcounty makes bylaws and the district makes ordinances.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the issue that you have?

MR OLANYA: I am raising a very important issue on clause 24(e) that says, “makes bylaws and ordinances for sustainable fisheries and agricultural management.”  Right now -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want to make an amendment on this?

MR OLANYA: Yes, that is where I am moving to. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the amendment?

MR OLANYA: As Hon. Nandala-Mafabi tried to explain, the subcounties are mandated to make bylaws and the districts mandated to make ordinances. Therefore -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which is okay; the subcounties are supposed to make bylaws. Is there any problem with that?

MY OLANYA: It is okay, but the subcounty and district should be guided to make the bylaws and ordinances according to what we are passing. That is what I am trying -

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is where you have the role of the Local Government.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, I wish to guide my colleague. All bylaws made by districts come to the First Parliamentary Counsel’s office and the drafts-person in the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. So, they are ably guided before they are made.

THE CHAIRPERSON: When you read this part (e) “make bylaws and ordinances for sustainable fisheries and aquaculture management.” They have that in mind in whatever they are doing. 

I put the question that clause 24 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is that clause 26 be amended as follows; 

(a) 	in subclause (1) by inserting a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (b) as follows; “issue licences and permits in accordance with this Act.” 

(b) 	by deleting subclause (3).

Justification: The insertion of a new paragraph is a consequential amendment arising from the transfer of some licensing mandate from the Chief Fisheries Officer to the District Fisheries Officer to ease accessibility to the services.

Deletion of subclause 3; “The existing internal disciplinary procedures within the Public Service are sufficient to deal with any misconduct of public officers including the District Fisheries Officer.” I beg to move.

MS ADOA: Madam Chairperson, I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 26 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 27

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is that clause 27 is amended –

a. 	In subclause (2), by inserting the words, “local governments and other relevant stakeholders”, immediately after the word “agencies”; and

b. 	By deleting subclause (3).

The justification is:

    1. To ensure that the process of regulation and control of fisheries is highly consultative.

    2. The Bill already has specific provisions regulating the activities that this subclause seeks to prohibit; the subclause being deleted. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister?

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 27 be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to delete clause 30 –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Yona, stop disturbing my Members. You have just come.

MS OKORI-MOE: Thereafter, delete the words, “Fisheries and Aquaculture Sector Strategic Plans” wherever the words appear in the Bill. 
The justification is that strategic plans are developed administratively and not through legislation. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister?

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 30 be deleted, as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30, deleted.

Clause 31

MS OKORI-MOE: The proposal is to delete clause 31. Thereafter, delete the words, “Fisheries and Aquaculture Management Strategy” wherever the words appear in the Bill. 

The justification is that this is an administrative and operational function. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister?

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 31 be deleted, as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31, deleted.

Clause 32

MS OKORI-MOE: The proposal is for deletion of clause 32. The justification is that it is a consequential amendment to the deletion of clause 31. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister?

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 32 be deleted, as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32, deleted.

Clause 33

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is that clause 33 be amended by inserting the word “fisheries” immediately after the word “transboundary”, appearing in line four.

The justification is to achieve consistency by aligning the provision to the definition of transboundary fisheries resources under clause 4. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister?

MS ADOA: Madam Chairperson, I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 33 be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 34

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for deletion of clause 34. The justification is that it is consequential to the deletion of clauses 30 and 31. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister?

MS ADOA: I concur with the chairperson, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question that clause 34 be deleted, as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34, deleted.

Clause 35

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 35 to be amended, in subclause (2)(b), by inserting the words “in collaboration with the Fisheries Research Institute” before the word “conduct”. 

The justification is to ensure that research-based information is obtained, maintained and disseminated, given the nature of the activities under paragraph (b). I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister?

MS ADOA: I agree with my honourable chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 35 be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 36

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to amend clause 36:

    a. In subclause (1):

    i. By substituting for the words “water body”, the word “district” and 
    ii. By inserting the word “resources” immediately after the word “fisheries”, appearing in line three. 

    b. By deleting subclause (2).

The justification is:

    1. The maximum allowed fishing effort should be regulated, based on each district and not water body, given the unique dynamics of every district to ensure equitable distribution of fisheries resources.

    2. Subclause (2) has been modified and placed under clause 41 to ensure that the regulation of fishing effort is done through the fishing vessel licence. I beg to submit. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable minister? 

MS ADOA: I agree, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question that clause 36 be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 37

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 37 to be amended:

    a. By substituting for subclause (1), the following:

    i. “The Chief Fisheries Officer shall, on the recommendation of local governments and in consultation with relevant stakeholders, establish, by notice in the Gazette, landing sites throughout Uganda.”

    b.  By deleting subclause (3);

    c. By substituting for subclause (4), the following:

  	“Activities at the landing site and on the related land, buildings and facilities shall include the smoking, salting or storage of fish, landing of fish from fishing vessels and the transportation, processing and sale of fish or fish products.”

    d. By substituting for subclause (7), the following:

	“(7) The Chief Fisheries Officer shall issue guidelines for:

    a) the establishment and management of landing sites and 

 b) 	closure of fishing activities at landing sites.

The justification is:

    1. To ensure that the establishment of landing sites by the Chief Fisheries Officer is done on the recommendation of local governments, in whose area of jurisdiction the landing site is to be established.

    2. The deletion of subclause (3) is because it is redundant, given that the existing laws already empower the Government to take over any land in public interest, in accordance with the applicable law. 

    3. The substitution of subclause (4) is for clarity and to address the existing controversies surrounding fishing activities permitted at landing sites. 

    4. The substitution of subclause (7) is to broaden the provision to include issuance of guidelines for management of landing sites and to restrict the closure to fishing activities to enable other activities not related to fishing activities continue. I beg to submit.

MR ISABIRYE: Madam Chairperson, there is clarification I want from the chairperson of the committee. By proposing that landing sites should be owned by Government in trust for the people of Uganda.

We already have a law that requires the 200 buffer zones that are already for the Government. Supposing a landing site is not in the buffer zone, how shall we consider that?

MR NIWAGABA: I don’t need to disturb the chairperson. If you listened to her critically, that particular provision is being proposed for deletion.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It was deleted. Honourable minister?

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 37 be amended as proposed? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 38

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 38 to be amended by deleting the words “by the Chief Fisheries Officer.” It is a consequential amendment arising - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Aza, stop making noise. (Laughter)

MS OKORI-MOE: It is a consequential amendment arising from decentralising some licensing mandate to district fisheries officers. (Ms Ogwal rose_)

THE CHAIRPERSON: On what clause do you rise?

MS OGWAL: On clause 38. Madam Chairperson, I  think we need to take a closer look at clause 38 because, earlier on, the chairperson put it in the report that there are sections of the population which are fishers from generation to generation; they live on nothing else, but fishing. Many of them are rural in character, particularly the ones I know in Dokolo. 

Now, if you say a person shall not engage in any fisheries or aquaculture activity without the relevant licence or permit, “relevant licence or permit” becomes a problem to our rural population. How can they be helped? For you to tell those villagers to go and get a licence - when you try to get a licence, it will attract fees licensing fees. You are actually now cutting off the population you are trying to protect in this particular Act. 

That is what the problem has been. Many of us have been crying because these populations were the ones being brutalised and now you are subjecting them to licensing. It is a serious matter. So, I would like the technical people to help me, but definitely, my local people cannot handle this. Thank you.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, that is true. Actually, when you come to Kumi these days, you find the market empty; there is no fish because already, these things of licences are starting to bite.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Imat, first look at the definition of “fisheries activity” on page 11. It means fishing, transportation of fish and artisanal processing of fish, industrial fish processing, trade in fish maw, fish trade and other fisheries products…” So, it is not limited to the fishing that you want to do.

MS OGWAL: I agree, Madam Chairperson. Maybe the committee can come up with an exemption. For those who are doing commercial activities, I have no problem; you can subject them to licensing. However, I am talking about the rural population which has been very well defined in this report. These are the people I am talking about: those who don’t know anything about licences -

THE CHAIRPERSON: What we can do is that when we come to clause 4 – the interpretation clause – we can amend the definition of fisheries activity.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: I would like an assurance, please.

MR NIWAGABA: The information I would like to give Hon. Cecilia Ogwal is for her to hold her fire and look at clause 53 on local fishing.

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Imat Cecilia, I know for you, you want illegal fishing. Hold your fire. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, what Hon. Cecilia is raising is important. The moment you pass a permit -

THE CHAIRPERSON:  First check clause 58.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The moment we pass a permit, Madam Chairperson, it is going to be very difficult for those people who live near the rivers and lakes – who survive on these lakes for food or whatever because they will say, in order for you to go to this water, you must have a permit. The ones who can have a permit are maybe those who are doing commercial business. Since the committee recognises the locals, we should not run away from this. I think let us sort it out here.

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi, can we look at clause 53 on local fishing – the proposed amendment on local fishing?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you are right. I would like to propose is that we stand over this and go and deal with it there. If we see that it covers the interests of the locals, then, we can pass it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: “Clause 53. Local fishing

Substitute for clause 53, the following-

“Local fishing shall be regulated in accordance with the Local Governments Act, subject to any restriction imposed by the Chief Fisheries Officer as may be required to minimise the threats to fisheries resources.” 

The justification is that it is a consequential one.

MR KAFUUZI: For purposes of clarity, my senior colleague, Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, let us not debate in anticipation. When we get to clause 53, we should handle it. For now, I request we proceed.
  
MR NIWAGABA: I believe we can get the solution. Under this particular clause 38, if we say “a person shall not engage in any fisheries or aquaculture activity without the relevant licence or permit issued under this Act”, we delete the words “by the Chief Fisheries Officer” since there are those permits that will be issued by local governments so that we now sort out both those who require specific licences and permits from the Chief Fisheries Officer and the local governments.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the amendment?

MS ADOA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to make some clarification. The old law that we have had does not allow anybody to be licensed or given a receipt when dealing in fish below 20 kilos. What Hon. Cecilia Ogwal has raised is very key in the local communities, especially people who live near the lakes. You are next to a lake or swamp and when in the rainy season comes, it comes with some of these and you are not allowed to move even next to your compound. 

So, anybody who deals with or carries less than 10 kilos of fish is not allowed to be licensed or given a receipt. From 10 kilos and above is when you can give a receipt from a landing site.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it in the law?

MS ADOA: It has been in the old law. So, we have to leave it the way it is. I would like to emphasise that we must protect these artisan fishers who are unable to - that is their survival and they cannot be given a licence. We must support them. (Applause) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, can you formulate the amendment?

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What are you conceding on? Let the Attorney-General guide.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson –(Interjection) - can we have order?

Ms santa alum: Madam Chairperson, this is very important for our local people who do fishing at a local level –

The Chairperson: You are repeating what she has said; that it is very important.

Ms alum: Madam Chairperson, I was wondering whether we can’t we stand over this so that we do a perfect thing. That was my issue.

The Chairperson: Standing over it for what reason? Let us resolve it; hear the proposal first.

Mr kafuuzi: Madam Chairperson, my proposal is that the minister's assertion should form part of clause 53, where we are looking at the local people. We maintain 38 as it is because there are two classes that we are dealing with.

Ms Naluyima: Madam Chairperson, I propose under 38 that we differentiate and let it be commercial farming. We say, “A person shall not engage in any commercial farming or aquaculture activity without a relevant license or permit,” such that we can leave room for someone who probably resides near the lake and that is entirely how he survives - minus getting into commercial activities. We should only specify the permit and license for commercial activities. 

We should recall that issues of licences are for local governments. These basically know how they gauge the need for that local licence. However, because we want to ensure that we have certain regulations in place, that is why we issue a license. Otherwise, for someone who wants some little food, we can now introduce commercial fishing.

The Chairperson: I think she has a point because when you look at the definition of “commercial fishing”, it means, “for monetary gain, including trade, business or profit, where all parts of the catch is sold or battered, but does not include subsistence.”

Ms adoa: Yes, Madam Chairperson, as I said before, I strongly support the local people who fish for food. However, not everyone who is next to them only goes for food. There are also those for commercial purposes. That is why the old law has been saying, “10 kilogrammes and above.”

Also, there are local artisan fishers - these local women who get 10 kilogrammes and go to the local market to sell. The local government gives them receipts when they are within local markets. However, for someone who is carrying small fish for his household to eat, the law does not allow it - what happened was that the enforcers of the law used to abuse that. If they get you carrying more than 10 kilogrammes, then they would arrest you.

Mr oshabe: Madam Chairperson, let the minister help us. Instead of quoting the clause, she keeps on saying, “the old law.” We do not know whether there is a different law other than the one we are trying to amend. 

Kindly help us, tell us the clause where the local people are protected. Once we are sure that they are protected, then we will not waste any more time. Hon. Cecilia came with that thought that the licenses will affect the way of life of those who live on subsistence fishing. 

Ms adoa: Madam Chairperson, I keep repeating that as we make this law, the biggest challenge the local people have been facing is that you could not differentiate - for example, if you are a fish farmer at a local level in the village, you have your one fish pond, but do not have a license. When they catch you with the fish going to sell, they will say, “Where is your license?” They are different. 

That is why I am saying we have to put it in clause 53 to emphasise the protection of the local person - this small person who goes to fish for food should be protected.

The Chairperson: Madam Chairperson, assuming we put this: “A person shall not engage in any commercial fishing or aquaculture activities without the relevant licence and permit issued under this Act.”

Ms pacuto: Madam Chairperson, we are not taking into consideration the fact that we do fishing for consumption or commercial purposes only; there are those who do it for leisure; where do we put these? 

The Chairperson: Clause 53.

Mr tebandeke: Honourable members, I would like to address your worry.  Under clause 4 of the new amendment –

The Chairperson: Interpretation.

Mr tebandeke: Interpretation of terms - that is part (L) - local fishing has been catered for. It means, “Fishing without a licence, a fishing vessel, where your fish is caught for consumption by the person engaging in the fishing.” At least local fishing has been indicated.

Mr aogon: Madam Chairperson, as we listen to the honourable colleague, once we have decided that clause 38 is talking about a “shall”, which means “a must” and it will take charge of the rest, what will happen then?

Mr tebandeke: Madam Chairperson, in the same way, since local fishing means “Fishing without a fishing vessel,” under clause 53, all the local consumers have been catered for under the provision of the local government. “Local government” does not only mean the district. It runs up to the subcounty, parish and village. Therefore, it will be upon those local leaders to come up with a formulation of policies. Bylaws are also provided within where the local fishing for consumption shall be catered for. 

Mr niwagaba: Honourable members, we are on part 5 – licenses and permits. When you look at that part, beginning with clause 40, the relevant licenses and permits are explained. Fish vessel licence (40), fish transport licence (42), Fish Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives Licence (43), Fish Storage Facility Licence (44) up to 53, which talks about local fishing. 

That local fishing is again defined in the interpretation section. Therefore, when you water down this particular clause 38, you are literally watering down all these licences that are being referred to here under.

Therefore, I beg Members - those who would want to be very specific on local fishing - that let us hold our fire until we reach clause 53. These other licenses mentioned under, as I have explained, are unnecessary for the enforcement of this.

Ms adoa: Madam Chairperson, we maintain it.

The Chairperson: The committee amendment?

Ms adoa: Yes, as it is.

The Chairperson: I put the question that clause 38 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 39

Ms okori-moe: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 39 to be amended:

    a. by substituting for subclause (2) the following – 

	“Subject to this Act, the licensing officer may, on application being made in the prescribed manner and on payment of the prescribed fee, issue to an applicant, a licence or permit.” 

    5. by inserting immediately after subclause (2), the following new subclauses - 
	“A licence or permit shall be issued in such form and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by regulations.”

	“Where the licensing officer refuses to issue a licence, he or she shall, within 30 days from the date of the application, provide a written explanation to the applicant, giving reasons for the refusal.” 

	“A licence shall be deemed issued where the licensing officer does not 

    a. issue a licence within the prescribe time; and 

    b. provide a written explanation to the applicant giving reasons for refusal.” 

	“A person who is aggrieved by the refusal of a licensing officer to issue a licence may appeal to the minister within 14 days from the date of communication of the refusal.” 

c.	by substituting for subclause (3), the following-

 (3) 	“A licensing officer shall, in determining an application for a licence or permit, have regard to the purposes of this Act.” 

The justification is: 

    1. The replacement of subclause (2) is because it is a consequential amendment arising from the introduction of the phrase “licensing officer” to take care of provisions that apply to both Chief Fisheries Officer and District Fisheries Officer. 

    2. To introduce timelines within which applications for a licence are to be determined. 

    3. To ensure clarity, transparency and accountability in the application process. 

    4. The substitution of subclause (3) is a consequential amendment arising from the division of the licensing roles between the Chief Fisheries Officer and the District Fisheries Officer, and the deletion of clauses 30 and 31.

I beg to submit. 

MS ADOA: Madam Chairperson, I concede. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 39 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 39, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 40

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 40 to be amended – 

    a. by substituting for subclause (1), the following -
 
 (l) 	“A vessel shall not be used for fishing unless there is in force, in respect of that vessel, a valid fishing vessel licence issued by the Chief Fisheries Officer.”

    b. in subclause (2), by substituting for the words “five thousand currency points” and “three years”, the words  “one thousand currency points” and “one year” respectively.

The justification is: 

    1. To allow the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries oversee the entire regulation of fishing vessels. 

    2. The current penalty in the Bill is too harsh and not commensurate to the prescribed offence. 

I beg to submit. 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, we are not comfortable with the proposed amendment by the committee. 

The proposal to amend clause 40(1)(a) is rejected. 

The reasons we give are as follows: 

According to Section 7 of the Inland Water Transport Act, 2021, Act No. 18 of 2021, a person who intends to employ a vessel in navigation of inland waterways shall register the vessel with the maritime administration. 

“Maritime administration” means the department responsible for maritime safety and security in the ministry responsible for transport, according to Section 4 of the Inland Water Transport Act, 2021, Act 18 of 2021. 

The mandate to register all vessels in Uganda is vested in the Ministry of Works and Transport and not in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

Therefore, we reject the proposal of the committee that the Chief Fisheries Officer should be the one to license the vessels. I beg to submit.  

MS PACUTO: Madam Chairperson, at the moment, most of our fishing communities are facing difficulties due to boat sizes, irrespective of the water body - whether it is a lake or a river. We thought that this law would help salvage this situation; that it would come out clearly.

For instance, in the Albert Nile, you cannot recommend a boat of eight inches whereas in the lake, it would be appropriate because the depth and width of these water bodies differ. I would have preferred the committee to bring it out clearly so that it is in the law because as much as that was agreed upon when the minister, for instance, visited my place, the SPUs are busy destroying boats on the Albert Nile. 

I thought it would come out explicitly here that on the various water bodies, the vessel sizes will depend on the kind of water body and not a one-size-fits-all for them to be licensed, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: The law it reads: 

“(a) the vessel is registered under the Vessel Registration Act.” 

It further reads: 

“(c) There is in force a respect that a vessel has a valid vessel licence.”   

The committee has deleted part (a) and are substituting the whole of clause 1; so we lose (a).

DR BWANIKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. It is the fisheries officials that have got the expertise in terms of the fishing vessels. What the Ministry of Works and Transport licenses are the transport vessels. They are very distinctive – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Abed, in the old Bill, (a) refers to the transport vessel, which is for the Ministry of Works and (b) refers to the fisheries. That is why we need to maintain the old Bill and not the committee amendment - at least in clause 1. 

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, let us maintain it as it is in the Bill.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to submit that we maintain the clause as it is in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can I hear from the minister?

MS ADOA: Madam Chairperson, we maintain as it is. The issue of sizes of the boats comes under regulations. It also depends on the size of the lake.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. So we maintain clause 40(1) and (2) as it is in the old Bill. I put the question that clause 40 stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41

MS OKORI-MOE: The proposal is for clause 41 to be amended –

    (a)  by inserting a new subclause immediately after subclause (1) as follows:

 “Notwithstanding subsection (1), the license issued under section 40 shall specify the species, fishing gear, type and size, the number of each target species based on the state of stocks and the number of crew”.

    (b) In subclause (2), by substituting for the words “three thousand currency points” and “three years”, the words “One thousand currency points“ and “one year” respectively. 

The justification is:

    1.  To prevent issuance of multiple licenses and ease implementation by requiring the regulation of fishing effort through the fishing vessel licenses. 

    2. The substitution of subclause (2) is to make the penalty commensurate to the prescribed offense. I beg to move.

MR KAFUUZI: I am agreeable to the committee's proposal. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What about the penalties?

MR KAFUUZI: On the penalties, I am of the view that we maintain three years.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What about the three thousand currency points?

MR KAFUUZI: Yes, three years and three thousand currency points.

DR BHOKA: I am seeking for clarification on clause 41(1). Many fishermen lose their lives in the waters because of lack of life jackets. I wonder whether provision for life jackets is one of the conditions required for issuance of fishing licenses. Thank you.

MS OKORI-MOE: I think those are details that can be provided under the regulations. We cannot capture everything under the law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you.

MR AOGON: I am seeking clarification from the chairperson and the minister. You are talking about numbers and a specific kind of fish. Can I clearly get what you exactly mean here? If I am a fisherman and I go to the waters and my net catches ikolongo, and tilapia or the other one, what happens? I thought you should give me a license as a fisherman to go on the water. 

Secondly, I thought – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you were not here when the report was being read. They named the different species of fish. There is tilapia and Nile perch, among others, and the size of the fishing gears – 

MR AOGON: Which is Okay, Madam Chairperson; I do agree with you. The fishing gear should be the controlling component. If the size is gauge 40, that is the standard. Why should we talk about the species?

MS ADOA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Hon. Silas, there are so many species in the lake. If you want to deal in silver fish or mukene, you cannot get a net for fishing Nile perch because Nile Perch needs a bigger size. For mukene, some people even use mosquito nets. So you have to be licensed according to what you want to deal in, but not to disguise. When you disguise and you are caught, you have broken the law.

MR AOGON: This House needs to stand with me.

MR KAFUUZI: If I may add, the reason they are being specific is that at any one time, there may be some protected species, and they want to allow you to access A and not access B. therefore, all that has to be foreseen and considered, as you make this law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 41 be amended as proposed by the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 41, as amended, agreed to.

MR MIGADDE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. If I heard you well, the question you moved was on clause 41(1) and the implication is that what we have carried is clause 41(1) and we have not carried 41(2). The committee amendment for clause 41(2) was one thousand currency points and one year respectively and we have not made a decision on that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We passed clause 41. Let us go to clause 42. 

Clause 42

MS OKORI-MOE: The proposal is to amend clause 42 as follows:

    (a)  in subclause (1)(a), by substituting for the words “Vessel (Registration) Act”, the words “Inland Water Transport Act, 2021”. 

    (b) by inserting immediately after subclause (1), the following new subclauses:

 	“the Chief Fisheries Officer may delegate the power to issue a fish transport license under subsection (1) to a District Fisheries Officer.” 

	“This section does not apply to the transportation of fish or fish products for subsistence purposes.” 

    (c) In subclause (2), by substituting for the words “five thousand currency points” and “three years”, the words, “two thousand currency points” and “two years” respectively. 

Justification 

    1. The Vessel Registration Act was repealed by the Inland Water Transport Act, 2021. 

    2. To permit the Chief Fisheries Officer delegate the power to issue fish transport license to a district fisheries officer whenever necessary, to ease accessibility especially the transportation of fish or fish products on motorcycles, bicycles and tricycles, among others.

    3. To exempt vehicles used in the transportation of fish or fish products for home consumption from the requirement of a transport licence.

    4. The currency penalty is too harsh and not commensurate to the offence.

I beg to submit.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, I concede

MS ADOA: Madam Chairperson, I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 42 be amended as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 42, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, the cross-reference in the law – Inland Water Transport Act, 2021 – refers to clause 42(1)(a) and also applies to clause 40(1)(a).

Clause 43

MS OKORI-MOE: The proposal is that clause 43 be amended-

    (a) in the headnote, by substituting for the word “trade” the word “mongers”;

    (b) in subclause (1), by substituting for the word “trade” appearing in line two, the word “mongers”;

    (c) by inserting a new subclause immediately after subclause (1), the following –

“The Chief Fisheries Officer may delegate the power to issue a fish mongers licence under subsection (1) to a District Fisheries Officer. 

    (d) by substituting for subclause (2), the following –

“A person who trades in fish or fish products without a fishmongers licence commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding two thousand currency points or to imprisonment not exceeding two years or both.”

Justification

    1. To replace the fish trade licences with the fishmongers licence since trade licences are already provided for under the Trade Licensing Act.

    2. To provide for a fishmongers licence, the issuance of which is based on technical assessment of public health issues and hygienic conditions.

    3. To allow the Chief Fisheries Officer delegate the power to issue a fishmongers licence to a District Fisheries Officer for ease of accessibility.

    4. The current fine and penalty is too harsh and not commensurate to the offence.

I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, indeed, the currency points are harsh because the other ones are for a vessel. 

MS ADOA: Madam Chairperson, I am equally representing fishermen and we shall give this interest because a fishmonger or trader should not be given very harsh penalties. At the same time, we want the lake to be sustained.

So, it is this House to agree. We shall not give them to deplete the lake just like that, but at the same time, this is their livelihood. They do not have anywhere to go and some of them totally depend on the lake. This House should decide and we shall have to vote. 

Since we are putting the clauses, I will concede and then when it comes to discussion, we shall agree on -

MR TEBANDEKE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Under this fish trade licence, we have market women who sell fish in very small quantities. If you are going to penalise them – five thousand currency points is Shs 100 million. It is very prohibitive -

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have already removed the Shs 100 million. We are now on Shs 40 million.

MR TEBANDEKE: Why don’t we have the penalty based on the quantity that somebody has? If it is below a certain quantity, then there is a certain fine.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What currency point is that?

MR TEBANDEKE: Here, it is indicated that one currency point is Shs 20,000. If we reduce and say, maybe -

THE CHAIRPERSON: The fines are in currency points.

MR TEBANDEKE: Yes. So, we could suggest 100 currency points if it is below 10 kilogrammes and then when it is above, we can have a higher rate.

MR OPIO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On this specific clause, the fishmongers licence - a monger is like a hawker who uses capital not exceeding Shs 1 million. We have these women carrying fish along the roads, some of whom are even using Shs 50,000. We cannot exert on them a fine of Shs 40 million. I suggest twenty currency points on this specific clause.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I support that proposal. Twenty currency points will do because these are our people. They bring fish and we are the very ones who buy it. If they are not given the opportunity, then we shall be supporting those who are exporting. I move that we go by twenty currency points. (Members rose_)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Who is speaking? All of you, sit down. (Laughter) We also need to do something that prohibits these people from doing this kind of thing. You are mongering without a licence at the disadvantage of the others who are paying.

Chairperson, are you maintaining your position of two thousand currency points?

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the penalty which has been proposed is the maximum, but the judicial officer presiding can give a lesser penalty. We could even give 100.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Look at the words, “not exceeding”. Is that okay, Madam Minister?

MS ADOA: That is okay, Madam Chairperson.

MR KAFUUZI: You see, Madam Chairperson, I want us to look at this in two ways. The law should not be made to massage people’s wrongs. It should be made to prohibit the wrong act they are doing, but we should also be considerate of their stand at a particular point. It is only the judicial officer who is in position to determine this person’s stand. That is why the judicial officer has the power to say this much or less. That is why the law says, “not exceeding”. So, this is the bar, but they can give a lesser amount. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 43 be amended, as proposed.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 43, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You know, whatever you do brings some English interpretation. It is just English - not exceeding - you can even be excused for free. 

Clause 44 

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to delete clause 44.

The justification is that the requirement for approval of fish processing establishments, under clause 94, is sufficient, given that fish processing establishments include fish storage premises. 

It is also to avoid over-regulation through the issuance of multiple licences, which will make the costs of doing business expensive and ultimately stifle business growth in the fishery subsector. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister?

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 44 be deleted, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 44, deleted.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is that clause 46 be amended:

    a. In subclause (1):

    i. By inserting the word “fish” immediately before the word “movement” and

    ii. By substituting for the words “Chief Fisheries Officer”, the words “District Fisheries Officer”. 

    b. By deleting subclause (2), 

    c. In subclause (3), by inserting the words “or fish product” immediately after the word “fish”, appearing in line one.

The justification is that the inclusion of the word “fish” is to ensure clarity and consistency with the entire provision. 

The substitution of the words “Chief Fisheries Officer” with the “District Fisheries Officer” is to devolve the mandate of the issuance of fish movement permits to local governments to enable people easily access the permit. 

The deletion of subclause (2) is consequential to the substitution of the Chief Fisheries Officer with the District Fisheries Officer as the issuer of the fish movement permit.

The insertion of the words “all fish products” is to ensure consistency with subclause (1), given that a movement permit is required for both fish and fish products. 
I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister? 

MS ADOA: Agreed, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 46 be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 46, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 47
MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to delete clause 47. 

The justification is that licensing of fishers is not necessary, since the fishing vessel licence covers the fishing effort, including the number of crew.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister?

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 47 be deleted, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 47, deleted.

Clause 48

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 48 to be amended:

    a. By substituting for the headnote, the following:

“Fish permit for research purposes.” 

    b. By substituting for subclause (1), the following”

“A person shall not undertake fishing for research purposes without a valid fishing permit issued by the Chief Fisheries Officer.” 

    c. In subclause (3), by deleting the word “research”, appearing in line 1.

    d. In subclause (4) and paragraph (a), by deleting the word “research”, appearing before the word “fishing”.

    e. In subclause (5), by substituting for the words “research fishing”, the words “fishing for research purposes” and 

    f. In subclause (6), by substituting for the words “research fishing without a research fishing”, the words “fishing for research purposes without”.

The justification is to ensure clarity by aligning the name of the fishing permit required for research purposes to achieve the intended object of the provision. The other is a consequential amendment, arising from aligning the name of the fishing permit required for research purposes. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister?

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

MR OLANYA: Madam Chairperson, for example, if a student is doing research on fish, why do we subject students to a permit before doing research? Madam Chairperson, I think let us be serious here. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: When is a permit always issued? Is it issued after?

MR OLANYA: It is before; it is like permission. However, Madam Chairperson, when the students are being told to make research on particular fish species, why are we subjecting them to getting permission? Why not allow students to be free and do their research? This is my concern.

MS PACUTO: Madam Chairperson, I want to support his point. Many times when students are going for research, the educational institutions give them letters that they go with to wherever they are going. Why shouldn't apply to a student who is doing research in the area of fishing? 

MR NIWAGABA: Honourable members, clause 48 (2) gives the minister powers to exempt a public institution from the requirement of that licence. So, students under a public institution or a private university - because even an individual can be exempted - can benefit from this clause. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You know, you can have other people masquerading as students who will end up fishing. Now, if I want to do research on a lion, should I just go and shoot it? Attorney-General? 

MR KAFUUZI: It is exactly what you have just said. The intention is pre-emptive - to prevent people from masquerading as researchers and accessing our water bodies. 

Allow me to give one example of an investor who wanted to take out of the country over 4,000 tonnes of a mineral for purposes of testing what it is; does he need to take 4,000 tonnes? That is masquerading. This is the kind of masquerade that we are trying to prevent here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: And I want to agree with Hon. Niwagaba on what he said. The minister will give permission for the students to go and do the research. I mean, that is why the minister is there to make the regulations and that kind of thing. 

I put the question that clause 48 be amended as proposed? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 48, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 49

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 49 to be amended by inserting a new clause immediately after subclause (1) as follows: “The chief fisheries officer may delegate the power to issue an ornamental fishing permit, under subsection (1) to a district fisheries officer.” 

Then in subclause (2) by substituting for the words “one thousand currency points” and “one year” the words “five hundred currency points” and “six months”, respectively. 

The justification is to allow the chief fisheries officer delegate the power to issue an ornamental fishing permit to local governments for ease of accessibility. 
Then on the penalty; that it is to make the penalty commensurate to the offence. I beg to move.

MS ADOA: Madam Chairperson, I concede.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, thank you so much. My spirit is telling me that it will be better if we fully give this function to the local governments because this thing of saying, “may delegate” - we should also allow our people easy access to some of these things. 

You never know what will happen; the chief fisheries officer can tomorrow turn out to be very difficult and he or she does not delegate the authority to the districts. What will our people do? 

Let us give the districts the permission to issue some of these licences so that our people also have some freedom. Otherwise, we are locking the entire lake; everywhere you touch is hard and the other way is hard. Everything is now locked up. Where are we going? Give our people some permission also to do some work. Where is the decentralisation we are talking about?

MR NIWAGABA: Just for information, Hon. Silas, we have passed clauses already giving powers to local governments to issue specific permits and licences.  You do not have to specifically give on each and every clause and say, this can be done by the local government. You must interpret the entire law when it is finally passed with the necessary amendments. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 49 be amended as proposed? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 49, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 50 agreed to.

Clause 51 agreed to.

Clause 52

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 52 to be amended:

In subclause (1)(a) by inserting the words “water body” immediately after the word “that”. 

In subclause (2), by substituting for the words “Aquaculture Facility,” and wherever the words appear in the Bill, the words “aquaculture establishment”.

In subclause (3)(a), by inserting the words “Fisheries Research Institute” immediately after the word “with”. 

The justification for subclause (1)(a) is for clarity and then the substitution of the words “Aquaculture Facility” with the words “aquaculture establishment” is to avoid repetition, since the phrase has been deleted under clause 4, because it is adequately covered under the interpretation of the phrase “aquaculture establishment”. 

Then subclause (3)(a) is to ensure that decisions relating to stocking, transfer and introduction of fish and aquatic plants into a water body are guided and informed by research. I beg to submit.

Ms Adoa: Madam Chairperson, I concede. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 52 be amended as proposed by the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 52, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 53

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 53 to be substituted with the following: “Local fishing shall be regulated in accordance with the Local Governments Act, subject to any restrictions imposed by the chief fisheries officer, as may be required to minimise threats to fisheries resources.” 

The justification is that it is a consequential amendment arising from the deletion of clause 31. I beg to submit. 

MS NALUYIMA: Earlier on, Madam Chairperson, we agreed that local fishing is about the local governments. So, I propose we further amend the committee’s submission and we just say, “local fishing shall be regulated in accordance with the Local Governments Act,” such that we only give powers to the local government officials. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Look at the amendment; it has taken care of what you are talking about.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, the entire authority in the enforcement of this particular Bill, if passed into law, will be the chief fisheries officer. So, you cannot exclude him or her from guiding the local government in regulating local fishing. I, therefore, implore my colleague - my Woman MP from Wakiso - not to oppose this particular amendment proposed by the committee because I think it serves the purpose.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honorable members, I put the question that clause 53 be amended as proposed by the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 53, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 54

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 54 to be amended in subclause (1) by deleting the words “and shall be in a form and subject to conditions either generally or in respect of any particular licence, as may be prescribed by regulations.”

The justification is to avoid duplication since clause 39 provides for the form and conditions for licences and permits. I beg to move.

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 54 be amended as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 54, as amended, agreed to.
New clause

Ms okori-moe: Madam Chairperson, there is a proposal to insert a new clause immediately after clause 54 as follows:

“Renewal of licence

    1) A person may apply for renewal of a licence issued under this Act.

    2) An application for renewal of a licence shall be made in accordance with the regulations made under this Act.”

The justification is to provide for the renewal of a licence to ensure clarity. I beg to move.

Ms adoa: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

The Chairperson: I put the question that a new clause be inserted immediately after clause 54 as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to.

Clause 55

Ms okori-moe: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 55 to be deleted.

The justification is that clause 59, which prohibits transfer and assignment of licences and permits is sufficient.

Mr kafuuzi: Madam Chairperson, I wish to object to the committee's proposal to delete clause 55. The belief by the committee that what is catered for in –

The Chairperson: Honourable chairperson, the title of clause 55 is “licence or permit not to be borrowed”.

Mr kafuuzi: Exactly. 

The Chairperson: It means that you should not borrow a licence, which has been issued to another person to use. This is different from the other section.

Mr kafuuzi: Madam Chairperson, that is my exact submission. If we are to distinguish between the two, clause 55 prohibits any licensee from lending out his/her licence or any other individual from borrowing that licence as opposed to clause 59, which prevents transfer - which is selling or assigning. You cannot sell a licence or assign it under clause 59. Clause 55 says you cannot borrow it like Hon. Niwagaba cannot borrow my glasses. I beg to submit.

Mr niwagaba: Madam Chairperson, I beg to disagree with the learned Deputy Attorney-General.

The wording in clause 59, particularly referring to “assignment”, in my view, would include pledging the licence as security, which is the same as borrowing. To me, clause 59 and clause 55 are the same except we could, for clarity, transfer the word “borrowing” into clause 59 so that we make one clause to cover everything.


Mr kafuuzi: If we are to buy Hon. Niwagaba’s idea, for clarity, we would further add “pledging.” It would then include “transfer, assign, borrow, pledge.” We put them in one clause, either clause 59 or clause 55. 

The Chairperson: So we delete clause 55. 

Mr kafuuzi: If we delete clause 55, we put those in   clause 59. I beg to submit.

Ms adoa: Madam Chairperson, there is an issue here concerning Lake Edward and Lake George. They inherit their licences from their forefathers. Maybe, this is where we should bring them in. It has been a battle. It is not easy for them to understand that a licence is not to be inherited. 

The Chairperson: The law will help us. 

Ms adoa: Yes. However, on these other ones, we have been having criminals moving with borrowed licences. It is criminal and we should not allow it.

Mr migadde: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Now that it is coming from the minister that on Lake Edward you can inherit a licence from your forefathers, I am sure forefathers are not only on Lake Edward. They are also on Lake Victoria. The clarification I want to get from the minister is: Are we going to apply the same, when it comes to our forefathers, as far as Lake Victoria is concerned?

The Chairperson: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 55 be deleted as proposed.

Mr kafuuzi: Madam Chairperson, allow me just a minute. The honourable minister has brought up something very important. If we do not handle it now, it could cause a problem in the future. Someone will come up with a licence and say he inherited it. We need to see whether to cover that under clause 59.

The Chairperson: Yes, clause 59. 

Mr kafuuzi: Most obliged. 

The Chairperson: I put the question that clause 55 be deleted as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 55 deleted.

Clause 56

Ms okori-moe: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 56 to be substituted as follows:

“1) 	Where a licence or permit issued under this Act is destroyed, defaced or lost, the licensing officer may, if satisfied as to the destruction, defacement or loss of the licence or permit and on payment of the prescribed fee, issue the person a certificate, setting out the purpose and effect of the licence or permit and reciting the destruction, defacement or loss.

2) 	Where a person makes an application to the licensing officer for the issuance of a certificate under subsection (1), the person is permitted to carry out any activity authorised under the destroyed, defaced or lost licence or permit pending the issuance of a certificate.
3) 	The certificate issued under this section shall have the same force and effect as the original licence or permit.”

Justification

    a) The splitting of the provision is to ensure clarity.

    b) The substitution of “Chief Fisheries Officer” with “Licensing Officer” is to take care of the shared licensing role between the Chief Fisheries Officer and the District Fisheries Officer. 

    c) To broaden the application of the provision by removing the word, “accidentally,” which is restrictive, since there may be other circumstances leading to the destruction, defacement or loss of a licence or permit.

    d) The introduction of a new subclause (3) is to enable continuity of business while the replacement process of a licence or permit is ongoing. I beg to submit.

Mr kafuuzi: Madam Chairperson, I am okay with the proposal of the committee, but I want to add something. Because they envisage a licence or a permit, which is accidentally destroyed, defaced or lost I want to add that “a licence, which is issued with mistakes”. For example, with the wrong names and you require to have it corrected. 

Mr aogon: Madam Chairperson, that is a good observation. 

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, the proposal by the minister is good, but it would change the meaning under the marginal note – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, can you redraft it? 

MR NIWAGABA: I am advised that that particular position is provided for –(Interjection)– is it clause 62? I do not think so because we are talking about a licence that has been issued in error and requires correction of errors. You could propose a separate clause immediately after this one because the marginal note would change. 

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, besides that one being separate, I do not think we should over-legislate by demanding for so many conditions to be attached here and there. I have seen that when people lose IDs, for instance, all you need to do is apply and pay the prescribed fee. Why shouldn’t we do the same here? If you have lost something or it is damaged, just apply and mention what has happened and pay the fee. I thought that would do. Otherwise, if we put many conditions such as satisfying the officer that it was lost or destroyed – will it help? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What you are talking about is in clause 62(1)(b). That is provided for.  Honourable members, I put the question that clause 56 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 56, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 57

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 57 to be amended by substituting for the words “particular waters or area of Uganda”, the words “fishing waters”. 

This is for clarity and consistency since the phrase “fishing waters” is defined under the interpretation clause.

MR OPIO: I would like to propose that this clause restricts the number of licences and permits issued in regard to areas – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which one now? 

MR OPIO: Clause 57. I would like to propose that we add a clause to also restrict the number of permits or licences that can be issued to an individual to avoid monopoly, which we have seen with the coffee agreement. We should not just restrict the area, but even the number. This is a “may” which means that it is at the discretion of the fisheries officer, but we can provide for it. Otherwise, you can have one person having a permit for the whole lake or region itself. That is my proposal. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, that is already catered for in the law. 

MR OPIO: Madam Chairperson, clause 57 is limiting in terms of the area, but not in terms of the number – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: It even limits the number of all or any of the licences or permits which may be issued under this Act. You are only reading the amendment. You are not looking at the original Act. Do you have the original Act?
 
MR OPIO: I have the Bill. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Look at the original Act. Do you have it? 

MR OPIO: No, I do not. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, come for it in my office. (Laughter)

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put a question that clause 57 be amended as proposed.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 57, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 58

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, if you are looking at the amendments, look at both the old law and new amendments. I put the question that clause 58 stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 58, agreed to.)

Clause 59

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 59 to be amended in subclause (2) – 

(a) 	by substituting for the words “one thousand”, the words “two hundred and fifty”; and 

(b) 	by deleting the words “the purported”. 

Justifications 

    1. To make the fines commensurate to the offence. 

    2. The deletion of the phrase “the purported” is to achieve consistency and clarity since the provision seeks to create an offence for transfer or assignment of licence or permit, and not purported transfer or assignment.

MR NIWAGABA: On clause 59, the marginal note, I am proposing to add the following words immediately before the words “transfer” – “borrowing, pledging and inheriting”.

Under subclause (1), the same words should to be included immediately before the words “transferred.” 

The justification is that this is to ensure that, indeed, a licence is personal to holder and neither pledgeable, assignable or in any way, whatsoever, taken by any other person other than the one to whom it was issued.

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 59 be amended as proposed, together with the amendment from Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 59, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 60, agreed to.

Clause 61

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 61 to be amended by substituting for the words “Chief Fisheries Officer”, the words “licensing officer”. 

The justification is that it is a consequential amendment given that this is a shared mandate by both the Chief Fisheries Officer and the District Fisheries Officer, as licensing officers.

MS ADOA: Agreed, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 61 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 61, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 62

MS OKORI-MOE: Clause 62 is amended – 

(a) 	in subclause (1) - 

(i) 	by substituting for the words “Chief Fisheries Officer”, the words “licensing officer”; 
(ii) 	in paragraph (c), by deleting the words “a serious or”. 

(b) 	by substituting for subclause (2), the following – 

“(2) The licensing officer shall, before suspending or cancelling a licence or permit under subsection (l), give the licensee or permit holder fourteen days’ notice requiring him or her to give reasons, if any, why his or her licence or permit should not be suspended or cancelled.” 

Justifications 

    1. It is a consequential amendment given that this is a shared mandate by both the Chief Fisheries Officer and the District Fisheries Officer. 

    2. What amounts to a serious breach is subjective and, therefore, prone to abuse.

I beg to submit. 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, I would like us to envisage a scenario where a license is issued with errors and has to be corrected, unlike a license issued in error or under false information. A license issued with errors; where I apply for a license as Kafuuzi Jackson, and it comes with Kafuuzi Niwagaba.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you saying – 

MR KAFUUZI: Yes, I am agreeable to the proposal –  

THE CHAIRPERSON: But we split (b)? And say a license issued with errors – 

MR KAFUUZI: Yes, because the original clause 62(1)(b), if I may read it, it is short. “If the license or permit was granted in error or on the basis of false or misleading information”. Meaning that there was an illegal act right from the beginning. But in this case, there is no illegality, but there is an honest mistake, where a typing error changes the name of the company or the licensee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, it should not be in error, it should be with the error.

MR KAFUUZI: Yes, exactly. That is what I am saying. So maybe we split (b) or we add (c) to add, “to cater for a license issued with errors”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes.

MR NIWAGABA: I think you have a point, only that it would now destroy the meaning of clause 62. This is because the headnote is about suspension and cancellation. We would rather have a standalone clause on the correction of errors in licenses issued under the Act. With a paragraph to state that “the Chief Fisheries Officer may correct errors in licenses issued under this Act once brought to his attention” something along those lines.

MR AOGON: Madam Chair, further clarification from the Attorney-General

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can't you say “suspension, cancellation and correction” so that we house it in one clause?

MR AOGON: May I get to know from you, Attorney-General, what will happen because you said the Chief Fisheries Officer may delegate the powers to issue licenses. Now we are talking about cancellation. Do the people at the district have the powers to cancel? How are we catering for that? May I be guided to understand that? “Cancellation and issuance” how do they move together? They should be in one rhythm.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chair, I think he raises a very interesting scenario. But you see, the powers delegated for issuing - they are not for cancellation. Yes, they are both administrative, but I believe some powers are retained. Cancellation is punitive. That should be retained.

MR AOGON: Madam Chair, I have seen appointing authorities becoming dis-appointing authorities. I do not see a situation where somebody who appoints is different from the one who dis-appoints. I have never seen such a thing. I do not know. Maybe guide me further.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chair, Hon. Niwagaba touched on this. I was wondering whether we really need to put something in the law to correct an error. This is because if I apply for a license as David Bahati and the licensing officer makes an error and says it is Davis Bahati, do we need to put it in the law that you have to correct it? Or it is an operational thing? Because the application will show evidence that I have applied under this name. So, if you issue a license which has errors, I thought that is an operation which does not need to be in the principal law. I really want some justification for your –(Interruption)

MS ASINANSI NYAKATO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have seen challenges with the national IDs, where the officers made technical errors like the spelling of the names of the people. These people went back to reapply, and up to now, some of them have never got their national IDs. So, if it is business, someone has applied for a license and an error comes - you never know that even politically or technically someone could have done it intentionally to frustrate that person. I would propose that we make a timeframe in which that error should be corrected; either two weeks or one week so that someone can progress with business.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chair, if I may respond to Hon. David Bahati. Correcting an error is administrative. And it means the person issuing the license, who made the mistake, should be the one to correct it. And it comes with an administrative cost, which you, the licensee would have to incur. There would be no administrative cost or it would be an illegal administrative cost if there is no law supported. 

And if we do not put it in the law, it means it is at the liberty of the licensing officer to correct your errors or not. Then you will get stuck when you have a bank account in a bank, with different company names and the license you hold is different. So, it becomes hard and difficult for you to trade. That is why we must have a clause specifically on how to correct these errors. But I have no problem combining this clause under “suspension, cancellation and correcting errors in licenses”. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don't you formulate it under (3) on what should be done in case of correction of errors and how much time that should take? Give it a timeframe. I think there are 14 days on the first one. We could still maintain 14 days for the correction.

MR KAFUUZI: So, if we were to put subclause (3), having amended the headnote to indicate suspension, cancellation and correction of errors, we would say,” where an application is made for correction of errors in a license, the Chief Fisheries Officer -” – I think we are restricting it to that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The licensing officer – 

MR KAFUUZI: Yes, the licensing officer shall correct the errors within 14 days. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes -

MR KAFUUZI: But then where do we put the payment of a requisite amount? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That will be in the regulations? 

MR KAFUUZI: I beg to submit.

MS NALUYIMA: Madam Chair, as we take note, if the error was by the licensing officer, then the cost should not for the – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is something administrative that will be handled. You do not put that in the law. 

MR AOGON: It has been misused – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 62 be amended as proposed by the committee and further proposed by the Deputy Attorney-General and Hon. Niwagaba.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 62, as amended, agreed to

Clause 63

MS OKORI-MOE: The proposal is for clause 63 to be amended by substituting for subclause (2), the following: “The Chief Fisheries Officer shall, by notice in the Gazette, prescribe the manner in which the register shall be kept and maintained.”

The justification is to broaden the provision to take care of the technological advancement by accommodating other means of keeping the register like electronic means besides physical registers. I beg to move.

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 63 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 63, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 64

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 64 to be substituted for the following:
“The regulation of aquaculture and approval of the aquaculture establishments shall be carried out in collaboration with relevant stakeholders.” 

Justification: To ensure consistency and clarity given that the regulation of aquaculture does not rest in only the Chief Fisheries Officer. I beg to move.

MS ADOA: Madam Chairperson, I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 64 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 64, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 65

MS OKORI-MOE: The proposal is to delete clause 65 to avoid duplication and conflicting provisions since fish breeding is an aquaculture activity which is already regulated under clause 70 through issuance of licence.

MS ADOA: I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 65 be deleted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 65, deleted.

Clause 66

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for the deletion of the words “Institution, organisation or establishment”.

Justification: The use of the phrase “person” is sufficient and takes care of all the other words - “Institution, organisation or establishment”. I beg to move.

MS ADOA: We agree with the amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 66 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 66, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 67

THE CHAIRPERSON: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for deletion of the words “or establishment”. 

The justification is the use of the phrase “person” is adequate.

MS ADOA: I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 67 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 67, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 68, agreed to.

Clause 69

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 69 to be amended in subclause (1) by deleting the words, “or establishment” and in subclause (2) by substituting for the words “all persons and establishment” the words “a person”.

Justification

The deletion of those words is consequential and the use of the word “person” is adequate. I beg to move.

MS ADOA: I agree with the proposal of the committee chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 69 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 69, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 70

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 70 to be substituted for the following: “Aquaculture activity licence.

    (1) A person shall not engage in an aquaculture activity without a valid licence issued in respect of that aquaculture activity under this part.

    (2) An aquaculture activity licence in respect of –

    a. cage culture or commercial land-based culture shall be issued by the Chief Fisheries Officer; and 

    b. subsistence land-based culture shall be issued by the District Fisheries Officer.

    (3) An application for an aquaculture activity licence shall be made to a licensing officer in the prescribed form and shall be accompanied by the prescribed application fee.

    (4) The licensing officer shall, before determining an application under this section, ensure that consultations with stakeholders are carried out in accordance with such procedures as may be prescribed by regulations.

    (5) The procedures under subsection (4) may require the costs of an auxiliary to consultation to be borne wholly or partly by the applicant.

    (6) The licensing officer shall not issue a licence under this section, unless he or she is satisfied that –

    a. the applicant has the legal right to occupy any land required for the operation of the aquaculture establishment and to use the land for that purpose;

    b. the applicant has the legal right to abstract or use any water required for the operation of the aquaculture establishment and to discharge any waste water or effluent from that establishment;

    c. the aquaculture establishment is in public interest; and

    d. the applicant has complied with the National Environment Management Act, 2019 and any other applicable written law.

    (7) The provisions relating to licensing under part (v) to this Act, shall apply to one aquaculture activity licence with the necessary modifications. 

    (8) A person who contravenes this section commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding one thousand currency or to imprisonment not exceeding two years or both.”

Justification:

    1. Clauses 70 and 71 have been merged to achieve clarity by providing for one licence and avoid contradictions between the two clauses.

    2. The proposal to have subsistence land-based culture licence issued by the District Fisheries Officer is to decentralise the service since aquaculture activity is small-scale. 

    3. The substitution of the phrase “aquaculture facility” with “aquaculture establishment” is a consequential amendment arising from the deletion of the phrase under clause 4. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you.

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, on the issue of land ownership, I do not know what the committee meant. Must I have a land title before I can be allowed to conduct aquaculture within my own land? I heard you read about “legal possession of land” what does it imply? Maybe the Attorney-General should guide here?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Legal ownership does not talk about only a title. You can be a bona fide occupant and you will be the legal owner.

I put the question that clause 70 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 70, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 71

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, clause 71 is proposed to be deleted. It is a consequential amendment having merged clause 71 with clause 70. I beg to move.

MS ADOA: Agreed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 71 be deleted as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 71, deleted.

Clause 72

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 72 to be amended:

    a. In subclause (1):

    i. By inserting the word “activity” before the word “licence”; and
    ii. By substituting for the words “Chief Fisheries Officer”, the words “Licensing Officer”.

    b. In subclause (2), by substituting for the words “guidelines as may be issued”, the words “the regulations, as may be prescribed”;

    c. In subclause (3), we propose deletion.

    d. In subclause (4) –

    i. By substituting for the word “permit”, the words “activity licence”;

ii. 	By substituting for “five thousand currency points” and “three years”, the words “two thousand five hundred currency points” and “two years” respectively.

Justification 

    1. To ensure consistency, given that the issuance of aquaculture activity licence is shared between the Chief Fisheries Officer and the District Fisheries Officer. 

    2. The deletion of subclause (3) is to ensure consistency, since clause 59 prohibits the transfer and assignment of all licences. 

    3. The substitution of the word “permit” with the words “activity licence” is to achieve consistency through the use of the appropriate title of the licence, as used in the Bill. 

    4. The substitution of the currency points is to make the penalty commensurate to the prescribed offence. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister?

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 72 be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 72, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 73

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 73 to be substituted for the following:

“73 Alterations to aquaculture establishment

An aquaculture establishment shall not be altered without the prior consent, in writing, of the licensing officer.” 

The justification is to broaden the application of regulation relating to alterations to aquaculture establishments to apply to all establishments, whether for commercial or subsistence aquaculture, given the risks that may be posed by either establishment to the environment. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister?

MS ADOA: I concede to the amendment. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 73 be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 73, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 74, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Elder, is there a problem? Can we help you? (Laughter) 

Clause 75

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for the substitution of clause 75, the following:
“75 Notice of disease

    1) An owner or a person in charge of an aquaculture establishment who suspects fish, aquatic plant or aquaculture product in the aquaculture establishment to be infected with a disease shall notify an authorised officer.

    2)  The authorised officer shall, as soon as practicable, notify the Chief Fisheries Officer of the disease. 

    3) Where the Chief Fisheries Officer is satisfied that any fish, aquatic plants or aquaculture product in the aquaculture establishment is infected with any disease, the Chief Fisheries Officer shall, in consultation with the Commissioner responsible for Animal Health and the Fisheries Research Institute, give notice in writing to the owner or person in charge of the aquaculture establishment, requiring –

    a. the destruction of all fish, aquatic plants or aquaculture products in the establishment; or 

    b. the taking of such measures, as the Chief Fisheries Officer may specify in the notice.”

The justification is:

    1. To avoid restricting the provision to only epidemic diseases affecting fish, aquatic plants or aquaculture products, given the impact of any disease on the aquatic organisms, and ultimately on people.

    2. To ensure consistency with the clause 136 (2)(r) and (mm);

    3. To provide for the chronological flow of information relating to fish, aquatic plants or aquaculture product diseases to enhance clarity.

    4. To provide for the involvement of the Commissioner for Animal Health and NaFIRRI to ensure that the decision to destroy fish or aquatic plants in an aquaculture establishment is well informed. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister?

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 75 be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 75, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 76

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for substitution for the word “aquatic”, the word “aquaculture”.

The justification is to ensure consistency. I beg to move.

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 76 be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 76, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 77

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for deletion of clause 77. 

Justification

    1.  Provisions relating to refusal to grant a licence by a licensing officer and the appeal to the minister are already catered for under clause 39 and apply to all licences under the Bill. 

    2. The requirement for the aquaculture establishment to be in public interest has been provided for under clause 70, as one of the conditions for grant of an aquaculture activity licence. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister?

MS ADOA: Agreed, Madam Chairperson?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 77 be deleted, as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 77, deleted.

Clause 78  

MS OKORI-MOE: The proposal is for deletion of clause 78. The justification is that this is a function of the directorate, which has been transferred to clause 7 for proper chronological flow. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister?

MS ADOA: I concur with the chairperson, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question that clause 78 be deleted, as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 78, deleted.

Clause 79

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 79 to be amended -

    a. In subclause (1), by inserting the words “or any other purpose” immediately after the word “aquaculture”; and 

    b. By inserting a new subclause immediately after subclause (3) as follows:

“The Chief Fisheries Officer shall, before granting an import permit, require an applicant to carry out a risk assessment study, in respect of the fish to be imported.”

Justification

    1. The importation of live fish, regardless of the purpose, poses a risk on the biosafety and biosecurity of Uganda’s fisheries resources and, therefore, the prohibition should not be restricted to only live fish imported for purposes of aquaculture. 

    2. To ensure well controlled inputs of high quality genetics, which are key to local production of highly productive seed for competitive fish farming.

 I beg to move. 

MS ADOA: I Concede, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 79 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 79, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 80, agreed to.

Clause 81

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 81 to be amended -

    (a) by substituting for subclause (1), the following-
“(1) A person who intends to engage in production for sale and distribution or importation of aquaculture inputs, including fish seed, aquaculture feeds, aquaculture fertilisers, hormones or antibiotics for aquaculture use shall apply to the Chief Fisheries Officer for certification.” 

    (b) in subclause (2), by deleting the words “or establishment”.
    (c) by substituting for subclause (3), the following-
“(3) An application under this section shall be in a manner prescribed by regulations.” 

Justification

    1. To make the provision clear.

    2. The word “person” suffices.

    3. To broaden the application of subclause (3) to apply to all applications under the provision. 

I beg to move. 

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 81 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 81, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 82

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 82 to be substituted for the following -

“A person shall not use fish feeds in an aquaculture establishment that do not contain all the nutrients in the proportions required for optimum growth of the target fish as prescribed by regulations.”

Justification

It is for clarity.

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 82 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 82, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 83

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 83 to be substituted for the following -

“A person shall not use veterinary therapeutic products and medicinal premixes in fish feeds unless the veterinary therapeutic products and medicinal premixes are approved for use by the Chief Fisheries Officer, in consultation with the commissioner responsible for animal health.”

Justification 

It is for clarity.

The title “Chief Veterinary Officer” does not exist within the established structures. 

I beg to move.

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 83 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 83, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 84

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, there is a proposal to amend clause 4, in subclause (2) by substituting-

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is clause 84, not clause 4.

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, clause 84 is amended, in subclause (2), by substituting for the words “Chief Fisheries Officer”, the word “directorate”.

This is for clarity since the competent authority is the Directorate of Fisheries Resources, not the Chief Fisheries Officer. 

I beg to move

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 84 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 84, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 85

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 85 to be amended by substituting for the words “Every person or establishment”, the words “A person”. 

The justification is that this is for clarity since the use of the word “person” is adequate.

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 85 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 85, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 86

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 86 to be amended –

    (a) by substituting for subclause (2), the following -

“(2) The Chief Fisheries Officer shall prescribe –

(a) 	standards for hygienic and quality production of fish and fish products; and
(b) 	minimum standards for safety and quality assurance of fish and fish products.” 

(b) by inserting a new subclause immediately after subclause (3) as follows -

“The Chief Fisheries Officer shall ensure that the standards and conditions prescribed under this section are applied throughout the production, harvesting, handling, transportation, storage, processing and marketing of fish and fish products.”

This is for clarity and to require the Chief Fisheries Officer to ensure the application of the standards and conditions prescribed under the entire provision. 

I beg to move. 

MS ADOA: Madam Chairperson, I concede. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 86 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 86, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 87

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 87 to be substituted for the following -

“The Chief Fisheries Officer shall establish and maintain effective systems to detect and prevent commercial fraud of fish or fish products placed on the market in a manner prescribed by regulations.” 

The justification is that the requirement for a sanitary mark on every batch or consignment is an impediment to trade, given that fish and fish products placed on the market are processed in licensed facilities and are clearly labelled according to UNBS standard for labelling of prepackaged foods. 

I beg to move.

MS ADOA: I agree, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 87 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 87, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 88

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 88 to be amended by inserting the words “or fish products” immediately after the word “fish”. 

This is to broaden the provision to apply to fish products as well. 

I beg to move. 

MS ADOA: I agree, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 88 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 88, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 89

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 89 to be substituted for the following –

“The Chief Fisheries Officer and every district fisheries officer shall ensure that all steps in the supply chain for each batch or consignment of fish, fish products or raw material is clearly labelled and traceable to the supplier of the fish, fish products or raw material in the manner prescribed by regulations.”

Justification

For clarity and to remove the requirement for traceability of fish, fish products or raw material to customers since it is not practicable. I beg to move

Ms adoa: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

The Chairperson: I put the question that clause 89 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 89, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 90 

ms okori-moe: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 90 to be amended –

1) By substituting for subclause (2) the following:

“A person shall not process for export or attempt to export any fish or fish product unless the fish or fish product are processed in a fish processing establishment approved in accordance with this Act.”

2) By deleting subclause (4).”

Justification:

For clarity and the deletion of subclause (4) is to avoid duplication since inspection of fish and fish products before export by fisheries inspectors is provided for under clause 93. I beg to move.

Ms adoa: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

The Chairperson: I put the question that clause 90 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 90, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 91

Ms okori-moe: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 91 to be amended in subclause (1) by deleting the words, “or establishment.” In subclause (4), by substituting for the words, “an establishment” the words, “a person.” In subclause (5), by substituting for the words, “five thousand currency points” and “three years” the words, “two thousand five hundred currency points” and “two years,” respectively. 

Justification

The word “person” is adequate and the substitution of the currency points is to make the penalty commensurate to the prescribed offense. I beg to move.

Ms adoa: Agreed, Madam Chairperson. 

The Chairperson: I put the question that clause 91 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 91, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 92

Ms okori-moe: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 92 to be amended –

    a) In the headnote by deleting the words, “and therapeutants”.

    b) By substituting for subclause (1) the following:

“A person who engages in fisheries activity or aquaculture activity shall not be in possession of food additives, without the approval of the Chief Fisheries Officer.”

    c) By substituting for subclause (2) the following:

“A person shall not use permitted food additives in fish, fish products or aquaculture products in amounts exceeding the permissible levels prescribed by regulations.”

    d)  In subclause (3),

    i) by substituting for the words, “and fishery products” the words, “fish products or aquaculture products,”

    ii) By deleting the words, “prescribed by the chief fisheries officer.”

    e)  In subclause (4), by substituting the following:

“A person shall, where food additives are used in fish, fish products or aquaculture products, indicate in an indelible manner on the packaging of the fish, fish products or aquaculture products the type and name of the food additive used.”

    f) By inserting a new subclause immediately after subclause (5) as follows:

“The minister shall in making regulations under this section consult with the Uganda National Bureau of Standards and National Drug Authority.”

Justification:

    1) The word “therapeutants” is redundant since it is only used in the headnote. The use of therapeutic products is provided for under clause 83.

    2) Substitution is for clarity and specificity since the provision seeks to regulate the use of food additives used in fish, fish products and aquaculture products. 

    3) The deletion of the words “prescribed by the Chief Fisheries Officer” in subclause (3) is to avoid contradiction with subclauses (2) and (5), which empower the minister to prescribe, by regulations, permissible levels of food additives and the use of food additives in fish or fish products.

    4) To ensure efficacy of food additives used in fish, fish products or aquaculture products by requiring the minister to consult with the relevant standards agencies. I beg to move.

Mr aza: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. She talked about “permitted food additives” that should not be used in amounts exceeding the permissible levels prescribed by regulations. What about this fish that is found in Pakwach called “Angara” where they put a lot of salt? Can I get clarification about the same? Thank you. 

The Chairperson: Explain to Hon. Aza. 

Ms pacuto: Madam Chairperson, there are many ways of preserving fish. You can salt or smoke it. My brother here is just not knowledgeable about fish. (Laughter)

The Chairperson: Actually, he does not eat fish. 

Ms adoa: Agreed, Madam Chairperson. 

The Chairperson: I put the question that clause 92 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 92, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 93

Ms okori-moe: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 93 to be amended in subclause (1) by substituting for the words, “fish processing establishment,” the word “person.” This is for clarity since the word “person” is all-encompassing. I beg to move.

Ms adoa: Agreed, Madam Chairperson.

The Chairperson: I put the question that clause 93 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 93, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 94, agreed to.

Clause 95

Ms okori-moe: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 95 to be amended:

    a) In subclause (1) by substituting for the words “Chief Fisheries Officer,” the words, “District Fisheries Officer.” 

    b) In subclause (3), by inserting the words, “notwithstanding section 63 (1), the District Fisheries Officer shall keep a register of all licenced artisanal fish processing facilities.” This is to be put at the beginning of subclause (3). 

    c) By inserting a new subclause immediately after subclause (4) as follows: “The Chief Fisheries Officer shall prepare and publish in the Gazette the Code of Practice for safety and quality assurance in the artisanal fisheries sub-sector.”

    d) In subclause (5) by substituting for the words, “one thousand currency points” and “one year”, the words “one hundred currency points” and “six months” respectively. 

The justifications are: 

    1. To decentralise the licensing of artisanal fish processing facility to ease accessibility to the services. 

    2. To prevent conflict between the Chief Fisheries Officer and District Fisheries Officer given that clause 63(1) obligates the Chief Fisheries Officer to keep and maintain a register of licences, among others. 

    3. To be specific on who to prescribe the minimum hygiene requirements and the mode that ensures public awareness about the Code of Practice for Safety and Quality Assurance. 

    4. To make the penalty commensurate to the prescribed offence.

I beg to move. 

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 95 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 95, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 96

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 96 to be amended – 

    a. by substituting for subclause (3), the following - 

“(3) A person licensed under subsection (l) shall – 

    a. comply with the requirements prescribed in the regulations; and 

    b. before placing the fish maws on the market, ensure that fish maws meet the export and import requirements specified in regulations.”

(b) 	by deleting subclause (4); 
(c) 	by substituting for subclause (5), the following- 

“The minister shall, in consultation with relevant stakeholders, by regulations, prescribe conditions for storage and transportation of fish maws.” 

(d) 	by inserting a new clause immediately after subclause (5) as follows -

“A person who contravenes this section commits on offence and is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding five thousand currency points or to imprisonment not exceeding three years, or both.” 

The justifications are: 

    1. To ensure clarity and consistency with subclause (1). 

    2. Subclause (4) has been merged with subclause (3). 

    3. To enable the involvement of key stakeholders in the formulation of regulations for fish maws. 

    4. To make provision for a sanction by prescribing a penalty.

I beg to move. 

MR KAYONDO: Madam Chairperson, I consider this over-licensing because fish maw is part of the fish. We are licensing the trade fishing and a maw is one part of the fish; so I request that we delete clause 96 because we are already licensing the fish and fish maw is part of the fish. If not, let it carry the same licence, other than licensing the fish and then the fish products and parts of the fish. I think that is over-licensing. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, they are talking about the fish and its products. Its products are sold separately from the fish. It is like you are saying you buy a cow and you do not buy offal alone. It is just common sense. 

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 96 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 96, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 97
 
MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 97 to be substituted for the following – 

“97. Approval of ice producers for the fish industry 

The Chief Fisheries Officer shall approve producers of ice to the fishing industry which meet the conditions prescribed in the Manual of Standard Operating Procedures for Fish and Aquaculture Inspection and Quality Assurance issued by the Chief Fisheries Officer.” 

The justifications are given below and Members have been following. 

MS ADOA: Agreed, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 97 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 97, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 98, agreed to.

Clause 99 

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 99 to be amended in subclause (2) by inserting the words “in consultation with the relevant ministry, department or agency of government” immediately after the words “public officers”.

Members are well aware of the justification. 

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 99 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 99, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 100 

MS OKORI-MOE: The proposal is for clause 100 to be deleted and this is duly justified. 

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 100 be deleted as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 100, deleted.

Clause 101 

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to amend clause 101 as follows – 

    a. by substituting for subclause (l), the following - 

“(l) Where a vehicle, vessel or fishing gear is seized, impounded or confiscated and the owner, operator or hirer of the vehicle, vessel or fishing gear is charged with an offence under this Act, the owner, operator or hirer of the vehicle, vessel or fishing gear may apply to the court to release the vehicle, vessel or fishing gear.” 

    b. by substituting for subclause (3), the following- 

“(3) Where the owner, operator or hirer of the seized, impounded or confiscated vehicle, vessel or fishing gear does not apply for the release of the vehicle, vessel or fishing gear under subsection (l), the Chief Fisheries Officer or authorised officer may apply to a magistrate – 

(a)	for an order for the delivery of the vehicle, vessel or fishing gear to the owner, operator or hirer; or 
(b) 	if the owner, operator or hirer of the vehicle, vessel or fishing gear cannot be ascertained or found, order the vehicle, vessel or fishing gear to be sold by auction or destroyed.” 
(c) 	by inserting a new subclause immediately after subclause (3) as follows- 

“Where a magistrate makes an order for the sale of vehicle, vessel or fishing gear under subsection (3), the Chief Fisheries Officer shall cause a notice of the intention to sell the vehicle, vessel or fishing gear by auction to be published in the Gazette and in at least newspapers of national circulation.”

c) 	In subclause (4), by substituting the word “thirty” with the word “ninety”.
d) 	In subclause (5)(b) by substituting for the words “trailer or engineering plant”, the words “vessel or fishing gear”. 
e) 	by inserting a new subclause immediately after subclause (5) as follows:

 “Where, after applying the proceeds of sale under subsection (5), remains a balance from the proceeds of sale, the Chief Fisheries Officer shall pay the balance into the Consolidated Fund.”

This is justified very well below. I beg to submit. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hansard, you need to capture everything that is in the report and in the amendments, including what the chair is leaving out. 

(The report and amendments thereto shall appear as an appendix in the Hansard monthly bound volume of May 2022)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Under subclause (3), we need to specify the duration. We need to put something to cater for when the owner fails to come within this specific time. It is quite open and we do not know when the vehicle maybe sold under auction. I propose that we give it at least three months for the owner to come before any action is taken under subclause (3).

THE CHAIRPERSON: The justifications are:

    1. To achieve clarity and consistency. 

    2. To allow the due process before any sale or destruction of a vehicle or vessel or fishing gear. The due process will make you get the timeline that you need. 

MR OLANYA: On that note, the due process should be given a timeframe – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: The other justification is to allow reasonable time before the sale of a vehicle, vessel or fishing gear. 

MR OLANYA: You are right, Madam Chairperson, but if you find someone who is malicious – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Assuming the due process takes one year, and now you have specified three months, what will happen? 

MR OLANYA: This is why I am proposing that we need to specify the time. This is because when someone is malicious, you will take five years without – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, “reasonable time” is just good enough.

MS ADOA: Madam Chairperson, as the colleague has said, there are people who take advantage either to rush it or to keep postponing so that they sell your vehicle or motorcycle. We need to take care of that. Otherwise – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you proposing that you need a timeline? 

MS ADOA: It would be good to give them time to avoid the – there are people who look at your vehicle or motorcycle, which is still new -

MS AVUR: Additionally, Madam Chairperson, where this vehicle should be auctioned, it should be within the jurisdiction because they can take your vehicle from Packwach all the way to Kasese and you have very limited – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I thought that would come in the regulations.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, I am looking at clause 101 (3) and (4). It provides for a notice to be published in the Gazette and that the sale can only take place after 30 days. This is the practice even with the courts. Where property is attached, it is advertised in a newspaper of wide circulation – national coverage because you cannot advertise in Rupiny somewhere, when in Kyegegwa, they do not read it. Basically, we are following the practice of court. It is 30 days. It is here and very specific.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What have you agreed?

MS ADOA: Madam Chairperson, I am conceding, with the amendments that are going to be in the policies. These things are going to be in the regulation. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is going to be in the regulations. Chairperson finance, I know you know finance issues.

I put the question that clause 101 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 101, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 102

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 102 to be amended –

a) in subclause (1) -

 i. by substituting for paragraph (a) the following:
 
“Release the fish or perishable fish products on obtaining adequate security from the person from whom the fish or perishable fish products was seized”.

ii. 	In paragraph (b), by inserting the word “fish” immediately after the word “perishable”. 
iii. 	In paragraph (c) by deleting the words “or fisheries product”. 

b) 	by substituting for subclause (2) the following: 

“Where the fish is of a species listed in Appendix 1 to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of wild fauna and flora, the fish shall not be disposed of by way of sale.”

The justifications are lined up there, Madam Chairperson. I beg to move.

MS ADOA: I agree, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 102 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 102, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 103

MS OKORI-MOE: The proposal is to amend clause 103 –

    a) in subclause (1) by inserting the words “where practicable” immediately after the word “caught”. 

    b)  by deleting subclauses (3), (4) and (5). And it is well justified. I beg to move.

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 103 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 103, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 104

MS OKORI-MOE: The proposal is to amend clause 104 in subclause (1) by inserting the word “vehicle” immediately after the word “vessel” wherever the word appears, for consistency. I beg to move.

MS ADOA: I agree, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 104 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 104, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 105

MS OKORI-MOE: The proposal is for clause 105 to be amended –

a) 	by deleting paragraphs (b) and (c); and 

b) 	by substituting for the words “three thousand currency points”, the words “one thousand currency points”.

Madam Chairperson, it is well justified below. 

I beg to move.

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 105 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 105, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 106

MS OKORI-MOE: The proposal is for clause 106 to be amended –

    (a) by deleting paragraph (b);

    (b) In paragraph (e), by inserting the words “fish or” immediately after the word “any”;

    (c) by substituting for the words “five thousand currency points” and “three years” the words “one thousand currency points” and “one year” respectively. 

It is well justified and the honourable members are following. I beg to move. (Laughter)

MS ADOA: I agree with the honourable chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 106 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 106, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 107

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 107 to be amended in subclause (1), by substituting for the words “three thousand currency points” the words “one thousand currency points.”

This is to make it commensurate to the offence.

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 107 be amended as proposed. 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 107, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 108

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 108 to be amended –

    (a) by substituting for subclause (4) the following-

“(4) Subsections (1)(a) and (b) do not apply to the use of prohibited fish methods or gear for purposes of research in accordance with this Act.”

    (b) By deleting subclause (7).

It is well justified below. I beg to move.

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 108 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 108, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 109

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 109 to be amended –

    (a) in paragraph (a) by deleting the words “or injuries”, and;

    (b)  by substituting for paragraph (b), the following -

“(b) buys, sells, exposes for sale or is in possession of any undersize fish taken from any fishing water.”

    (c) by substituting for the words “ten thousand” and “seven years” the words “one thousand” and “three years” respectively, and;

    (d) by numbering the current provision as subclause (1) and, thereafter, insert a new subclause immediately after subclause (1) as follows-

“(2) In  addition to the penalty under subsection (1), court may order the person to make good any loss occasioned by paying an amount equivalent to the value for the undersize fish in question at the rate of permitted size, to court.”

Members are following the justification. I beg to move.

MR MAGOLO: In that section, we have the different types or species of fish which were outlined. There are those which are mature, but are small size, for example, mukene – those small ones. How are we catering for that kind of fish in view of the fishing gear and to ensure that they are not mixed up?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. John Faith, it is unfortunate that you came in a little early, but that is already covered in other clauses. 

MS ADOA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I concede.
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 109 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 109, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 110

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 110 to be amended in paragraph (a), by inserting the word “hazardous” immediately before the word “substance” appearing in line six.

The justification is that this is for clarify and specificity since the word “substance” is broad.

MR ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 110 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 110, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 111

MR OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 111 to be amended –

    (a) in paragraph (g), by deleting the words “answer questions or”, and;

    (b) by substituting for the words “three thousand” and “two years”, the words “one thousand” and “one year” respectively. 

It is well justified. I beg to move.

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 111 be amended at proposed.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 111, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 112, agreed to.

Clause 113

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 113 to be amended –

    (a) by substituting for paragraph (a), the following-

“(a) for supply of fish to a fish processing establishment for the export market, to a fine not exceeding two thousand currency points or imprisonment not exceeding one year or both for a first offence and a subsequent offence, a fine not exceeding three thousand currency points or to imprisonment not exceeding two years or both.”
 
    (b) In paragraph (b), by substituting for the words “two thousand” and “two years” the words “two hundred” and “six months” respectively. 

The justification is well laid out. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Minister?

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 113 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 113, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 114

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 114 to be amended –

    (a) in subclause (1), by inserting the word “authorised” immediately before the word “officer” appearing in the first line, and;

    (b) by substituting for the words “ten thousand currency points”, the words “two hundred forty currency point”.

The justification is there: one is to harmonise the penalty with the penalty prescribed for the related offence under the Anti-Corruption Act, 2009.

I beg to move.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, it is our considered opinion that this clause should be deleted because the offence is already catered for in other laws. To make matters worse, it goes ahead to prescribe certain currency points, contrary to what the law provides and the powers given to the judicial officers while enforcing that law. 

So, I am of the view that clause 114 should be deleted. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister?

MS ADOA: I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question that clause 114 be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 114, deleted.

Clause 115 agreed to.

Clause 116

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 116 to be amended:

    a. In paragraphs (a) and (b), by deleting the words “or fisheries inspector” and 

    b. By substituting for the words “two thousand” and “three years”, the words “one thousand” and “one year” respectively. 

The justifications are well laid under there. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister?

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 116 be amended, as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 116, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 117

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 117 to be amended by deleting the words “a fisheries inspector”. 

The justification is very clear, to avoid repetition.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister?

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put a question that clause 117 be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 117, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 118

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 118 to be amended by substituting for the words “five thousand” and “five years”, the words “one thousand” and “one year” respectively. This is to make it commensurate to the offence.
I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General, are you okay with that? Okay.

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 118 be amended, as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 118, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 119

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 119 to be amended by deleting subclause (1). 

The justification is there. It is redundant. I beg to move.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, it is our considered opinion that the committee proposal be rejected and we maintain the clause in the Bill; our justification being that a continuing offence is substantially different from a subsequent offence. A continuing offence is a type of offence that continues uninterrupted over a period of time, while a subsequent offence is a new offence being repeated – of the same offence, but being repeated.

The person charged with a subsequent offence is being charged with a crime and has been previously convicted of the same crime, as opposed to a continuing offence.

I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what are you suggesting? 

MR KAFUUZI: I am suggesting that we maintain the clause in the Bill. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister?

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson, with that amendment of the Attorney-General.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 118 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.) 

Clause 118 agreed to.

Clause 119, agreed to.
 
Clause 120

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 120 to be amended:

    a. In paragraph (a), by substituting for the words “five thousand”, the words “one thousand”;

    b. In paragraph (b), by substituting for the words “fifty thousand”, the words “ten thousand".

This is to make it commensurate to the offence. I beg to move.

MR KAFUUZI: I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister?

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 120 be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 120, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 121

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 121 to be amended in subclause (1): 
(a) By substituting for the words “by which a person is convicted”, the words “which convicts a person”;
(b) Paragraph (b), by inserting the words “fish or”, immediately after the word “take”. 

The justification is to make the provision clearer and for consistency.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister?

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put a question that clause 121 be amended, as proposed.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 121, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 122, agreed to.

Clause 123, agreed to.

Clause 124, agreed to.

Clause 125, agreed to.

Clause 126, agreed to.

Clause 127 

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for the deletion of clause 127 and the justification is below. I beg to move.

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question that clause 127 be deleted as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 127, deleted.


Clause 128

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 128 to be deleted. It is a consequential amendment arising from clause 127’s deletion.

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question that clause 128 be deleted as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 128, deleted.

Clause 129

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to delete clause 129. This is consequential to the deletion of clause 127. I beg to move.

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question that clause 129 be deleted as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 129, deleted.

Clause 130, agreed to.

Clause 131 

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 131 to be amended in subclause (2), by inserting the word “resources” immediately after the word “fisheries” to ensure consistent usage of the phrase. I beg to move. 

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question that clause 131 be amended as proposed? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 131, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 132

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 132 to be amended by inserting the words “research and training institutions” immediately before the word “relevant”. The justification is clear and Members are comfortable with it. I beg to move.

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question that clause 132 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 132, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 133 

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 133 to be amended in subclause (1) by inserting the words “relating to the licence or permit.” The justification is clear. I beg to move.

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question that clause 133 be amended as proposed? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 133, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 134, agreed to.

Clause 135, agreed to.

Clause 136

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is that clause 136 be amended –

        (a) In subclause (1) by inserting the words “in consultation with the relevant stakeholders” immediately after the word “may”;

        (b)  In subclause (2) –

            (i) by deleting paragraph (a); 

            (ii) in paragraph (b) by inserting the words “fishing activities at the” immediately before the word “landing,”;

            (iii)  in paragraph (m) by substituting for the words “better providing for recreational fishing” the words “sustainable management of fisheries resources.”

            (iv) in paragraph (aa) by inserting the words “transportation and storage of baits” immediately after the word “fishing”. 

            (v) in paragraph (cc) by inserting the words “and artisanal fish processing facilities” immediately after the word “establishment”;

            (vi)  in paragraph (II), by inserting the words “any specie of fish or” immediately after the word “any”;


            (vii)  by inserting a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (II) as follows: “permitted by-catch or non-target fish species”. 

(c)	In subclause (4)

(i) 	in paragraph (c) by substituting for the words “ten thousand” and “seven years” the words “one thousand” and “three years” respectively;

(ii) 	in paragraph (d) by substituting for the words “one thousand” the words “five hundred”;

 (iii) 	in paragraph (e) by substituting for the words “twenty thousand” the words “two thousand”. 

(d)	By inserting three new subclauses immediately after subclause (4) as follows: “The minister shall present the regulations made under subsection (2)(e), (i), (o), (u), (w), (x), (y), (z), (aa) and (bb) to Parliament for approval.

Parliament shall approve the regulations under subsection (5) within thirty days from the date of presenting the regulations.

Where Parliament does not approve the regulations within the prescribed period, the regulations shall be deemed approved.” 

The justifications are clearly laid out. 
Madam Chairperson, I beg to submit.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, just one further amendment –  and I invite the chairperson of the committee to agree with me. Let us include paragraph (v) among laws and regulations to be subjected to parliamentary approval; since it talks about equitable sharing of fisheries resources. We cannot leave that equitable sharing of fisheries resources to regulations, which is very discretionary without the people’s representatives scrutinising it. So I invite the chairperson and the minister to concede, just paragraph (v).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, assuming the House is in recess or we are transiting from one Parliament to the other, does one month still stand? Will you take it as approved?

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, the presumption is that by the time the minister submits, Parliament is sitting and the days begin to count or run from then onwards. So if I submit today and the Parliament goes into recess, ideally the days continue until- because I do not envisage a scenario where Parliament is in recess for a whole month; 30 days are a whole month.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not agree with that, as a presiding officer.  Because you should not take or presume like it has been approved. Let us put 60 days; 60 days are appropriate. Yes, “within 60 days”, it can even be in two days. Can you move the amendment?

MR ISABIRYE: Madam Chairperson, I move the amendment that let us move from 30 days to 60 days. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question to that clause. 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, I would like us to be clear on something. Usually, regulations come to Parliament. Parliament does not debate them. We have given a leeway to the minister to make them. If we make it impracticable for the minister, we either make it too long a period or we delay to approve. The presumption is, either way they will pass. 

Therefore, I would propose we maintain the 30 days, but make sure that the committee to which – (Interjections) – 

The Chairperson: We have some very unavoidable circumstances where you cannot. Just put yourself in the scenario we went through when we lost the Rt Hon. Speaker. Would you continue counting the 30 days? We are saying “within.” It can be one or two days.

Mr kafuuzi: I do not want to sound unreasonable, but the regulations would be sent to the committee, which can sit even during recess. It would be considered as one of the urgent matters of the committee.

The Chairperson: The committee has to report to Parliament. Now, I am talking as a presiding officer. 

Mr wokorach: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We want to appreciate very much the guidance from the Attorney-General and it is from the technical perspective. However, how I wish he considered your guidance based on the justification, which has been very clear. I submit.

The Chairperson: Concede. It is within. It can even be one day.

Mr kafuuzi: Before I concede, Madam Chairperson, the regulations may be made with an urgent matter in mind that the minister intends to address. We are stretching it to 60 days. This matter will go on and on until after the 60 days.

The Chairperson: So, what are you suggesting?

Mr kafuuzi: I am of the view that we maintain the 30 days.

The Chairperson: Can we put it to vote?

Mr kafuuzi: If we put it on a vote, I can see the weighing scale is not in my favour - (Laughter) - Okay, I concede.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, within 60 days - I put the question that clause 136 be amended as proposed by the committee and further amendments by Hon. Niwagaba Wilfred and Hon. Iddi Isabirye.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 136, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 137, agreed to.

Clause 138, agreed to.

Clause 139, agreed to.

Clause 140, agreed to.

Clause 4 

Ms okori-moe: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is that clause 4 be amended –

    a) in the definition of “aquaculture activity”

    i) by deleting the words “commercial fish farming”; and 

    ii) by substituting for the word “omission” the word, “provision.” 

    b) In the definition of “aquaculture establishment” by inserting the words, “but does not include a personal aquarium” at the end of the provision.

    c) By deleting the definition of the phrase “aquaculture facility.”

    d) In the definition of “Directorate” by substituting for the words, “established by the Ministry of Public Service,” the words “existing in the ministry.”

    e) By deleting the definition of the phrase “fish processing facility.”

    f) By substituting for the definition of “Fisheries Research Institute,” the following:

“Fisheries Research Institute’ means the National Fisheries Resources Research Institute established under the National Agricultural Research Act, 2005.”

    g) In the definition of the word “fishing” -

    i) by inserting the word “attracting” immediately after the word “catching”;

    ii) by deleting the word “killing.”

    h) In the definition of “fisheries activity” –

    i) substituting for the words “fisheries products” the words “fish products” and thereafter wherever the words appear in the Bill;

    ii) by substituting for the word “boat” the words “fishing vessel.”


    iii) by substituting for the words “fish storage facility” the word “fish processing establishment.”

i) 	By substituting for the definition of “fishing vessel” the following –

“‘Fishing vessel’ means any craft, raft or boat used for fishing, but does not include a vessel used for -

    a) the transport of fish or aquaculture, and
    b) local fishing.”

    (j) In the definition of “foreign fishing vessel”, by substituting for the word “neighbouring” the word “foreign.”
    (k) In the definition of “gear”, by substituting for the word “gear”, the words “fishing gear,” and thereafter wherever the word appears in the Bill.

    (l) By substituting for the definition of “local fishing” the following: 

“‘Local fishing’ means fishing without a license fishing vessel where fish is caught for consumption by the person engaging in the fishing.”

    (m) By inserting the following new definitions in their appropriate alphabetical order: 

“‘Committee’ means the Fisheries and Aquaculture Advisory Committee established under section 9.

‘Licensing officer’ means the Chief Fisheries Officer or a District Fisheries Officer.

‘Ministry’ means the ministry responsible for fisheries.”

The justifications are all arranged under there and they are very clear and elaborate. I beg to move. 

Mr kafuuzi: Madam Chairperson, I do not rise to object to the proposals. However, I wish to add that in clause 43, the committee introduced the word “mongers”, which was brought on board to replace “trade” - to make “trade licence” into “monger’s licence.” I am of the view that the word “mongers” be placed under clause 4 and defined. 

“’Monger’ means an individual who holds a licence to trade in fish products or issued by the Chief Fisheries Officer.” Also, “mongers” needs to be distinguished between mongers (plural) and mongers (the individual holder of the licence). 

Therefore, I would like that, if it is acceptable, we leave that to the drafts people to see how best they can put it. I beg to submit. 

MS ADOA: I concede, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 4 be amended as proposed by the committee and the Deputy Attorney-General. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clause 10 - recommittal? 

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, the motion for recommittal comes after the Committee of the whole House has reported – and I will move it after. 

Schedule
THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the schedule stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Schedule, agreed to.

Title

MR MIGADDE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to move this last amendment. Uganda is part of the East African Community and the committee ably presented that the Fifth Special Session of the Lake Victoria Fisheries Organisation Council of Ministers approved the establishment and operationalisation of the Fish Levy Trust Fund and urged member states to put in place legislations. The old law had the Fish Levy Trust Fund and the new law seeks to repeal it. 

However, when you look at the report of the committee, the committee was concerned that the Fish (Amendment) Act, 2011 introduced the Fish Fund, which the Bill is repealing without providing for an alternative. 
The committee recommends that Government should ensure adequate allocation of financial resources to support all these. So, you cannot do this minus these resources.

I would like to move that any fees received by the Chief Fisheries Officer or an authorised licensing officer from the issuing of licences and permits and other fisheries activities, under this Act, shall be retained by the Department of Fisheries Resources in a fund established for the purpose. 

Let us be in line with the East African Community. The good thing is that we have the minister in charge of economic monitoring here. He has to monitor the economy of the fisheries sector. So, we should support this. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What are you saying? 

MR MIGADDE: My proposal is that we should set up the Fish Levy Trust Fund, like it is in Kenya – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does it have an effect on Article 93 of the Constitution? 

MR MIGADDE: Madam Chairperson, it is already in place. The old law recognises it, but finance – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it in the old law? 

MR MIGADDE: Yes. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But you have repealed the old law. So, you should introduce it afresh.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I know where Hon. Migadde is coming from, but it has been our practise that moving substantive amendments – when we are considering Bills – is not a good practice because some of these amendments need to be studied. For example, we need to study its effect on the Public Finance Management Act – that is already here – and the Constitution. 

I know that it is an important amendment, but bringing it in the middle of enacting a law in the House - I think it is so substantive that the committee should have considered this so that the whole House is not ambushed to make a fundamental decision when we are legislating. 

There is still some time. So, I suggest that this can stay and, probably, come in another amendment at a later stage when the committee has considered it and studied what it is going to be. This is because we are now talking about people collecting money – the licensing fees. We would want to know what the effect would be on those collecting and people who are paying. 

So, while it is important, it should be discussed in the committee and brought properly as an amendment to the Bill. 

MR MIGADDE: Madam Chairperson, the committee has actually studied this and they are reporting on it, only that they are not recommending it. On page 22, they say: “The committee was concerned that the Fish (Amendment) Act, 2011 introduced the Fish Fund which the Bill is repealing without providing for an alternative.” 

Therefore, it is not that the committee did not know. This minister cannot move – she has no resources to do fisheries activities. All this that we are proposing here will not be implemented – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Robert, that is a very good idea to get a fisheries fund. However, let us pass this Bill and then you bring it in the subsequent amendment, it goes to the committee and comes through the normal process other than ambushing Members on the Floor. I think that is what we should do.  

I put a question that the Title stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

9.09 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Hellen Adoa): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

9.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Hellen Adoa): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, ”The Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill, 2021” and has passed  clauses 1 to 140 with amendments.
 
MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

9.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Hellen Adoa): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the House adopts the report of the Committee of the whole House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.
9.11
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I move under the provisions of rule 138, for a motion to recommit clause 10, which has been passed, but ought to have been deleted as a consequential amendment under clause 9. Clause 11, which was an insertion, but forgot to make a provision on removal from office in respect of a person who has been sentenced to -

THE SPEAKER: Which clause are you recommitting?

MR NIWAGABA: Clause 10 and clause 11 which was inserted – 

THE SPEAKER: No, it was only clause 10 that you said you were recommitting. 

MR NIWAGABA: Then clause 11 was by the Attorney-General -

THE SPEAKER: No, it is clause 10. 

MR NIWAGABA: Okay, I abandon that. Then there is also another clause 87 where we use the word “fraud” - that commercial fraud on fish instead of commercial adulteration. To substitute the word “adulteration” with the word “fraud”; just that. I beg to move. I hope I am seconded.

THE SPEAKER: Is the recommittal seconded? Seconded by Hon. Ethel, Hon. Dennis, Hon. Abed, by Masaba, Hon. Fred and Hon. Aza. Please speak to your recommittal.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE BILL, 2021

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chair, in considering clause 9 of the Bill, we did provide that the Chief Fisheries Officer would instead be the secretary of the committee and yet clause 10 which was retained gives the minister power to designate an officer to be the secretary of the committee. This becomes a direct contradiction. Therefore, my motion is to have clause 10 deleted as a consequential amendment. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 10 be deleted as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10 deleted.

MR NIWAGABA: In respect of clause 87, the word used, “fraud”, you cannot commit fraud on fish. So instead of the word “fraud” we use the word “adulteration”. So, substitute the words “commercial fraud” with the words “commercial adulteration” for grammatical clarity.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that clause 87 be amended as proposed by Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 87, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

9.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Hellen Adoa): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE.

9.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Hellen Adoa): Madam Speaker, the Committee of the whole House has deleted clause 10 and amended clause 87. 

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

9.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Hellen Adoa): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the House adopts the report of the Committee of the Whole House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE BILL, 2021

9.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Hellen Adoa): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill, 2021” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill, 2021 be read the third time and do pass. 
(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT TITLED THE FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE ACT, 2022.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill passed and title settled. (Applause) Congratulations, members. 

Honourable members, the Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill, 2021 had a record of 109 amendments out of 140 clauses in the Bill. And that is 78 per cent. Such extensive surgery on the Bill implies inadequate pre-legislative studies and scrutiny. This leads to a severe modification of a Bill. And sometimes it has implications. Such implications are not really necessary and are not called for. 

If we are repealing the whole Bill, we repeal it other than saying we are going for an amendment. Of course, you know, by law, we are not supposed to go beyond 50 per cent. I request you, Members, next time, do not do that. It is the first time, but next time do not do that. 

Otherwise, I would like to congratulate you. For us to have better legislation, effectiveness and efficiency and responsibility, we need to do things the right way. Attorney-General, I hope next time you will advise your people correctly because we will not receive any Bill like this anymore. 

Congratulations, Chair and committee, minister, all the front bench and all the Members of Parliament and the Shadow Attorney-General. The whole team on my left, I want to congratulate all of you. Our UPDF personnel thank you for staying up to this time. We will organise a birthday for you. (Laughter) 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, thank you very much for being in the House this late. I want to thank everybody. And once more, congratulations. Chair, do you have something to say?

9.20
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Janet Okori-Moe): Madam Speaker, I want to sincerely appreciate all of us for being very resilient and for passing this long-awaited law. It has not been easy to process because this is one of the sectors that attracted the largest number of petitions on the Floor of the House. 

I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for being a very resilient Speaker, sitting from 2.00 p.m. to consider all the amendments. I want to thank all of you and I want to thank members of the committee on agriculture. It was not easy. Amid these many challenges, we now have something to be proud of. Thank you very much. 

I want to thank my ministers, the front bench, the Attorney-General and the Prime Minister, thank you very much. The Shadow Attorney-General, thank you for being very active. (Laughter) It is the reason you are there. Thank you very much.

9.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Hellen Adoa): Madam Speaker, allow me also from the bottom of my heart to sincerely thank the Rt Hon. Speaker, the committee especially the chairperson who kept calling me – like this morning. Allow me thank the shadow ministers who stood with us. 

I would like to thank my colleagues: the Attorney-General, Hon. Bahati, the Prime Minister and all of you honourable members. Time has gone, but the sacrifice you put, your children and partners have already slept, but you sacrificed for this Bill. (Applause)

This is a subsector next to coffee and if we do very well with this Bill and implement what we are going to agree, we are going to surpass the coffee subsector in this country.

Fisheries is only not attended to and it is not given enough money, but if the fisheries subsector is given money, we can be able to do everything that this country needs. Thank you all of you who have been patient with us. God bless you. 

9.23
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, minister, the chairperson, members, shadow ministers and all the colleagues, thank you very much for your time. You have been here to see that this Bill is passed. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much. I adjourn the House to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House roes at 9.24 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 4 May 2022 at 2.00 p.m.)

