


Tuesday, 8 May 2018

Parliament met at 2.46 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is a pleasure to be with you today and I welcome you to this sitting. I thank all of you for the work you have been doing in the committees and elsewhere. 

I would like to formally inform you about the death of two prominent Ugandans in the recent past, among whom were Members of the first Parliament, namely the late hon. Kham Karegyesa and the late Dr Akbar Adoko Nekyon who died last week. We shall be paying tribute to them. However, now I would like us to rise for a moment of silence in their honour.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have been undertaking a number of both local and international activities but today I would like to report on the domestic activities. In the last few months, I have toured the constituencies of Mitooma, Lyantonde, Buhweju, Kagadi and Kamuli. However, one of the issues running throughout is the issue of domestic violence against women. 

In one district I was informed that during the harvest season, violence and killing of women is more. Therefore, I would like to ask that we intensify sensitisation against domestic violence and also ask the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Police to pay attention to this matter but also to ask the victims to come forward.

The second common area is the lack of water, both for humans and animals, especially in the districts found in the cattle corridor. Honourable members, as we go to the Budget, let us keep in mind the needs of the population and the fact that water is very vital for our people. It is also one of the causes of domestic violence because if the women are late as a result of collecting water, the men think they are having affairs and they really beat them and their children.

Therefore, I would like to ask that we take special interest in water so that we can give support to the welfare of the women of Uganda. I also hope that if we do that, we can make a difference in their livelihood but also meet the SDGs. It is just a few years left; I do not know whether we shall have been able to satisfy the people of Uganda on the issue of water.

The third issue is the inadequacy of the Women Entrepreneurs’ Fund. You were in Ssembabule and you heard how many women in Uganda have benefited from that fund. We think that efforts should be made to step it up so that more people are able to benefit from it at the earliest opportunity.

The other issue is transport for the district women councillors. The women district council leaders have to work in the district and they are working on foot. Therefore, I hope that the Government can also look at their contribution and facilitate them to move; maybe with motorcycles.

As I said, I will deal with the other issues tomorrow. However, I would like to reiterate to the sessional committees that have pending Bills in this House that I would want you to finish them before the close of the Second Session. I do not want to see any Bill crossing into the Third Session. You know yourselves; I do not want to name you. Therefore, please work quickly so that these Bills close with the Second Session and we move to other work in the Third Session.

Honourable members, in the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery, we have hon. Beatrice Lagada, former Member of Parliament for Oyam District. She is here to observe proceedings and she has come with some of her friends; they are all very welcome. Thank you very much for coming. (Applause)

I will briefly give an opportunity to hon. Luttamaguzi and hon. Kibalya to raise matters of national concern.

2.53
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Madam Speaker, before I present a matter of national importance, I would like to thank you. Two months back, I made a presentation here about the President’s pledge to Semuto Health Centre IV of an ambulance. I would like to report to you that today the ambulance has arrived. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, I rise up on a matter of national importance regarding the 44 villages of Nakaseke South constituency, specifically in the sub-counties of Semuto and Nakaseke, which were heavily hit by hailstones. Very many homes and gardens were destroyed.

Two week ago, I came here and reported this and the Government had assured us that they would be working on that matter but up to now, nothing has been done. It is my humble prayer that Government can commit itself because last time they told us that within a week, they would be attending to us but up to now, nothing has come.

Therefore, it is my humble prayer that Government can come to the rescue of the people of Nakaseke South, specifically the sub-counties of Semuto and Nakaseke. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS KAROORO OKURUT: Madam Speaker, I would like to give the honourable member information. I wrote to the honourable member giving him an update and I wish I had a copy here, which I would lay on the Table. Therefore, I am just saying, please have some patience. I put all the facts in the letter and said that Nakaseke will be considered. We know that as we talk, the rains are ravaging many parts of Uganda and there are many disasters. However, we have put in our submission and as soon as we go through, Nakaseke will be on the list. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. No, the minister has responded.

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Mr Speaker, I would like to know how soon is soon because that is what they have been telling us. Thank you.

2.55
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I raise on matters of national importance. I celebrated the International Labour Day in St Mary’s Hospital, Lacor and while there, we received a lot of information regarding the challenges of health service delivery. The influx of refugees in northern Uganda has brought a big burden on most healthcare units in northern Uganda and Lacor Hospital requested me to present a petition to Government.

For the last 15 years, they have been receiving Shs 600 million but to date, the burden is too much and they request Government to add an additional Shs 900 million to help contain the challenges of influx of refugees from South Sudan.

I pray that the prayer is taken care of and I lay this petition on the Table. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Can you think and let us know what we can do about this issue? Of course no one planned for the refugees.

2.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This has been a challenge to us generally in the health sector and we have had discussions with our partners. Something is being worked on.

You are aware that UNHCR supports the refugee population in this country but they provide the support separately without going through the Ministry of Health. 

We now have a committee that has been working closely with our partners to see how to increase funding, not only to our hospitals but also to the other Private Not-For-Profit Providers (PNFPs) that are supporting the refugee population. 

Madam Speaker, allow me at an appropriate time, to come and give an update to this House. 

2.58
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am raising an issue of national importance concerning the security of the people of Kerua Sub-County in Yumbe District.

Whereas we have an amended Refugee Act to the Refugee Act, 2006 that stipulates that all refugees that come to Uganda must be formally registered and settled in camps and that those who want to settle on their own are supposed to seek permission from Government on where they are supposed to be settled and from time to time, they are supposed to report their presence, the Department of Immigration and Citizenship does not take this seriously. The whole of Kerua Sub-County has illegal refugee settlers and this has posed a lot of challenges.

Information from the locals is that most of those who have settled in Kerua Sub-County are those whose relatives are in the bush fighting the South Sudan Government. During the day, they mix with the local population in civilian clothes and once they hear you talking against their move, they will come for you during the night. On Saturday, they shot King John, a businessman in Kerua Sub-County trading centre. This is the sixth time that they have killed people there. 

In August last year, I raised an issue here about my counterpart on the South Sudan side bordering my constituency who came to see his relatives. He was shot 10 metres away from the police post at around 7.15 p.m. Last Saturday’s incident also happened at around 7.45 p.m. in the trading centre.

Therefore, my plea is that the Department of Immigration and Citizenship should go and evict those people. They should be registered and settled. The problem is that once they come, they settle in your land and you cannot complain because of fear. The challenge is that there are three entry points in Kerua but the army is only stationed in one; the others are left open. As such, those who come in are not checked and have settled there. 

Therefore, my prayers are that Government should undertake a comprehensive registration of the refugees and formally settle them in refugee settlements. The locals should be left to stay alone. 

Secondly, those two other points, which are left without check points, should be taken care of because those could be entry points for arms, which can also cause problems. Thank you, Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are about to appoint a select committee to examine some of those issues but in the meantime, we would like to ask the Ministry of Internal Affairs to address the issue of security of the people and about the refugees of Kerua Sub-County in Yumbe District and give us an update.

3.02
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Jeje Odongo): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. On the issues that my colleague has raised, I would hasten to add that in order to answer that question in isolation would be unfair to my colleagues because I have indicated that tomorrow I will be giving a comprehensive statement on the status of security in this country, including incidents of this nature.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us await the minister’s statement then we can debate.

3.02
MR Henry Kibalya (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter concerning the distribution of citrus seedlings by Operation Wealth Creation. On several occasions, the President has visited our areas and the complaint that has always come up has been about importing seedlings from different districts into mother districts yet those respective districts have nursery operators.

This has been happening for long and it is very disappointing. During this last season, in Kamuli, people invested money in setting up nursery beds for a variety of citrus fruits. However, seedlings were instead imported from Luweero, Masaka and other areas leaving those people who had invested a lot of money in these nurseries. 

The people are very disappointed because they have invested a lot of money but up to now, seedlings are being imported from different districts to our home district. For example, you cannot know which type of oranges have been brought from elsewhere. They are simply loaded on a vehicle and it is hard to know whether it is Hamlin or Washington –(Interruption) 

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my good colleague for giving me way. The information I would like to give is that you are not the only ones suffering. The whole of Teso sub-region is witnessing the same thing. We do not know where these seedlings are being brought from. 

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, the situation of having our districts receiving seedlings that come from areas we do not know - Others say that they could be Cuban seedlings. This is very disappointing and we need the Government to pronounce itself –(Member timed out.)

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we have received this complaint of lack of local content and we understand it. We hope that this problem can be solved in the next financial year because NAADS had prequalified companies and those who are not prequalified cannot supply NAADS. 

However, we have said that beginning with the next financial year - and I think this month they are putting out an advert - local companies in the districts will be given the first priority to supply in those districts. Therefore, we encourage companies –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I am seeking from the honourable minister is to the effect that I have been to Kamuli, Mayuge and Namutumba districts and there are serious nursery bed operators there. Why didn’t you prequalify people from those districts so that the people there can get this money? I have seen these nursery beds myself. What are you talking about, honourable minister? 

By the way, I raised an issue in the 9th Parliament when I asked why it is that – and this issue was also raised by hon. Otto - whenever it is Christmas and Easter time, cows in the other regions are declared diseased apart from the ones from Ankole. 

Therefore, the honourable minister should clarify where the seedlings are coming from and what the conditions are for the pre-qualification.

MR FUNGAROO: I would like to seek further clarification. Madam Speaker, the issue of these seedlings comes in the spirit of Operation Wealth Creation (OWC). They were expected to supply Operation Wealth Creation in order to create wealth for themselves and as such, failing to supply means that they are creating poverty for themselves. 

How is Operation Wealth Creation going to create poverty in one area and wealth in another? For whom is this wealth being created? Who are the beneficiaries of the wealth created by Operation Wealth Creation when we have poverty created as a result of discrimination in pre-qualification of suppliers?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, appreciate what the minister has said; that some companies were pre-qualified. However, we think that policy should not be used to violate Article 40 of the Constitution on the economic rights of the population. (Applause) 

In this financial year, whether they are pre-qualified or not, allow the local people to supply because they are entitled to that money. (Applause) Many times the products that come are of poor quality and tired so they just wither. Therefore, honourable minister, the districts must supply as long as they are available. Thank you.

3.09
MR OJARA OKIN (Independent, Chua West County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter I would like to raise concerns the issue of land in Kitgum District where we have had the involvement of the Ministry of Defence and the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF). 

Madam Speaker, a piece of land situated in Akwang Sub-County was given to the Ministry of Defence in the 1980s so that they could establish a military barracks. Recently, the Ministry of Defence has gone ahead to compensate the land owners. Unfortunately, together with the lawyer who is concerned with compensation, the ministry has gone ahead to pick an additional 192 acres of land on top of the previous one that was given to them. This is displacing the people who have been surrounding the barracks.

Secondly, we have had a situation of two council resolutions; one in Orom Sub-County and the other of the district council professing clearly to the Ministry of Defence that there is no land in a place called Orom being given for a military barracks. Unfortunately, in defiance of the position of the council, recently the Ministry of Defence went there and threatened the local people to vacate this land measuring four square miles so that they can establish an army barracks. This is a very serious issue; the matter of the first and second pieces of land. 

My prayer is that the minister comes with a comprehensive statement on the matter of these two pieces of land; one on the issue of the compensation that is going on and the additional 192 acres that was fraudulently given. Secondly - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members. This is not a debate.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give is to support the matter of national importance that our colleague has raised. I have just returned from Arua this morning and yesterday I had a meeting with the Chairman, Local Council V alongside one of the district councillors representing a sub-county called Arivu where Bondo Army Barracks is located. This councillor had brought information to the chairman to the effect that the locals were about to go up in arms to fight with the UPDF. The reason was that the UPDF had expanded the boundary of their barracks, swallowing primary schools in the neighbourhood as well as people’s farms forcefully. 

Therefore, the information that the honourable member has raised is truly a matter of national importance that this Parliament must demand the Minister of Defence to bring a comprehensive report to Parliament that we can debate. If there is need for barracks to be expanded, they should use a formal procedure. If private land is going to be brought on board, there should be a mechanism for compensation but not because people are wearing army uniform, they can take up people’s land for free. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. There was a matter, which hon. Anywarach raised, which may not need to wait for the statement. He has brought to my attention something, which is happening around the refugees. Please inform the minister.

3.13
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My information is that refugees from Congo and South Sudan are gaining access to our national identity card registration process. The danger is that we made a law in this Parliament that recognises the national identity card as your voting right and, therefore, once they access our national identity card registration process and they attain the national identity card, they are actually violating the voting rights of Ugandans. 

That may not come in your security report but it is a very serious matter that may require that we amend the National Registration Act so that we go back to the other process where if we are supposed to vote, the voters’ register should have been validated and that one should have a voter’s card. We should separate voters’ cards from national identification cards. Short of that, all these multitudes of refugees we are having in this country may become voting machines. 

Madam Speaker, assuming that you or hon. Otto or any other person in this Parliament contests for presidency tomorrow, somebody who has either imported these refugees or has been so good to allow them to access our national identity card registration process will have an upper hand. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: That is a very serious issue and I hope that the Office of the Prime Minister will examine the possibility of these people registering and having our national identity cards. It can have substantial effect on our work and our planning so please come back to us with a statement. 

In addition, the Ministry of Defence should come and update us regarding the land in Orom, which the population is complaining about. 

3.15
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 1st May, two people were swept by floods in my constituency and up to now, their bodies have not been recovered. Just yesterday, a person was trapped in a landslide and over 20 families have been displaced. The landslides have blocked roads, swept away homes and over 200 people are now displaced.

Madam Speaker, the affected areas are in Buhumira and Maliba sub-counties and as I speak, they are burying the person who died yesterday as a result of being trapped in the landslides.

I would like to bring this to the attention of the Minister for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees that the communities that have been displaced are in dire need of shelter and food. In addition, the Ministry of Works should see how they can re-open the roads that have been blocked by River Rwimi. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to seek the indulgence of your chair to see how the people can be rescued.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we know about the issue of floods, we expect them, they always happen but they happen and we do nothing. When are we going to solve the issue of these floods and landslides? We know when they are coming and they happen, people die and life goes on.

3.17
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER  (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Mary Karooro Okurut): Madam Speaker, every morning the Disaster Department sits and gets information on whatever is happening in the country disaster-wise. I know these should be learning lessons but I know that hon. Nzoghu’s situation has been brought to Disaster Department and I can assure him that we are handling it. Thank you.

Madam Speaker, this very matter was handled in Cabinet yesterday. We discussed it at - (Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you. Madam Speaker, this information is to answer your question. You said that we know that floods occur and what the minister is saying here is that weather predictions are made, people are informed, even Government departments are informed that floods and landslides are coming but nothing is done.

In Obongi, we have had this situation. I wrote to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and copied you, Madam Speaker, about a plan to prevent floods in Waka Parish, Itula Sub-County, Obongi County, Moyo District. This time I am telling you that our efforts were frustrated by the district. The district received new road equipment, UNRA has new equipment parked in Obongi, we wrote to them that floods are coming, give us the equipment but they looked at me as being in the Opposition.

I therefore mobilised the people, bought 1,000 sacks, opened the clogged water channel and built dykes with the people. That is why you have not seen me coming here to report that floods are occurring in Obongi. We took action ourselves. What is down there is irresponsibility on the part of Government. Local initiatives from people like us are not taken positively. Go to Obongi and see what we have done. Go to Obongi and the greater Moyo and see the letters and meetings we had with the officials of the district, including the engineers.

I told you last year that I will never come to beg or report that disaster is coming. If I have the means, I will do it. When you come to stop me, I will report you to the Speaker. Therefore, they are malicious. (Laughter)

MS KAROORO OKURUT: Madam Speaker, I just want to inform the honourable member that we condemn whoever is looking at you as someone from the Opposition because disaster has no party; it visits everybody. Therefore, we condemn that but I have taken your information. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Perhaps minister, you might want to send your team to see what can be done by the population so that we learn from it. Maybe we do not need to send much money.

MS KAROORO OKURUT: I am promising that by Friday, we shall be there.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, who has the money, is here.

3.21
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The money is there but it is never enough. On the question of what is happening in the country, the weather has changed to our detriment. Floods are everywhere, winds are blowing, houses are losing their roofs, plants potatoes and bananas are being submerged. 

Yesterday, we had a very extensive discussion on this matter in Cabinet. Maybe I will use this opportunity to inform you, Members, that as my colleague said, we are doing everything possible to ensure that first of all we protect lives and secondly, we restore, where possible, the living conditions of our people. 

More importantly, and this is where I want Members to join me, as the population has increased, we are damaging the environment. When I was growing as a young man, you would never cultivate on a slope without terraces. However, I would like to assure you that I was in Kapchorwa three weeks ago and you know that area is hilly. Many people are cultivating on the hills but with no terraces. In Kabale, they could never cultivate without terraces.

Secondly, we have cut down most of our forests. I can speak for Kibaale that I know best. In Kibaale, around 1985 to 1987, we had about 35 per cent of forest cover. Now, we would be lucky if we have five per cent of forest cover –(Interjection)– Give me a chance to finish my point. 

We cultivate right up to the banks of the rivers and I have been a victim in my own constituency where a bridge was swept off –(Interjection)– Please, you may say under which Government but this is a matter of national importance, which we need to share. 

As Government, we might have slept but I am saying that in order for us to cure this, we need sensitisation. It is not only Government that must sensitise; all of you in your own constituencies, you are political leaders. Therefore, I am appealing that we need to sensitise our people and ensure that we effect the law. 

Madam Speaker, this is a serious matter. In Government, we are doing everything possible but I am asking everybody - this has nothing to do with politics or parties, it is to do with the country. I would like to use this opportunity to appeal to my colleagues that we need to sensitise our people to do things rightly and ensure that we enforce the law. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am sure that this year the minister is going to provide the tree fund. He is very serious about the environment and I hope this year’s budget will provide the tree fund so that these Members can go out and sensitise the population.

3.25
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I take the opportunity to register my appreciation for your gracing the International Labour Day celebrations in Ssembabule, together with all Government dignitaries and Members of Parliament. On behalf of my colleagues, Members of Parliament from Ssembabule and on my own behalf, we would like to thank all of you who came to Ssembabule because that day was tough but you endured. I thank you and welcome you back. 

Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of urgent public importance. You are aware about the press reports yesterday and today that Uganda is losing the United Nations base at Entebbe in favour of Nairobi. This base has been directly employing over 420 Ugandans but there are others who are benefiting from the base at Entebbe with inflows of more than $11 million annually.

Members can bear testimony that when you go to Entebbe, you can see its vibrancy: the modern malls, the housing industry and infrastructure. Uganda will be losing this leverage because Entebbe is the only regional and continental base of the United Nations. However, on 1 May 2018, the United Nations Secretary General, António Guterres, wrote to the United Nations Advisory Committee recommending that the UN should remove its base from Entebbe to Nairobi –(Interruption) 

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, hon. Ssekikubo, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that any patriotic Ugandan would pray that this facility is retained. However, there are a number of factors that are bound, as he mentioned, one of which is that they are shifting this regional service centre base from Entebbe to Nairobi to save about $11.3 million.

Second and most important is the travel advisory that was slapped on our Foreign Affairs Minister while his counterpart in Kenya is aggressively lobbying in the UN and in America because he can move all over the world. Our minister cannot access those headquarters to seek an amicable resolution of this matter. That is the information I would like to give. (Laughter)                      

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, this matter affects all Ugandans and that is why we can put aside our differences and see how we can save this very important lifeline. Uganda is contributing greatly to the African cause; we have the biggest number of troops in Somalia, South Sudan and Central African Republic. The only way Uganda can be rewarded is to maintain this service centre because this is where we can also get something from the UN. Kenya has already benefitted; it already houses several UN agencies. However, the only UN service centre we have in Entebbe is being taken away. For people who want investments, you can see people have borrowed greatly from banks to support their investments - (Interruption)

MR KAJARA: Thank you very much, hon. Ssekikubo. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give is the fact that this is almost becoming a trend. About three or four years ago, the World Food Programme regional office, which was based in Uganda, was transferred to South Africa. I think we need to put a stand on this. The effect of what hon. Ssekikubo is bringing up is very adverse to the economy of this country as well as to our regional balance. Thank you.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, Kenya should not beat us on all fronts. This is a national cause but apparently, the entire Kenyan Government is fully supporting the bid to take away the base from us. We do not seem to see a similar robust response from Government, save for the President who single-handedly wrote a protest note, which has largely not been responded to. 

Madam Speaker, the UN is soon taking a vote but apparently, we are losing. Can we get to know from Government what concrete steps it has taken to counter Kenya’s manoeuvres? Kenya has a very strong UN Ambassador, Kamau. He is giving us a run for our money and there seems not to be an equally good response from Uganda. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this situation is really grave. Kenya has got UN-Habitat, United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), among many UN bodies while Uganda, I think has paid with blood. We have shed our blood on this African continent much more than any other African country. Therefore, I think we deserve to be supported. Can we send out envoys to go and lobby on this issue, honourable minister?

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, Government is handling this matter with the seriousness it deserves. The President has already written to the UN, in the strongest terms possible, showing the credentials that Uganda has got which Madam Speaker has put across. I can go to State House and get the letter, which the President has written and bring it to the House.

Secondly, the Minister of Foreign Affairs has put up a team and they should be beginning to move to various capitals because the information came to us not very far from today. We believe we are putting up a spirited fight. These people will be travelling across the globe to ensure that this service centre remains with us. We welcome the voice of this Parliament. Madam Speaker, this Parliament should move a resolution that will add more strength on what we are doing so far. We are fighting to do everything within our power to ensure that we retain this service centre. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. If we could work on the Budget issues quickly and take a debate on this matter - It is very serious for our country.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I can excuse myself with a few Members and come up with a motion. I do not know whether we can have space for this very important matter. Ideally, it should have been spearheaded by a Government official and then debate can ensue so that it is not an individual Member’s effort.

THE SPEAKER: Can we hear from the Chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs?            

3.34
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform Parliament that I was in touch with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs last week because I was approached by the UN workers at Entebbe who are afraid of losing their jobs. 

I engaged the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and they assured me that they were not sitting and that hon. Sam Kuteesa is trotting the world –(Interjection)– and that the President himself was going to engage the Secretary General of the UN so that they try to reverse the whole thing.

In today’s paper, many of you have read that the President has written. 	 

THE SPEAKER: Please go and try to organise a motion. Is the Government able to come and move this issue?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I move a motion without notice under our Rules of Procedure that the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda expresses concern at the reports that the United Nations Regional Service Centre at Entebbe is bound to be removed and taken to Nairobi.

I therefore wish to move that Parliament expresses its strong commitment and support for Uganda to retain the UN base at Entebbe.

That Parliament registers its strong support for Government efforts and airs its views to the United Nations that Entebbe International Airport remains a base for the United Nations Regional Centre for the African Continent. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need a strong resolution based on facts. Therefore, please gather the facts about the facilities that are in Kenya and the contribution of Uganda so that it is contained in the resolution, which we shall send to back the Government. We will discuss it tomorrow, please organise your ammunition so that we have this debate tomorrow and we support the Government and the President on this issue.

Hon. Mutonyi, I think you need to work with hon. Ssekikubo to gather information from Google and other sources about the facilities that are in Kenya and the work we have done as Uganda on all fronts over the years so that when we discuss tomorrow, we have plenty of strong points. Thank you very much.

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, I would like to believe that the decision we are taking is right. However, we have taken a long time without seeing the foreign affairs minister here. We would love to converse with him on this salient issue. Wouldn’t it be proper for us to have the minister come here and give a comprehensive statement on this matter so that we debate on the minister’s statement and not a motion brought by Members of Parliament? Wouldn’t it be proper procedurally?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, my information is that the Minister of Foreign Affairs is in Cairo with the President. I however think that this is urgent. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would be party with hon. Ssekikubo to bring useful data that can help the Government lobby. We are not in Somalia in vain; we are not in Central African Republic and South Sudan for nothing.

This is the second most receptive country to refugees in the world; they are even bringing refugees from Israel here fully paid-up. Even Cuban doctors are coming. (Laughter) We shall bring these facts tomorrow.

The point I would like to raise is in relation to what hon. Aogon said. We have information that there is a pending arrest warrant for hon. Sam Kuteesa in all the major capitals of Europe. I am not surprised that he is in Cairo; he is just loitering around Africa. They want him in Europe. (Laughter)

Therefore, we would like to be told if the Minister of Foreign Affairs is free to move around the world. We would like to be told because we may be dealing with someone who is handicapped. This is so serious. I see hon. Karooro Okurut there; we would like to be told whether there is a pending arrest warrant on the Minister of Foreign Affairs or not so that in our resolutions, we can even say, if you want him, we can give you another one who does not have a problem. This information has to come out very clearly - or we hand him over.

MS KAROORO OKURUT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank all the Members who have brought up this very important issue. Hon. Sam Kuteesa is out of the country but that does not mean that the ministry is empty and void of other ministers. Therefore, hon. Henry Oryem will be here tomorrow afternoon to give a statement. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let our Members start getting this data, which we shall incorporate into our motion to ensure that we have a good case to present to the United Nations.

3.42
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank colleagues for supporting this good cause. 

I stand here in two capacities: sitting-in for the Leader of the Opposition and as the alternative shadow Minister of Regional and Foreign Affairs. 

I think it is in the interest of our country that all of us, including those that sit on the Opposition side, support this cause. I would like to assure Government that you have our full support. There are a lot of things that can wait but this particular one is not one of those. I encourage colleagues to work with us. I think for the part of giving evidence, let us look at our strengths and capabilities.

Honourable members, we are all aware that Uganda has continued to serve as the glue that holds Africa together. When Africa looks for leadership, they think about Uganda. We do not want the people who sit in New York to use our country for cheap labour and cheap thinking. 

I am happy that my Chairperson, Committee on Foreign Affairs and my colleague the minister will have to brainstorm tomorrow and encourage all of us to turn up in big numbers to support this cause. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. As we come to item No. 3, I would like to remind the House that we are actually off schedule; we should have considered these reports by the 20th day of April. The reports and recommendations should have gone to the Budget Committee by the 30th day of April but they are not there. The Budget Committee was expected to report on the 15th day of May, which is still ahead and we are expected to complete the Committee of Supply of the estimates by 20th May. 

Therefore, I would like to appeal to you that we move expeditiously with limited debate so that we can try and support the Budget Committee. However, I am unable to proceed in the circumstances until the Chairperson of the Budget Committee has addressed the House.

3.46
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am moving a motion under rule 16 of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament to suspend rule 148(1) and (2) in order to allow for space and time to present the reports that have just been mentioned.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, under rule 148(3), I am asking for more time beyond the 15th day of May, up to the 25th day of May, to allow for sufficient time for the Budget Committee to consider the reports arising from these presentations. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Yes, the motion is seconded by several Members of the House. Do we need to debate? Honourable members, I put the question that the motion be approved as proposed by the Chairperson of the Budget Committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson, Committee on Gender, please give an executive summary so that we can go to the Committee of Supply.

3.48
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Central): Madam Speaker, I am pleased to present the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Financial Year 2018/2019. The detailed report was sent to the Members’ gadgets five days ago. Therefore, I hope we are moving together as I endeavour to summarise the key issues.

Madam Speaker, the first key issue is on page 4 and it relates to the social development sector’s compliance with the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. In general, the social development sector complied with the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 in the presentation of its policy statement. There are, however, gaps in the area of information quality and also, the sector was a bit late. Our recommendation is on page 5 and it is to the effect that the ministry adheres to the provisions of the law in the subsequent financial year.

The second issue is a cross-cutting one relating to compliance by all ministries, departments and agencies to the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 in relation to gender and equity. 

Madam Speaker, the Equal Opportunities Commission carried out an assessment in terms of gender and equity. The assessment was carried out in relation to 106 entities. Out of these, only 85 complied with requirements of gender and equity. This means that 21 agencies did not comply. Under the provisions of the law, we are not supposed to be considering their budgets or even the statements themselves. 

We were, however, advised by the Equal Opportunities Commission that we can give these sectors another chance. Acting on the advice of the Equal Opportunities Commission, we propose the following recommendation on page 6 that in subsequent financial years, all ministries, departments and agencies that do not comply with the requirement of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 in regard to gender and equity should be sanctioned by the law. This is because the failure of most agencies to comply with gender and equity requirements has set an adverse precedent that disregards the Constitution on matters of gender and equity.

Madam Speaker, the third issue is on the same page. Our committee noted that the performance indicators for the social development sector have no baseline. This implies that it is very difficult to measure achievements or performance. Our recommendation in relation to this concern is on page 7.

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development embarks on carrying out baseline surveys and realigns the outcome indicators of its sector to match the expected or projected financial growth of the sector in the medium term in order to achieve its objectives in line with the National Development Plan II and the National Resistance Movement manifesto.

Madam Speaker, on pages 7 and 8, we carried out an analysis of sector performance. One issue of main interest is a new project referred to as, “Mitigating social risks of management and gender-based violence” on page 13.

Madam Speaker, as you are aware, this Parliament has been urging the Government to address the problems associated with gender-based violence. We have been saying that where you have gender-based violence, you have unstable families. Where you have unstable families, you have unstable communities. Unstable communities mean an unstable country. Therefore, our committee strongly supports the Government’s desire to initiate this new project, which is to be funded by the World Bank.

Madam Speaker, I call upon all Members of this august House to rise above any differences we may have and support this very important project for the good of our sisters, mothers and brothers. 

The next issue is on page 18 and relates to persistent budget cuts suffered by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

The committee observed that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development continued to experience budget cuts despite the provision of Article 32(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. The committee has in the past two years persistently recommended that the ministry's budget be exempted from any further cuts. 

Madam Speaker, this has not been complied with and every time Government brings a supplementary, it means reduction in the funding for the social development sector. Our recommendation is on page 18 of the report.

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that the budget for the social development sector should be exempted from any budget cuts in accordance with Article 32(1) of the Constitution, which states, “Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the State shall take affirmative action in favour of groups marginalised on the basis of gender, age, disability  or any other reason created by history, tradition or custom, for the purpose of redressing imbalances which exist against them”.

Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment (SAGE)

This area has two aspects; the first aspect concerns meeting the obligations Government entered into with donors in funding the existing forty districts of SAGE. This activity requires Shs 7.4 billion to fund it.

The second aspect under this activity is public demand for the national roll out of SAGE. This call has been growing stronger each day and we can longer ignore it. All Members of Parliament who interacted with us unanimously agreed that we need a national roll out of the SAGE programme in order to benefit all districts in Uganda. Our recommendation is on page 19; we urge the Government to find the required money amounting to Shs 373.46 billion to fund the national roll out of SAGE.

If the Government cannot fund it as a national programme, it should pause it.

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has initiated a project aimed at strengthening institutional, operational and technical capabilities in chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear and explosives. However, the project is underfunded to a tune of Shs 30 billion. On page 20, we recommend that Government provides the money to fund this important project.

Green jobs 

The Green jobs programme has a budget shortfall of Shs 30 billion. The Government is required to fund this important programme. 

Externalisation of Labour

The committee noted that labour externalisation has registered a positive impact. However, there are still challenges with migrant workers such as trafficking persons, exploitation and abuse of rights of workers.

The committee therefore recommends the following:

    1. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should fast track recruitment of officers responsible for handling complaints both at the ministry and in all labour receiving countries.

    2. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs together with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should fast track recruitment and deployments of integrated management information systems officer in all embassies to facilitate proper monitoring of migrant workers in all receiving countries.

    3. The Government should ensure enforcement of penalties to recruitment agencies for noncompliance of guidelines.

Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme

The committee noted that this programme has never been fully funded to cover the entire country. We recommend that more funds be provided to ensure national roll out of the programme. 

Welfare of children in remand homes and rehabilitation centres

Madam Speaker, our children in remand homes and rehabilitation centres have no food, basic provisions for accommodation and no medical care. We recommend that Government provides Shs 1.7 billion to cater for their requirements.

Persons with Disabilities Bill, 2014

In 2014, the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development tabled the Persons with Disabilities Bill, 2014, in Parliament for first reading. The Bill was referred to the committee for scrutiny and report back to the House and Parliament spent a lot of resources to scrutinise this Bill.

However, on 14 February 20l8, the Bill was withdrawn but the minister said she would bring back a new Bill within a period of one month. Up to now, the Bill has never returned. We recommend that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should have this Bill tabled not later than 30th June. If this is not done, then the option of bringing a private members’ Bill will be considered. 

Special grants for persons with disabilities

The committee recommends that the Government provides Shs 10 billion, which was promised by His Excellency the President to strengthen the special grants for persons with disabilities.

Uganda National Cultural Centre

The centre needs funding for salaries and wages of its staff. Our recommendation is very clear, on page 28.  

The centre is facing a challenge of collecting rent from Nommo Gallery. Nommo Gallery has been occupied by a company called Creations Limited since 1998. However, Creations Limited has not paid any rent and even Government has failed to pay rent and yet every year, it allocates money to maintain this facility.

The committee studied the matter in details and recommends in page 28 the following:

1. 	Creations Limited immediately pays rent arrears amounting to Shs 1.62 billion before the end of 2018 and vacates Nommo Gallery.

2. 	Shs 44.6 million be re-allocated to National Council for Disabilities to procure office furniture and equipment and no funds should go to Nommo Gallery. No money should be spent on maintenance on Nommo Gallery before the facility is returned to Government.

On page 29, National Library of Uganda -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chairperson, sorry to interrupt you. To whom has this money that we appropriate been going? Who has been receiving it? Who was managing it?

MR NDEEZI: The Nommo Gallery itself. Madam Speaker, Nommo Gallery is a Government facility. It is supposed to be managed by Uganda National Cultural Centre. The Uganda National Cultural Centre is, in turn, managed by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

About 20 years ago, a company called Creations Limited took over management of Nommo Gallery. Since then, the company has never paid rent and the ministry has failed to collect the rent. Creations Limited is not paying and the ministry and the Uganda National Cultural Centre have failed to collect the rent. Now, again -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, the money which we budget, where does it go? That is what I would like to know.

MR NDEEZI: Every year, we have been sending money for the maintenance or renovation of Nommo Gallery. The money is indicated for maintenance; therefore, the money has been going to Nommo Gallery. Details are on page 28. 

However, in brief, a company called Creations Limited - I think one of the Members of Parliament here is a director in this company. This company has been managing Nommo Gallery, using it for whatever purposes they use it for. He never pays rent but at the same time, every year, we send money for the maintenance of Nommo Gallery. 

Therefore, we recommend that no more money should be sent to Nommo Gallery. 

Secondly, the Government should recover the property. Members who want the details can read page 28. The money is indicated in the budget as maintenance for Nommo Gallery. I am going to find out in a few seconds; someone has promised to give me the information but the money has been going to Nommo Gallery to ensure it is kept in good condition.

National Library of Uganda (NLU)

The main challenge is that the National Library of Uganda has no director. We recommend that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development facilitates the recruitment of a Director for the National Library of Uganda. The gender ministry has the mandate to appoint the director for the National Library of Uganda. 

We also recommend that funding for Pay as You Earn and National Social Security Fund be provided as indicated on page 29. 

National Women’s Council

Honourable members, this is a very important issue. The committee noted that since 2OO3, elections of women councils and other committees have never been held like other elections of special interest groups such as the youth and Persons with Disability. The committee recognises the role of women councils in the coordination of the Women Enterprise Fund and other development initiatives.

Our recommendation is the second paragraph on page 31. The committee strongly recommends that in accordance with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the National Women’s Council Act, the Electoral Commission should organise women council elections by the first half of the Financial Year 2018/2019. That is our main recommendation on the National Women’s Council.

National Council for Persons with Disability

Madam Speaker, the Council for Persons with Disability told us that they do not have a vehicle and yet last year we allocated funds for the vehicle. We recommend that funds be provided immediately to enable them to secure a vehicle.

Industrial Court

On the Industrial Court, the major recommendation is that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development fast tracks the amendment of the Labour Disputes, Arbitration and Settlement Act, 2006; to be able to reduce case backlog.

On page 33, the committee reiterates last year's recommendation that the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development expedites recruitment of staff in the Financial Year 2018/2019 to enable the Industrial Court improve its operations.

Madam Speaker, on page 35, the Industrial Court badly needs Shs 500 million in order to carry out operations this year. Therefore, we recommend that ministry of finance provides the required Shs 500 million to enable the Industrial Court carry out its operations. 

National Children’s Authority

The committee observed that section 9 of the Act mandates the minister responsible for gender to appoint the board of directors. The committee however noted with concern that since the enactment of the Children's Act, the board has not been put in place. The committee recommends that the minister should expedite the process of appointing the board of directors.

Equal Opportunities Commission 

We analysed the performance of the Equal Opportunities Commission, the body mandated with the responsibility of ensuring that we realise the objectives of Article 32 of the Constitution. Our main recommendations are on page 40.

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendations on the current financial year as follows: 

    1. The Office of the Prime Minister should coordinate the submission of both the budget framework papers and ministerial policy statements so that they are availed in time for assessment by the Equal Opportunities Commission.

    2. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should include timelines for assessment of budget framework papers and ministerial policy statements in the budget cycles.

    3. We also recommend that due to the introduction of the performance-based budgeting, communication and sensitisation should be carried out in time for the various Ministries, Departments and Agencies. The commission requires Shs 1.5 billion and we recommend that this be provided. 

Funding for special interest groups

The last issue of concern is on funding for special interest groups. You can look at this on page 42. The special interest groups include youth councils, women councils, councils for people with disabilities and councils of older persons.

The committee notes that the funding for these activities is channelled through local governments. The total allocation is Shs 7.6 billion annually and this money is supposed to be shared amongst the 126 districts. This in effect does not cause any impact on the social wellbeing of the interest groups and defeats the entire spirit of centralisation. We do not see how Shs 7.6 billion is going to help this country empower these groups.

Therefore, we recommended on page 44 that the ministries of Gender, Labour and Social Development, and Finance, Planning and Economic Development should make efforts to ensure there is increment in the funding for these interest groups.

Madam Speaker, details regarding the budget for the sector are on page 45. 

The committee recommends that Parliament adopts this report and approves the budgetary estimates of Shs 205,859,000,000.  

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table this report and the minutes of the meetings that considered the ministerial policy statement and the budget. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to report. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and the members of the committee, for your report. Sometime back, I had instructed that your reports should include an evaluation of the performance of the SDGs. I do not see anything on SDGs in this report. I hope the subsequent reports will be able to address that as well.

Now, honourable members, you have heard the report. Unless there are issues you would like to raise, I think the report is clear. It is not clear? We are only going to have five comments.

4.18
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to comment on the issue of Nommo Gallery. I would have been very comfortable commenting about it if Gen. Pecos Kutesa’s friend was in the House. Now that he is not here, I see the committee lamenting - Gen. Pecos Kutesa, I meant your friend, Gen. Elly Tumwine; the one you recruited in the bush. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, the committee is lamenting; they have told us that there is nothing this country can do about the ownership and the rent accruing from Nommo Gallery for 20 years. It is a total of Shs 1.62 billion. This is my fourth term in Parliament and I am at a loss. It is like the whole Parliament seemingly cannot do anything about this. Year in, year out, the same person cannot pay rent. 

Madam Speaker, I do not know whether it is possible for your Office to call Gen. Elly Tumwine to make a personal statement on this matter. It is because it will remain on record that during your tenure as the Speaker, nothing could be done about this situation. 

There are several things which can be done including stopping payment of his emoluments. These are public facilities. The other day, we were squeezing Shs 1.3 billion shillings to help the nodding syndrome’s victims but there is someone who owes Government Shs 1.62 billion. This money can support schools in Busia or the women in Pader who are being delivered by traditional birth attendants.

Therefore, we should stand our ground other than the committee coming here to lament. Actually, I would like to move formally that Gen. Elly Tumwine be invited on the Floor of this House to make a statement on this matter. He has been invited before the committee but he has also refused and the committee is helpless. 

I now know why some people went to the bush. I can now take the information. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, hon. Odonga Otto for giving me space to give information. Recently, Gen. Tumwine invited Members of Parliament for a party at his place and you could see a real Nommo Gallery there. He has built a Shs 5 billion Nommo Gallery there. The information I am giving is that he has transferred the Nommo Gallery from Kampala to his home in Kazo. (Laughter)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, being the most senior member in this House, we seek your guidance on this matter. What can we do about these seemingly untouchable Ugandans who carried guns, went to the bush, overthrew a Government and now they are untouchable to the extent that even a committee of Parliament is lamenting. We need your indulgence on whether their emoluments cannot be stopped to pay these rent arrears.

THE SPEAKER: I will respond.

4.22
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson. However, I heard the chairperson say he also does not know who owns Nommo Gallery. 

If the chairperson and the committee do not know who owns Nommo Gallery, I would like to ask the minister in charge of this docket since we are all speculating; who owns Nommo Gallery? At least, clear the air for Parliament and the country at large because we cannot lose money or appropriate money where it seems to benefit only one individual.

Madam Speaker, I also would like to comment on the issue on page 32 where the committee recommended that the ministry recruits more staff. Recently, we heard Mr Keith Muhakanizi who is in charge of the Treasury saying there will be no more recruitment. I would like the committee to clarify whether this recommendation they have given Parliament can still stand.

Thirdly, the issue of the national roll out of SAGE; the committee does not come out very clearly in their recommendation. For the Youth Fund, their recommendation was clear for SAGE, it was not very clear. We would like a national roll out for SAGE. Some districts cannot keep benefitting from the money we appropriate and yet some of our districts are not benefitting. 

This country belongs to all of us and these are the people who made us who we are irrespective of where we come from. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to –(Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give is that recently Cabinet sat and agreed –(Interjections)– No, we got information; I am a member of the Parliamentary Forum on the Elderly.

THE SPEAKER: He has not said anything; I do not know what he is going to say.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, I am surprised that the minister does not want me to give information when they have actually failed to bring it out. 

The information we received is that Cabinet sat and agreed that there will be a national roll out. The challenge is that when they agreed, they did not give the ways in which the money is going to be raised and yet we had already sent them a message that there is already a shortfall in the last financial year of around Shs 9 billion. Now the five districts that were supposed to be taken over this financial year were not and we did not receive any explanation as to why those five districts were not added. 

When they said we are going for a national roll out, we said we have failed to clear the shortage. Now you are saying you are going for a national roll out, where is the direction of the money? They said the ministry of finance will provide the money. Now in that line, we are always taken for granted, deceived and not given the clear direction on how SAGE is going to progress yet where we come from, people are always demanding and saying this must be put in place.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is something the chairperson forgot to do. He made a proposal for the budget of the ministry but did not deal with the agencies at the equal opportunities commission or the local governments. If you could formally complete the prayers for the budgetary provision before we go back to the debate. 

Honourable chairperson, you only mentioned the Shs 205 million but did not touch the others for the record.

MR NDEEZI: Madam Speaker, I mentioned at the beginning of my presentation that we would share with you the copies of the reports and I hoped you had read it. Otherwise, much of the issues you are raising, we have the information in the report. I hope the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development will also answer some of the issues. 

However, Madam Speaker, we did take into account the question of Sustainable Development Goals. My problem was time but it is covered and taken care of in the report. Secondly, for the issue of SAGE - the programme of older persons -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, when you were concluding and requesting for money, you only handled the money for the ministry and not that of the non-wage, equal opportunities, local government and the donor budget. It has to be on record because we need to supply.

MR NDEEZI: For specific details, we agreed with the Committee on Budget that we shall share notes when all session committees have made presentations. We all share notes regarding the actual allocations. However, the figures contained on page 45 are those obtained from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

For SAGE, our recommendation is very clear. We thought the Government should provide -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chairperson, when you are reporting about your evaluation, you also need to speak about the money which you want to be given to your ministry and agencies. They must be on record. You spoke the words, “Shs 205 billion only”. You did not talk about the Shs 177 billion, the Shs 2 billion, the Shs 7 billion. Put them down for the record because we shall need to work on the Appropriation Bill.

MR NDEEZI: Madam Speaker, on page 45 we mentioned Shs 205, 859,000,000 - before you come to the grand total, you have of budget support funds from donors. It is these funds from donors that give you what you see as the grand total of Shs 276 billion. Therefore, we are asking Parliament to authorise Shs 205.859 billion. I hope it is clear, Madam Speaker. 

Hon. Minister, do you have information?

THE SPEAKER: Is the minister coming in?

4.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala): Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. The budget for the Ministry of Gander, Labour and Social Development is Shs 191.902 billion; the money for the Equal Opportunities Commission is Shs 7.34 billion and the portion to the local Government is Shs 7.640 billion. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay; that has now been concluded. They are on record. Hon. Egunyu, hon. Amoding and hon. Akurut wanted to say something. We will just take very few comments, honourable members, because we have many reports.

4.31
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am mainly concerned about the exportation of labour to the outside countries. I have not heard the chairperson say about the agreements that are done to the importing countries by the exporting country, Uganda.

I am aware that as Uganda, we cannot employ all the children that are educated here. However, we still need to protect our people who migrate to other countries in search of employment. We need to have the ministry of gender make bilateral agreements with those people so that we protect our people in and outside Uganda.

We just neglect our responsibility and think we are here as Government to protect people just within the country, and we cannot protect Ugandans outside Uganda who have gone to work and because they failed to get jobs here. That is very unfair to Ugandans. Other countries are protecting their people but I have not seen any strong point that has come out of our ministry.

Madam Speaker, another issue is a point of emphasis. Like my honourable colleague said, we are all Ugandans; we all have elderly people in our constituencies who are senior citizens that have paid a lot of money to this country in form of taxes. I wonder; is this foolery? 

If Cabinet had goodwill for SAGE, it would be rolled out countrywide. The committee also recommends that SAGE be rolled countrywide but at the end of the day, they put it that there is no budget allocation. What do we do? My interest is not for some five districts to be rolled out this financial year; let the entire country benefit provided they are 65 years old.

When donors gave money to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, did they specify that certain districts must get this money and others not? This is unfairness that is expressed by the ministry of gender and Government at large to our people. 

As I wind up, I pray that since the committee and the Cabinet has the goodwill for SAGE to be rolled out countrywide, Parliament should use its powers to distribute money within the budget that they have so that SAGE is given to those districts including Buvuma –(Member timed out.)

4.34
MS MONICA AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the committee for the report that they have laid before the House. 

However, the issue of legislation - I am aware it is the duty of the ministry, the line sector to legislate and to initiate legislation before the House.

The Amendments on Employment Act, I would have loved to see them feature strongly in that ministerial policy statement. As hon. Egunyu raised, the plight of migrant workers in Uganda is still a very big challenge especially those that are working in the Middle East. These are some of the issues we could embed in our local legislation.

The plight of the domestic workers is still unaddressed. We all do have domestic workers in our homes and these children work without a clear policy, pay and enforcement of their rights. I would like to hear a comment from the minister in line with those issues. 

The plight of our infants; we tried to initiate a breastfeeding policy as a Parliament but generally the employers in Uganda do not have the requisite policies in that direction. Therefore, most of our working mothers in Uganda have sacrificed the health of their children on the altar of money and the desire to earn a living in their families. We do not have breastfeeding and non-breastfeeding mothers who are taking care of children properly. Children are paying the price for the lack of clear policy in that direct. 

I would like to hear a comment from the line minister and I do not see anything featuring in the ministerial policy statement there; how the ministry is addressing that and how this amendment should be coming on the Floor of Parliament very soon.

4.36
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report. I have three issues that I would like to bring forth. The first one is on gender based violence.  

I had a chance of looking at the report and to my dismay they are talking of getting funding of Shs 132 billion from World Bank for a period of five years but in this financial year, they have received Shs 15 billion; the funding is supposed to be for gender-based violence, prevention and response. 

However, looking at that the sectors that have been given the money - the Uganda Police, the Ministry of Health and JLOs are all sectors for response. I would have loved to see this funding going to the local governments to sensitise our communities about gender based violence prevention. If you just respond it means that those who have been beaten go to hospital and the perpetrators are arrested.

What will change the attitude in our communities in regard to gender-based violence? This funding should go to attitudinal change in terms of sensitising or creating awareness in the communities.

Just for emphasis, I again had a chance of reading through the SAGE aspect. I also belong to the Parliamentary Forum on Social Protection. We were told that this programme was supposed to have been rolled out in the country but I wonder what the priorities of this Government are.

If Irish Aid has given the bulk of the funding and Government is supposed to give matching funding of Shs 40 billion but could not provide that and here we are talking of rolling it out. Government needs about Shs 300 billion to be able to roll out this programme to benefit about one million elderly Ugandans. 

If we cannot provide that yet in my assessment, the SAGE project has been one of the best performing programmes this country has implemented and yet we are not prioritising it. I appeal to the planners that we need to prioritise and plan for our elderly people. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, quickly respond to the issues raised by the Members.

4.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The first one was about migrant workers. The ministry has recently so far set up two offices in the United Arab Emirates to ensure that the coordination is on the either front and more offices are coming up. 

However, we realised that the demand is overwhelming and unemployment is at its helm and so, we have to work expeditiously. This morning in top management, we were concluding the draft for the amendment within the law such that we can provide for the fees that are being charged, which are very different and high. 

Someone parts with Shs 5 million to just simply go and work in a low paying job and yet that money can ably be used here to start up some small business. We are regulating the fee that is being charged to the bare minimum.

Other amendments include the cost of transportation (air tickets) to be met and all contracts to be signed here before any worker can be taken away. 

Madam Speaker, I request that we bring a very detailed paper at the earliest opportunity before Parliament so that we can exhaustively answer to the Members of Parliament what happens in this particular field. 

SAGE is one issue; I request the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to finally pronounce himself on the issue of SAGE because we have tried our level best. (Applause) 

The issue was about why the gender-based violence money is mainly through the police and other institutions, contrary to the local Government. Madam Speaker, the money is apportioned basing on what is done by each sector. For example, the police are tasked with the fall on programmes, resettlement, sensitisation, fast tracking of these cases and that is why they have a portion of this money. 

However, the breakdown of the loan and other finances in gender based violence can also be presented before Parliament next week. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to touch this issue of Nommo Gallery. It is a serious indictment on this House that we have been budgeting for Nommo Gallery when it has been appropriated by an individual.

Honourable members, if we do not check this impunity, one day someone will come here and take over this Parliament and say, “This is my house; I fought in the bush.” (Laughter) 

Honourable members, this House directs Gen. Tumwine to pay the rent but also vacate because it is a public facility. I do not think I would like to be associated with this type of impunity. We would like to know from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, who has been receiving this money that we budget for and what it does. This is taxpayers’ money. Give us an answer before we pass your budget. 

4.43
MR GODFREY KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I encourage the entire House that this is very important. Timing in a policy means everything. I encourage the entire House to support the committee, the leadership of the committee and the Speaker that no budget should pass without money allocated by the Ministry of Finance, Panning and Economic Development to roll out the SAGE.

Madam Speaker, your Members go through a rough time especially coming from communities where the SAGE is non-existent. They imagine that we do not care for our constituents and yet that is their normal daily story, and I think the time is now that we have that locked and solved once and for all.

As a matter of fact, there is already a letter from the Republic of Ireland that if Government delays or drags on with its commitment, they will withdraw their funding and even suffocating those that are already benefitting from SAGE. This Parliament should not stand or tolerate that under your leadership, Madam Speaker. 

Finally, you will recognise that every time you talk about teenage pregnancies, cholera outbreaks, nodding disease, poverty, you are either looking at the east and the north, other places are kind of doing okay.  

I remember saying that before the Financial Year 2018/2019 budget could be read, we can be a Parliament that is remembered for having put in place some affirmative budget so that we do not have two communities in one country - one community doing well and the other doing badly and when that happens, we do not forget the Rwenzori Region, particularly Kasese District. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall require answers from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on both the Nommo Gallery and the SAGE before we go to the Committee of Supply. 

In the meantime, I put the question that the report be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Committee of Supply, we want answers.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a procedural issue; what is the role of Parliament in appropriation? If Parliament is the one supposed to appropriate and it must make decisions in light of what is taking place in the country, then why do I see Members crying? 

Is it procedurally right for Members of Parliament, with all the powers to appropriate funds, to not make a decision on SAGE and say, “This amount of money is for SAGE so let it be taken to the ministry of gender”? 

You are saying that we should ask the minister of finance; are we here at the mercy of the minister of finance or the minister of finance is at our mercy? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I expect you, as a Committee of Supply, to make proposals on where to get that money and put it in the ministry; that is what I want you to do. (Applause) Yes, he has no answers so we move as a Committee of Supply.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

4.48
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (Mr Kafeero Ssekitoleko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation on the Ministerial Policy Statement for Vote 23 and Vote 110 for the Financial Year 2018/2019. 

Before I proceed, I beg to lay on the Table the minutes of meetings that sat to scrutinise the ministerial policy statement and also lay a hard copy of the report at the Table. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, in our methodology, the committee scrutinised the following documents as listed on page 1 of the report. The committee also held meetings with the listed people on pages 1 and 2. 

There are two votes, as already mentioned, under the ministry, and these are: 

Vote 23: Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation,
Vote 110: Uganda Industrial Research Institute. 

However, Vote 23 has a number of subventions as shown on page 4. It has the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology, Kiira Motors Corporation (KMC) and Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development (PIBID). 

There is a table on page 4, which shows an overview of the proposed expenditures of Financial Year 2017/2018 and Financial Year 2018/2019 and it proceeds up to page 5 of this report. 

The ministry has registered a number of achievements and among them, as listed on page 5, is securing office accommodation and relocation from Ntinda where it was temporarily housed in the building of the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology to its new premises located on plot 19, Lumumba Avenue. It has also acquired operational equipment to support the effective ministry functioning. 

The committee observed that the Uganda Industrial Research Institute at Nakawa has a lot of free space; so, Government is advised to consider putting up structures at that place to provide accommodation to the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation in the future. 

Madam Speaker, I mentioned that Kiira Motor Corporation is now a subvention and I would like to state that this was transferred to Vote 23, effective Financial Year 2017/2018. The ministry obtained Cabinet approval for the commercialisation of Kiira Motor Corporation. 

The Government of Uganda, through the Uganda Investment Authority, allocated 100 acres of land at Jinja Industrial Business Park for the establishment of the Kiira Vehicle Plant and a certificate of title is herewith attached.

The cadastral and topographic survey and geo-technical analysis of the Kiira Vehicle Plant site were completed and a certificate of title was issued and attached hereto. The Environment Impact Assessment for the same was completed and a certificate by the National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) is also attached here. 

Our observation is that the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation, in conjunction with the ministry responsible for Lands and the Uganda Investment Authority should rectify the anomaly reflected on the certificate of title in which it is indicated that the land allocated to Kiira Motor Corporation should be restricted for farming.  It is written there - and yet the lease agreement between UIA and KMC reflects that the land leased to Kiira Motor Corporation is for the establishment of a vehicle manufacturing plant or other purposes, incidental thereto. 

The committee observed that in the Financial Year 2018/2019, Kiira Motor Corporation was allocated Shs 24 billion in the ministry as a subvention to support the commercialisation of the electric vehicles which are under development.

Another subvention is the Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development, as shown on page 7, which was financed to a tune of Shs 17.466 billion for the Financial Year 2017/2018. It is however, required to submit a fresh project proposal that shall be subjected to a full appraisal by the relevant institutions before it can be considered for further funding. PIBID has not been allocated funding for Financial Year 20I8/2019 because it did not submit a fresh project proposal.

The Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development registered the following achievements:

It acquired 50 acres of land from the National Animal Genetic Resource Centre and Databank (NAGRIC) as part of the land for the Industrial Technical Park (ITP) master plan.

They set up out grower irrigation demos in banana at Shuuku Sub County - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chairperson, don’t you have an executive summary? I think Members have this report.

MR KAFEERO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. On page 8, you should have realised that at first, a certificate of gender and equity responsiveness had been denied to this sector because they had only registered 41 per cent for Uganda Industrial Research Institute and 37 per cent for the ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation.

However, in a letter dated 19th April, the commission indicated that after resubmission, the ministry scored much higher and therefore, it qualified for the budget approval.

On page 9, there is Uganda Industrial Research Institute, which is vote 110 and on the subsequent page, there is a table highlighting how they want to spend this money.

On page 11, we have general observations of the committee. The Science Technology and Innovation sector is underfunded. This cripples the operationalisation of institutional structures and establishment of legal frameworks.

Inadequate funding of Research and Development-Uganda's gross expenditure on Research and Development as a percentage of GDP is O.48 per cent which is lower than the African Union recommended one per cent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Research and Development (R&D) in Uganda is largely funded by donors, which puts Uganda's R&D at risks of external influence at the expense of Uganda's priorities.

The National Science, Technology and Innovation Strategic Plan for 20l2/20l3- 20l7/2018 indicated that Government was committed to developing science centres in all districts. However, the centres have not been established up to date.

Madam Speaker, there is lack of a regulatory framework for utilisation of the Innovation Fund, which we allocate as we did allocate Shs 30 billion. Therefore, we need to expedite putting in place a regulatory framework. 

We were supposed to establish a packaging centre in 2016/2017. However, money to that effect to the tune of 18.3 billion has not been allocated.

The Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development (PIBIDI) had expected to receive Shs 23.3 billion, which the committee has not supported and we request this Parliament to agree with the committee.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Public Service should urgently recruit and fill the staff structure of the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation to enable the ministry to carry out its mandate effectively. 

Parliament should expedite the passing of the Bill for an Act entitled, “The National Biosafety Act, 20l7” to provide a framework for safe development of modern biotechnology.

Following the guidance from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, PIBID should not be provided with a budget for the Financial Year 2018/2019 until it has submitted a fresh project proposal that is fully appraised by the relevant institutions.

Government should comply with the constitutional requirements of Article 153 (2) (a) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Section 29 (2)(b) of the Public Finance Management Act to enable PIBID to access Government funding.

Likewise, the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation, with assistance of the entire Government, should comply with the directive of Parliament to table a comprehensive law, which harmonises legal provisions pertaining to the science, technology and innovation sector in the country.

The commercialisation of the Kiira Motors Corporation should be undertaken in phases with the market-entry point being assembly of vehicles in partnership with reputable vehicle manufacturers. This should progressively position the Kiira vehicle plant for growth prospects in cutting-edge vehicle technology innovation. 

However, every phase completed should be subjected to a comprehensive appraisal by the relevant authorities. The Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation should urgently establish the necessary institutional and legal framework for Kiira Motors Corporation.

As indicated above, the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation should come up with a regulatory framework to facilitate the operations of Kiira Motors Corporation.

A comprehensive National Innovations Inventory should be compiled in order to enhance innovation and development of products that facilitate national transformation and development.

In the absence of an innovation authority, all innovations should be housed in the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation. This will enhance institutional coordination and prevent duplication of interventions.

Shs 20 billion should be provided to the ministry to enable it to commercialise innovations.

Government should expedite the process of developing a legal framework to enable the National Innovation Fund to operate effectively.

Shs 5.0 billion that was deducted from the budget of the Innovation Fund by this Parliament should be reinstated to support further development of existing innovations.

An additional Shs 10 billion should be found and added to the Innovation Fund to support the Solar Irrigation Pump Project.

The Presidential directive to give the Uganda Industrial Research Institute (UIRI) Shs 20 billion for commercialisation of UIRI proven innovations and another Shs 18.3 billion for the packaging plant should be allocated to it.

Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation (MOSTI) should devise means of reviving plans to establish functional district science centres.

The development budget of MOSTI should be increased from Shs 500 million to at least Shs 1.5 billion.

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that the budget of the Science, Technology and Innovation sector for Financial Year 2018/2019, as shown on pages 4, 5 and 10, that is vote 23, Shs 80.88 billion and vote 110 Shs 13.72 billion, with the committee recommendation be approved and adopted. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair. Before I hand over to the Members, I would like to know, under recommendation number four, who is responsible for facilitating the implementation of Article 153(2) and Section 29(2) of the Public Finance Management Act.

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation is responsible for initiating guidelines to support the innovation’s fund because right now, they keep spending funds of the innovation fund without guidelines as recommended by this article. 

THE SPEAKER: No. I am talking about the Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development (PIBID). You are not allowing them to access money because there is a provision in the Constitution and in the Act which have not been implemented. Which ministry is responsible for activating that Act? 

MR SSEKITOLEKO: The Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation (STI).

THE SPEAKER: Is PIBID under STI? 

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Yes. It was transferred this year from Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to STI.

THE SPEAKER: I think you should say the ministry. When you say that, “Government should comply”, Government is very big. How will they report in the Treasury Memorandum?

MR SSEKITOLEKO: There is no established legal framework for their operation. Madam Speaker, as I reported, they intend to transform PIBID, which was a presidential initiative, into what they call “Banana Industrial Research Development Centre”. But now, there is no legal framework to support what they are doing. Therefore, everything is not yet clear.

THE SPEAKER: That is why I am looking for someone who we can task with that work. Here, I do not know who we are tasking that responsibility with.

5.9
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI: (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. That PIBID has been around for long. I recall in 2013, they brought land titles saying that: “Now we have handed the titles to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the transfer will take place immediately.” At that time, they were allocated about Shs 12-15 billion because they were going to transfer.
 
I am getting worried; why didn’t the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development then transfer the titles from that lady to Government? I would like to ask the chairperson of the committee - I hope you have been following the PIBID. PIBID has been in existence for some time and it has been one of the things which the President of this country has been looking forward to but I do not know what happened. The transfers would have been done long ago; what happened? You should have told us what really happened to PIBID.

Secondly, under the Public Finance and Accountability Act, I have not heard you talk about all parastatals and state enterprises. Under your ministry, you are supposed to present their budgets here for appropriation. I have not heard you talk about any of those parastatals or state enterprises; what is the problem?

5.11
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to comment on two issues:

The issue of the PIBID: Chairperson of the committee, I think you should come and advise this Parliament that that initiative is not viable and we immediately stop funding it. The same bananas we are promoting – because the President’s vision then was that we spent so much money on transportation. Therefore, we could go towards developing a technology where these bananas are peeled from wherever they are, carried in a packed form and delivered light to supermarkets. The aim was that the transporters do not eat half of the money. 

For fifteen years now, the bananas are still being carried from the home of my good friend, Maj. Gen. Pecos Kuteesa on Fusos. There is nothing like a research which shows that they have been packed in buveera. There is no single banana you see in the supermarkets which is already peeled. People have got a culture of buying bananas while you are seeing. I think we should be fair to the taxpayers and recommend that we just close the PIBIB and people go home. That is my strong recommendation.

Concerning Kiira Motors Corporation: A country which does not manufacture a needle, now wants to tell us that they want to manufacture vehicles? We live in a real world and I am not against local initiatives or technological transfer. Countries like South Africa took 20 years signing concessionary rights with Ford and they sent everything built and they assembled for about 20 to 30 years for knowledge to transfer. If you assembled Ford for 20 years then you can start thinking of manufacturing. We are now talking of Kiira project, honourable Chairperson; I pray that you be the first to board that vehicle. You will be promoting coffin-makers.

We live in a real world and that is another chapter we have to close. These vehicles do not work. The other time, they made a bus and took the professors and some ministers to move around the site and the vehicle stopped moving after 30 metres. That was the vehicle which is available and was just assembled. They are bringing the dynamo from China and lights from Dubai and they are just welding and assembling and are not manufacturing anything. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thought we should be proud that there is something the Ugandans are doing on their own. We are here buying all the telephones from everywhere and do not manufacture any. Maybe, it is not moving as fast but we should really encourage our engineers to innovate. The future is about innovation. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: I am not discouraging something made in Uganda. However, I am saying the approach Kiira is using – maybe the committee chairperson should tell us which of those parts is being manufactured in Uganda? As Government, we should get these international companies the way Rwanda is doing. We do assembling for 20 to 30 years before we start thinking of manufacturing what we are assembling. Thank you.

5.15
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the committee. Innovation is okay but when you innovate, Government only helps you at incubation. It should be that, if it is anything viable, the private sector should commercialise it, and take over from there. 

Tata Nano is the cheapest vehicle in the world. But Tata worked with Land Rover which it acquired to make it commercial. Equally, that should have been the case for Kiira and that should have also been the case for the banana project.

By now, the private sector, the likes of Britannia, should have taken over the banana project if it had been viable. For Government to take 12-15 years spending - first of all, it was segregative; it was the wrong criteria because we know cassava is more industrial, has more pharmaceutical starch and has a world market. When we talk of coffee, we know it has a world market. Where is the market for this banana? The approach of acquiring funding by those who can access the President - when scientists have very viable ideas like Irish potato, cassava and other projects which cannot get funding - is wrong. Vegetable oil has market, why has it never got preference?

There are areas which we know - we do not have to re-invent the wheel - and we know the private sector will take them up. People are taking advantage of the President’s interest in modernisation and they get money from this country when they do not deserve it.

Let me request that this unfortunate creating of very many entities, which the President himself is opposed to; we know that the Ministry of Trade and Industry exists – 

THE SPEAKER: Conclude on the policy issue.

MR MUKITALE: In line with the presidential request that we should stop duplication and parallel organisations, we should streamline some of these industries to go where they belong - to the Ministry of Trade and Industry and that is where we should help these institutions to be. They should be helped by Government, but working with the private sector.  

5.18
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for their report. It is stated in their report that the innovation fund was established in 2003 and that up to now there is no legal framework and the funds are being mismanaged.

I would like to know from the minister; where is the problem? Why are they failing to bring the guidelines or the Bill to regulate or to manage these funds? Are we proceeding well to continue giving them this money when there is no legal framework for this fund?

My second observation is on the research and development. We are aware that, based on their report, 80 per cent of both basic and applied research in the country are funded by the donors. Donor funds come with conditions and are directed to specific areas of interest which may not be the interest of Government and which may not help address the challenges of the country. The country is grappling with different challenges but lacks research in those areas. 

I would like to urge the committee and also this House to take serious the issue of research and development. If need be, commit a lot of money on this very important area because if we put money, we can be in position to address a lot of challenges related to unemployment, environment, agriculture and many other related areas. 

Madam Speaker, those were my areas of observation.

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson, you forgot to address your request. You stopped at the recommendations. You have not talked about how much money you want for recurrent or – 

5.20
MR MICHAEL AYEPA (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I would like to comment on PIBID. Remember in the Ninth Parliament, PIBID was under the committee of finance. I do not know how it went to the Committee on Science and Technology.

While they were with us in the committee of finance, each time they came, the issue was the timeframe. We would ask them, “What is the timeframe? For how long do you want us to continue supporting these initiatives?” You must have a timeframe in which the Government should support you until a certain point, and then you can be self-reliant. However, we waited for that timeframe and we never got to see it.

It is very painful to hear that they (PIBID) have now not been given money. What if it was a good initiative? Is that how we end an initiative that we have started? Is Kiira going to end like that? When we start something, we must have a ground breaking event and let Ugandans know how far the money they have been allocating to PIBID has gone.

Take, for example, Kiira when we start giving them the money, let us have it properly tagged. We used to ask them about the land title which was in somebody else’s name. We asked for it to be transferred to Uganda Land Commission but it was never done. I do not know why no money has been given to them. Have they ended? Have they reached their timeframe? We would like to know.

Madam Speaker, what is the timeframe for Kiira? For how long are we going to support Kiira? Is it really organised? They should specify so that as we proceed with Kiira, we know that we are supporting them up to this time so that we – (Member timed out.)

5.23
MR WAMAKUYU MUDIMI (NRM, Elgon County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to draw attention to page 11. The chairperson of the committee said that the Minister of Science, Technology and Innovation received Shs 30 billion as Innovation Fund but the Innovation Fund has no legal framework as required. We have been providing this money but illegally.

Since we were looking for money for SAGE and other funds, I propose that these Shs 30 billion be reallocated to ministry of gender for SAGE (Applause). Since there is no legal basis, it is clear here.

The issue of PIBID has been a recurrent one. The committee has said that there is no money for this. This is to inform the honourable minister of finance that much as Parliament one time rejected the budget for PIBID, you went ahead and provided money under supplementary. I hope this time round you will not. Please take note of that. 

Chairperson of the committee, on your recommendations for (Xii), you were talking about reinstating the Shs 5 billion that was deducted. Since we are taking the entire Shs 30 billion, there is no need. That one has collapsed, so take note of that.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have just realised that the minister for this sector is not here. So who is going to answer?

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Madam Speaker, the minister is not here but maybe hon. Bahati can answer.

THE SPEAKER: No, he is alone. Since you are here, can you answer the issues?

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will particularly address my mind to the issue of the Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development (PIBID) because it was under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for seven years.

It is true that PIBID was formed under an executive order of His Excellency the President. I would like to request this House that before we take a final decision on this matter, we request a few Members of this House to go on site in Bushenyi and see what is happening, or if there is any Member from Bushenyi they can give you a testimony about what is happening.

On the issue of the legal procedure, PIBID is now under the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation and we have a Permanent Secretary, who is the accounting officer for these resources. Therefore, we hope that Parliament could reconsider the decision and supply this money so that the project is completed because they are almost 95 per cent to commercialisation. 

They started as research and development project. They have been doing research on how to turn bananas into a commercial commodity. It is now at the stage of commercialisation and this is the last leg of the project –(Interjection)– That is why I was saying the committee should have visited Bushenyi to see for themselves the progress this project is making. 

Madam Speaker, for us to make a decision without sending a team to Bushenyi to see what is happening or allowing a Member of Parliament from Bushenyi to show us what is happening -

THE SPEAKER: Where are the Members from Bushenyi?

MR MOSES KAHIMA: Madam Speaker, coincidentally, I was in Bushenyi for about 10 years and when PIBID started I was there. Later on, I worked as the district commercial officer for Sheema and we used to take people to PIBID for some studies. 

Like the minister has stated, this initiative started as a research establishment and Government has invested heavily in PIBID. Therefore, for Members of Parliament to come up and say we close the facility is unfair and it is costly on part of Government. 

Actually, my recommendation is that we should be asking the PIBID researchers to give us the commercial component of the facility and we finance it because they are almost through with the capital investment at the facility.

THE SPEAKER: Who is the minister responsible?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, when the new Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation was created, His Excellency the President shifted PIBID to the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation. Therefore, the minister responsible is the Minister of Science, Technology and Innovation, hon. Elioda Tumwesigye and he will even be here tomorrow to make a statement on the Innovation Fund. Thank you.

MR DAVID MUTEBI: Madam Speaker, when PIBID interfaced with the Committee on Science and Technology, they expressed their frustration with Government. They intend to divest their rights and transfer the patent to Government but the submissions that they have made to Government have not been responded to for quite some time. Therefore, the clarification I am seeking from the minister or Government is: why haven’t you responded to the submissions and requests that PIBID had submitted to divest their patent to Government?

MR OTHIENO: Madam Speaker, the clarification I am seeking from the minister and committee is in regard to the funding of PIBID. This project started as a PhD thesis project for a certain reverend and somehow she managed to convince Government and Government funded her thesis. As we speak now, she has registered PIBID under her patent rights – it is her personal project, not a Government project. I think that is the reason hon. Bahati is not telling the truth. 

What I know is that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was asking how Government can continue funding a private entity yet we are using public resources. I do not know the name of the proprietor but she is a reverend –(Interjection)– She is a reverend called Florence. She has refused to transfer the patent to Government and that is why the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is now responding. Even the Auditor-General queried this. How can Government continue putting public resources into a private project without any agreement? 

Honourable minister, yes we know the project is there but it is a personal project; why do you want Government to continue putting money into somebody’s personal project when the person has even refused to transfer the patent rights to Government?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is important that we get information about the rights of the Government and the people of Uganda in this innovation and also the issue of Kiira. Therefore, I would like to defer this debate to tomorrow and please, make sure that the minister comes. 

In addition, honourable members, this is the budget season but many of the ministers are not here. So they expect a free ride; they expect Parliament to pass for them their budget while they are dancing somewhere. (Laughter) This matter is deferred to tomorrow and the minister must come.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, I would like seek your guidance on this matter. The Government allocated Shs 24 billion towards Kiira project. The Government went ahead and allocated land – first of all, it was 100 acres of land and later it was 60 acres of land – in Kagogwa Village, Kakira Town Council in Jinja. 

Madam Speaker, the plan is that we would begin assembling at a Kiira motors corporation and they talked of sedans, which would cost us $25,000; Crossover would cost $28,000; and $32,000 would be for pick-ups. I would like to seek your guidance. If they are coming back to report on Kiira specifically, shouldn’t they give us the specifics? As a committee – I am a member of the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation -  I think we are actually lamenting.

THE SPEAKER: Are you a member of this committee? So, what are you debating? 

MR ANYWARACH: I am not debating but seeking your guidance. In the committee, we found it very hard and we were just lamenting that Government should do this and that. They said that by 2018, production of Kiira would begin. If we call the Executive Director of Kiira Motors Corporation, he will confirm that. However, the committee does not reflect this in the ministerial policy statement. We insisted but it does not appear. I would like to seek your guidance on this matter.

THE SPEAKER: We will ask the minister to respond to all those issues tomorrow before we can complete this matter. This issue is deferred. I do not see the Minister for Water and Environment. Let us go to the  Ministry of East African Community Affairs. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

5.37
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Tony Ayoo): Madam Speaker, I beg to present the report of the sectoral committee on East African Community Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Ministry of East African Community Affairs for financial year 2018/2019. I will go straight to page three of the report to highlight the key functions and roles of the Ministry of East African Community Affairs (MEACA).

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not know whether your report was uploaded on the iPads because I do not have it.

MR AYOO: Madam Speaker, when I checked on the iPad, it was uploaded.

THE SPEAKER: Is it there? Okay, proceed.

MR AYOO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to page 4 to highlight the key functions and roles of the ministry.

Key Functions and Roles of the Ministry of East African Community Affairs

In order to execute its mandate, the ministry carries out the following functions:

    a) Initiate and develop policies that support the East African Community (EAC) integration.
    b) Provide leadership in the negotiation process including development of country positions.
    c) Monitor and follow up the implementation of EAC Summit and Council decisions and directives as a way of ensuring compliance and conduct research on the impact of EAC regional integration for policy actions.
    d) Sensitise and create awareness about the progress and benefits of EAC integration and enhance participation of all stakeholders including the public-private sector and civil society.
    e) Build capacity of all stakeholders including Ministries Department and Agencies (MDAs), private sector and civil society on EAC regional integration matters so as to enhance their participation from an informed point of view.
    f) Foster cooperation arrangements with other regional and international organisations whose activities have a bearing on the objectives of EAC. 

Strategic Objectives

The following are the strategic objectives of the ministry: 

    a. To coordinate harmonisation of regional legal and policy frameworks at the national level;
    b. To provide strategic leadership, coordination and guidance for EAC integration;
    c. To ensure compliance and implementation of East  African Community policies, laws, decisions, directives and programmes. (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have guided us here while Members were presenting the different reports but the chairperson of the Committee on East African Community Affairs seems to be concentrating on the mandate of the ministry. I thought that in the interest of time, we would rush to the observations and recommendations so that we can be able to manage time.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, since the report is with the Members, skip out the areas like the objectives, mandate and others. Just present the observations and recommendations.

MR AYOO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted to raise those issues to enhance the debate. However, since Members already have them in their iPads, allow me to go straight to the observations and recommendations on page 6.  

Observations and Recommendations

The committee observes that out of the total budget allocation of Shs 28.242 billion, Shs 18.339 billion, equivalent to 65.9 per cent, is for contributions to EAC organs and institutions; Shs 1.14 billion, equivalent to four per cent of their budget, is for wages; and Shs 0.53 billion, equivalent to two per cent, is for development. This leaves a balance of Shs 8.37 billion as non-wage for core activities at the headquarters. 

Of this balance, only 6.9 per cent, that is equivalent to Shs 0.58 billion, is left for enhancing public awareness and public participation in EAC regional integration; 2.5 per cent, equivalent to Shs 0.21 billion, for domesticating regional policies, laws and strategic frameworks. The committee notes that these allocations to the core functions of MEACA are inadequate and cannot make the desired impact.

The committee further observes that Government’s failure to allocate adequate funds to the ministry undermines the existence of the ministry and will fail the purpose and spirit of EAC integration.

The committee, therefore, recommends that out of the unfunded and underfunded priorities in table 4, Government should prioritise the following:

    i. Enhancement of public awareness on EAC integration with additional funding of Shs 2.7 billion.
    ii. Chairing and attendance of mandatory EAC regional meetings with additional funding of Shs 6.60 billion. 
The committee further recommends that MEACA should re-adjust its budget lines to ensure that its strategic objectives are prioritised.

The committee recommends that MEACA should ensure that core functions take the first call on the budget.

Legal Instruments

The committee observes that MEACA faced challenges in invoking its mandate to compel and/or demand compliance from MDAs in mainstreaming their activities towards goals and objectives of East African integration. This has hampered its capacity to achieve its set strategic objectives.

The committee recommends that MEACA should invoke the provisions of the East African Community Act, 2002 to demand for compliance from MDAs. In the meantime, the ministry should introduce a Bill to provide for compliance by all MDAs to table a certificate of compliance with EAC integration at the time of presenting their budget proposals.

Arrears

The committee observes that the arrears listed among MEACA's unfunded priorities in table 4 could cause litigation to be brought against the ministry. The committee further observes that Parliament’s recommendation in its financial year 2014/2015 report on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates, that the ministry should set an annual schedule of payments to clear all arrears in a phased manner within the next three financial years, has not been considered.

The committee, therefore, recommends that it reiterates its earlier recommendation in the report of the financial year 2014/2015 that the ministry sets an annual schedule of payments to clear the arrears in a phased manner within the next three financial years. The committee further recommends that for each financial year, beginning financial year 2018/2019, at least Shs 3.3 billion be allocated to the ministry to settle the outstanding arrears.

The committee further reiterates its earlier recommendation in financial year 2014/2015 that Government should increase the Ministry of East African Community Affairs’ ceiling to cater for adequate funds for contributions to the East African Community secretariat, organs and institutions.

The National Communications Strategy

The committee observes that for the last four years, the ministry has not been able to ensure that the national communications strategy is in place. The committee further observes that the absence of a national communication strategy to support the ministry in ensuring compliance from MDAs is responsible for weak coordination and implementation and has affected its budget execution.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of East African Community Affairs should, within the financial year 2018/2019, develop the national communications strategy and send it to Cabinet for approval.

Harmonisation of Policies and Laws

The committee observes that for many years, the Ministry of East African Community Affairs and MDAs have not prioritised harmonisation of national laws and policies. This negatively impacts on implementation of programmes and adherence to East African Community directives and decisions of the East African Legislative Assembly, the sectoral committees, Council of Ministers and the Summit and as such, has slowed down the East African Community integration process.

The committee recommends that in order to strengthen implementation and coordination of East African Community directives, decisions and programmes, the ministry and MDAs should within the financial year 2018/2019 harmonise all the outstanding laws and policies.

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, in reference to the recommendations made in this report, the Committee on East African Community Affairs proposes that the Ministry of East African Community Affairs be allocated additional funding in the following unfunded and underfunded priority areas:

    1. Enhancement of public awareness on East African Community integration – Shs 2.75 billion.
    2. Chairing and attending of mandatory East African Community regional meetings – Shs 6.60 billion. Madam Speaker, currently, the President of Uganda is the chairperson of the community.
    3. The Inter-University Council of East Africa, which is hosted in Uganda, has arrears of over Shs 10 billion. We recommend that Shs 3.3 billion be provided to the institution.

If the additional funds are provided, the budget of the ministry for financial year 2018/2019 will increase from Shs 28.424 billion to Shs 41.074 billion as indicated in Table 5. The recurrent budget would be Shs 37.244 billion. Of the Shs 37.244 billion, Shs 1.135 billion would go for wage and then Shs 36.109 billion would go for non-wage. The development budget would be Shs 0.53 billion and arrears would cater for Shs 3.3 billion, coming to a total of Shs 41.074 billion. I beg to move.

Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence. Allow me to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee meetings we had during the processing of the report and the report of the committee. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and the members of the Committee on East African Community Affairs. 

5.51
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I would like to begin by applauding the committee for the vigorous work and the good contributions to the report. I entirely support the recommendations. 

Under key East African Community activities, you have not talked about anything to do with national identity cards (IDs). I do not know under which budget line it comes here. There is this issue of putting expiry dates on our IDs. We are becoming an East African Community and we are saying that by 2024, the IDs will expire. Therefore, I do not know whether our citizenship also expires by that time. In other countries like Rwanda, for instance, their IDs are open; there is no limit. If we are heading towards unification, can we come back together really in that manner? I think it is wrong. You should be talking about these national IDs.

The other issue is on sensitisation and creating awareness. I thought we needed to double the budget for this. If you come to Kumi right now and you ask my people about the East African Community, they will not know what you are talking about. Therefore, I do not know what you are going to do about this. I recommend that we double the budget towards creation of awareness. Double it and then come to the grassroots. Awareness is not supposed to be created only in Kampala. People are also in the village and they need to benefit –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to seek clarification from you. Are you talking about regional passports or national IDs because national IDs are under the Ministry of Internal Affairs? Therefore, what are you talking about exactly, honourable?

MR AOGON: I actually thought you were coming to support me and build it better. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, my lay understanding is that as East Africa, we need to become one, whether you are talking about passports or whatever. When I am travelling, I should be free. I should be doing it in a normal way so that nobody questions me. 

I can tell you that even Members of Parliament get challenges while travelling within the EAC. It is an issue. Therefore, look at these details and do something about it. We should not be passing policies and budgets for the sake of it. Let us do something that really supports the country and the EAC to grow and we promote trade. I think that is my major concern. For awareness, double the budget. The rest can come later. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.54
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think our President has been on record in supporting the integration of the East African Community. He has really done a great job in ensuring that the East African Community stands as one. However, when you hear from a committee report that there is no communication strategy to bring all Ugandans on board, it looks like we are leaving the President and a few ministers, who know about the East African Community, to support the integration. This is because they are the ones who know about it. 

Therefore, I really support the recommendation of this committee that we need a communication strategy to bring every Ugandan on board. In that way, Ugandans will understand what the East African Community really means, what it is about, how they stand to benefit and why their taxpayers’ money is going into the East African Community. Therefore, I think hon. Ayoo and the team, you are spot-on on this. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: This has reminded me about something. Where is the Swahili in our community? How are the children learning Swahili? Even me, I do not know Swahili but I thought we should have a generation that speaks Swahili. Now, we are together but not together really - Ours is Luganda? (Laughter)

5.56
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are privileged to be speaking Swahili across the border there.

Madam Speaker, it was very good for hon. Ayoo to actually say something about the mandate and intention of the East African Community when it came up. I would like to bring to the attention of this House that there is really a lot that needs to be done in strengthening the East African Integration. What happens here in Kampala and maybe other capitals is not what is felt on the ground. Our people, especially my people, are suffering a lot. Whereas our neighbours move freely into Uganda, for us to enter just a few kilometres into Kenya our people end up in jail for moving without permits that would have enabled them to move in.

Madam Speaker, we also have a challenge with our transporters. Right now, for Ugandan trucks to be allowed to load cargo in Mombasa, they have to go through a very rigorous exercise that is frustrating, and it may take one full month before one is cleared to load. Some people are advised to use Kenyan registered trucks because the process is quite frustrating. 

For us to be able to benefit from the East African Community, it should not only be one sided. When I look at this critically, I see Uganda pushing very much and giving a lot of benefits to our neighbours but when it comes to Ugandans accessing these benefits, it is really a very big challenge. Very many of our boys’ motorcycles, with Ugandan registration numbers, were impounded in Kenya and yet in Mbale and Tororo, Kenyan motorbikes are moving everywhere –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One additional minute because he is from the border; he has more information. 

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Therefore, I thought the committee and the ministry should further explore this such that the benefits of the East African Community can be felt across. 

It does not only happen here but even in Tanzania. It is unfortunate we are trying to introduce that route to access our goods that at times come through there, but there is a lot of frustration. There are very many taxes that our people are charged with while in those countries and yet for them when they come here, it is free. Therefore, I think we really need to explore and look at this very seriously. 

Last but not least, Madam Speaker, the bridge at Malaba is causing a lot of frustration. Our neighbours are crying that we keep saying the East African integration is strong when they have built the road and bridge on their part but we have failed to do the same on our side. It is becoming an embarrassment. Let us work as a team and enjoy all the facilities across. Let Uganda also fix the bridge for our cargo to be able to move freely on either side without conflicting on a very narrow road as it is now. Today I talked to Uganda Revenue Authority and they were complaining –(Member timed out.)

6.00
MR STEPHEN KANGWAGYE (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. At least, you have given me an opportunity. First and foremost, I would like to thank the committee members for their good report and recommendations. I also would like to take this opportunity to thank His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda; at least he has been there to make sure the East African countries are one. 

To me as a person, however, who comes from the border of Uganda and Tanzania, I do not see any kind of unity in this. This is because at the boundary that separates us with Tanzanians, many people were tortured and their property was confiscated. In the committee’s report, I do not see that. When somebody is caught in either Tanzania or Uganda, or if his or her property is found on the other side, what happens? 

People’s property was confiscated and none of them was compensated. We would like to know how we can be able to consider these people as Ugandans. Those people who fall the other side did not know and yet many of them even had land titles.

Madam Speaker, my colleague has said when Tanzanians are in Uganda, they move freely and mingle with us as though they were Ugandans. They eat, drink and do everything with us. However, if you dare cross to Tanzania, you will suffer. They will beat you to death or jail you, torture you and take whatever you have at that particular time. Therefore, we really would like to see how these people can be brought on board and also be treated like human beings. Why shouldn’t we also be treated like we treat them? Why shouldn’t we also be considered as real human beings? Tanzanians are not good people for that matter, Madam –(Interjections)– Not yet, my brother. Allow me to express all this -

Madam Speaker, it is recently –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One additional minute for the border man. (Laughter)

MR KANGWANGYE: Thank you. Madam Speaker, recently, four of our boda boda riders took some Tanzanians from Bugango Centre in southern Uganda to Tanzania. Up to now, they are still in jail there with their boda bodas. They were beaten thoroughly and told they were Ugandans and there was no need for them to step there and yet they had gone there with Tanzanians; they even did not pay them. On the other hand, Tanzanians this side are enjoying life - education, hospitals and everything. Why are we being treated like that? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Minister for East African Community Affairs, I do not know whether the policy is still there in Kenya but when you enter the country illegally, you will be convicted for two months. They will then convict you for another two months for failing to report your presence in the country - those are now four months - and then they will convict you for another two months for remaining in the country. So, automatically, you get six months. I hope it has ended.

6.04
MR SAMSON LOKERIS (NRM, Dodoth East County, Kaabong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to indicate that in the presentation of the committee, there are other things that the Ministry of East African Community Affairs should be doing. 

I come from the border area of Kaabong; we border Kenya and South Sudan. There are issues that could be included in these plans so that we get to know what happens, like border disputes. Currently, we have a problem with Kenya. I think we are only managing the map but the Kenyans have come in as far 13 kilometres into our country. We are only looking at the map. We have raised this issue and these are the issues we feel this ministry should be handling.

Another issue is about conflicts. All of you are aware that in Karamoja, there was disarmament. Guns were removed from the Karimojong but the guns are still with the Kenyans and they have always used them to come and kill our people. We thought this would be another of their mandates so that the ministry could negotiate with other related departments in Kenya and discuss the disarmament in Kenya because we have had it and think we have a problem.

Lastly, we have the issue of trade barriers. We have no roads that connect us to Kenya and South Sudan. I think the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is represented here. For us, we are enclosed and we cannot move across. Government had got money one time to construct two immigration and customs offices in Kaabong but because we had the issue of the land, Government had to withdraw the money.

I believe this is the mandate that the Ministry of East African Community Affairs should be doing to ensure that they meet with other colleagues and raise up these issues. Otherwise - (Interruption)

MR AYEPA: Madam Speaker, when the chairperson was presenting, he talked about the minister meeting the challenge of ensuring that the ministries are compliant to the East African protocols. They were suggesting that we should have a certificate of compliance to the East African arrangement like we have a certificate of gender equity and so on. 

My question is: What are these details and parameters that we must ensure that ministries comply with? There must be something uniform. Is it finances or taxes that must be uniform and that we should comply with? We should know so that if the ministry is not complying with something, then we can follow it up. What should the ministry comply with? You are hearing hon. Lokeris complaining that guns are on the other side and not here. What are we to comply with? I needed to get that clarification from the committee. Thank you.

MR SAMSON LOKERIS: Thank you very much. Lastly, as my colleague said, we have protocols which are being signed on issues like security and trade. Whose role is it to follow them up? They are always signed but I think in our own country protocols are signed and not followed up. That is why we have a problem. If you are in pursuit of a person with a gun and this person has shot a Ugandan and gone across, you just stop at the border. Therefore, what are these protocols being signed for? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Lokeris has raised a very important point. You know, when we go for our meetings as Speakers, I am the Speaker who has the longest list of conventions which have not been implemented in my country. I have the longest; you can imagine - Pan African Parliament, African Union and so on. Government should wake up. 

They ask me to answer why I have not implemented them, but what can I do? Ratification has not come and domestication has not come. So, Uganda’s Speaker has the longest list of noncompliance. Can I invite the Minister of East African Community Affairs?

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek your indulgence. The Ministry of East African Community Affairs and EALA are supposed to help us fast-track the Treaty up to the political federation. The year 2018 was supposed to be the year in which we were preparing for the monetary union, to agree on the convergence criteria. The committee report is silent on this. If the minister can tell us where we are on road map; are we ready for a monetary union? If we have moved from the common market, if we are indeed a community we should be told. 

There is further evidence to that. The East African Community which we lost and we have been dying to have had joint venture projects. There was a steamer from Kisumu to Jinja and from Namasagali to Masindi Port and in Butyaba connecting to others. That was a joint venture project. We had East African Airways; now Kenya Airways is fighting alone for its market, Rwanda is fighting alone and we are trying to introduce our own. We had East African Harbours and other industries. 

Can we be informed by the minister what efforts we have made at this point in time - Last week on Wednesday, I saw a press conference that was taking place in Kenya disowning our standard gauge railway project. They have no money to bring that project up to the border. That means whatever Uganda is planning without the connection to Kenya is a dead project. Last year, we had this pipeline project which did not take off because we had gone to Tanga and that has caused us problems. 

True integration means interconnections in terms of power lines, pipelines, roads, harbours and steamers. I do not see this actual integration taking place. Can we get – (Interjection) - Can I allow the information?

THE SPEAKER: I thought you are asking the -

MR MUKITALE: Yes. My question is to the minister to truly explain to us.

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite the Minister of East African Community Affairs to respond. 

6.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Julius Maganda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report that they have given to this House. I also thank Members for their comments and advice. 

The Ministry of East African Community Affairs, as per the preamble of the chairperson of the committee, performs the role of coordination of almost all ministries. We ensure that whatever protocol is signed by the partner states is implemented by the ministries, departments and agencies within the country. That is our mandate entirely. One of the things that we do is to ensure that we also follow up. However, our mandate can easily be limited when we do not get allocations. I am happy that the committee is coming up with recommendations in the budget that should also expand our mandate.

One of the Members talked about the East African passport. We have the East African passport, which is used within the six partner states, including South Sudan which is the youngest partner -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the Member was not talking about the passport. He was saying our national identity card has an expiry date but the identity cards in the neighbouring countries are open. How do we relate?

MR MAGANDA: Madam Speaker, the emergence of the passport brought in the identity card. Right now, we have harmonised the travel around the region by use of the national identity card. For Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania, you do not need to use a passport; use an identity card. The national identity card of Uganda is now the travel document within the three partner states as for now.

Regarding Tanzania and Burundi, the system which they use would not read the identity cards but it is being worked on. By October, the system will be harmonised and it will be able to read these other identity cards. Therefore, immediately it is done, they will harmonise and you will now use your ID for Tanzania and Burundi as well. Therefore the passport is a travel document –(Interruption)

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, I have had to reluctantly raise a point of order especially when I realised the honourable minister, with all due respect, is speaking from both sides of the mouth. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, I happen to travel to all this East African countries, particularly Kenya and Tanzania. For the minister to insinuate that our national identity card is acceptable in Kenya and Tanzania is not only misinformation but misleading information. The truth of the matter is if the hon. Nakayenze was here to attest to what happened to them when they were -

THE SPEAKER: When they were going for a wedding in Mombasa?

MR NAMBESHE: Yes. When they produced their identity cards, they just laughed at them. Even this protocol, which he is alluding to, that has removed restrictions to do with free movement of labour, goods and services, only works in Uganda. It seems among the partner states, it is only Uganda that is championing the promotion of the East African cooperation. This does not work in Kenya.

Is it in order, therefore, for the honourable minister to speak from both sides of the mouth?

THE SPEAKER: I only saw one mouth. (Laughter) Honourable minister, can you clarify on the two mouths if you have them. (Laughter)

MR MAGANDA: Madam Speaker, it is very difficult to clarify whether I am speaking from two mouths. However, as I said, the national ID is now operational here in Uganda, Kenya and Rwanda. Tanzania and Burundi are coming on board by October.

We have to appreciate that a few challenges might be coming in the process of travel, but we know that it is practical and I would like to reiterate our commitment on that. If a Member or any person from any community within Uganda travels and gets a problem, we have put up a committee at the border and at the ministry to receive reports and we should be able to counter these issues immediately and let the other country know that there is a problem emerging at that level.

As a ministry, we have so far covered 54 districts under sensitisation and awareness creation programmes and we have a plan to cover 70 districts before we close this year. We shall definitely add that in the budget. Within this month, I will be in Iganga and Kamuli; I will communicate to the Members of Parliament. We plan to move around sensitising and creating awareness. We also write monthly reports for purposes of awareness, which are published after four months. We give these documents to the Members of Parliament to read about what is happening after every quarter.

Madam Speaker, the communication strategy has also been worked on; the document is before Cabinet awaiting Cabinet approval before we bring the matter to the Members of Parliament. As a ministry, we have already concluded our part.

Kiswahili is a language that is supposed to be spoken in East Africa and therefore in Uganda. It is in the Constitution of Uganda. We have a Kiswahili commission that is hosted in Tanzania. In Uganda, we have the Kiswahili Council under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. They help in formulating Kiswahili as a subject in the syllabus, which is supposed to be taught from secondary school. However, it also helps to retool Ugandans who would wish to learn Kiswahili even at an old age under the Ministry of Education and Sports.

The protocol on the free movement of persons is a protocol which we are supposed to facilitate, and this is the biggest part of the integration. I believe that this is one area where members get challenges. We keep advancing and if our people have issues in Kenya, Tanzania we handle it case by case. However, we cannot rule out the fact that when a Ugandan crosses to Kenya, for example, he may get problems as a person; he could either become a criminal or have some other personal problems.

Hon. Angura talked about the delay in transport. The Ministry of East African Affairs cannot determine how your goods will move from Mombasa or Dar es Salaam to Kampala on a truck. The Ministry of East African Community Affairs, Ministry of Trade and Industry and the Ministry of Finance only facilitate, to see to it that these goods are easily pushed through customs. We have now set up a system, which has harmonised all the customs systems under a single customs territory; so goods now move from Mombasa to Kampala in four days.

We have also established an officer of Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) in the Ministry of East African Community Affairs and a department in the ministry to facilitate you as you import goods. It is on the second floor of Crested Towers, under Uganda Revenue Authority office. We did this to ensure that you can pay taxes from here and your goods move directly to your house without going through URA in Uganda. 

Those are the processes that we are establishing. However, we cannot account for any breakdown of a truck along the road because that is a separate engagement you entered into with the person moving your goods. 

On arbitrary arrests, we have set up a committee at the border headed by the district resident commissioners. They are supposed to ensure that if there is a person who has been arrested, like my friend from Isingiro reported here, they are able to counter this with their colleagues from the partner states and have the issues sorted out. We are trying to create a system that can handle matters locally without reaching the minister.

We have also made it easy for the movement of goods in the country in terms of importation. We are reducing on smugglers by ensuring that goods which are imported into the country and are worth less than $2000 dollars do not attract taxes. I would like to emphasise that if you happen to travel to Rwanda or Kenya and you buy goods which are worth less than $2000, they will not attract tax as long as the goods originate from Rwanda, or from Uganda to Kenya or Kenya to Uganda. However, they must have a simple certificate of origin and an invoice that certifies that these goods were manufactured from within the partner states. We are sensitising our people so that they can benefit from this scheme.

We are aware of the bridge in Malaba. Trademark East Africa under the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives has built a one-stop border point in Malaba. We shall be going there very soon to commission it. The bridge that connects Malaba, Uganda to Malaba, Kenya is small and it was not worked on. The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is already having negotiations with Trademark East Africa to complete that bridge. Very soon, they will be communicating about that effort. The bridge will be repaired and the road will definitely be widened to cater for more traffic around the border.

Isingiro, Kyotera and that part of Masaka have problems, and I would like to appreciate the Member who made a comment on that. There are problems of land ownership and pastoralism because communities cross over to graze their cattle. There is also water shortage especially during the dry season; there is always a lot of drought. There is also a challenge on regulations because each country has different laws. Our law on pastoralism and movement of cattle is different from the Tanzanian law. A few months ago, Tanzania confiscated cattle from the Masai of Kenya and sold them off; the same happens here.

As a ministry, we have coordinated and right now the Ministry of Lands and Housing, Ministry of Water and Environment, Ministry of Trade and Industry, Ministry of East Africa Community Affairs and Ministry of Foreign Affairs have held two meetings on how we can identify and establish the boundary around Isingiro and Kyotera. The same issue is also being handled with the border at Busia and Karamoja, so that we can have proper demarcations. Thereafter, we allow people to have specified times when they will be crossing over to graze. We shall create a corridor that can give them access to water for their animals on the other side. The ministers who are responsible are already doing some work on that.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, does that involve compensating our people who lost property when they were viciously chased from Tanzania? 

Also, under the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), what are you doing about violence against women, especially the practice of female genital mutilation, in the East African Community?

MR MAGANDA: Madam Speaker, the minister has already taken that issue through EALA and a law was passed. The partner states have already pronounced themselves on the issues of gender, especially on female genital mutilation. Almost all partner states have secured support on this, even from the civil society, and there is a lot of sensitisation going on. 

The ministry has also established a department of gender in the Ministry of East African Community Affairs. We are working with the partner states and civil society organisations to see to it that we create support for these mothers, our old mothers, who have been acting as doctors during circumcision. If they get some means of survival, then the vice will easily reduce. Therefore, it is an effort that is being done by many players. I know Parliament, with your effort, you have taken the lead on this, but the ministry has already established a department. 

Regarding compliance, which the committee mentioned, we support it. However, we are a coordinating ministry. If other ministries are not complying, especially on ratification of some protocols and conventions, payments and also regulations, then the ministry can award those certificates to ensure that these ministries move on well. We have no problem with that because we actually do coordination and I do not think it is a problem for us. 

A monetary union is in the pipeline. We have so far passed two Bills. One was the Bill establishing the monetary institute. The second one is the Bill, which is going to establish or determine the location of the East African Central Bank; it will be tabled on 27 May 2018 in Nairobi where the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA) will be sitting. I know it will be concluded because we have already sent it to the committee. We are already on course and we believe by 2024, we shall have a monetary union in force and it will usher us into having a single currency. 

The East African institutions’ joint venture collapsed at the collapse of the East African Community in 1977. However, we have revived this and some of the institutions have been returned. There are some institutions, which would not be easily returned because some countries have moved on, especially the East African Airways. 

Some countries have moved on, and we have to appreciate that they have developed more than others. Rwanda has moved on with its own airline. Kenya has moved on and is now a big player in the market around the world. Uganda is coming on board and Tanzania is on board. What we are saying is that when all countries have moved on, we can have a single infrastructure that our airlines can benefit from within the region. This would reduce on the rates, so that the East Africans can benefit. The negotiations will be going on. 

Regarding the roads, we are developing them under the East African linkage; we are going to have the Trans-African Highway, which is going to cut across the whole of Africa. We shall also have our own internal roads. There is the northern corridor, which is being developed; the southern corridor that is going to even have the railway up to the lake through Mwanza; and we also have the Standard Gauge Railway (SGR) which is still under negotiation. Once Kenya gets the money that is going to push it up to Malaba, we shall be proceeding. 

I do not want to rule out the fact that Uganda as a Government cannot continue to carry out its plans on the SGR. We shall continue with our plans to establish infrastructure; the moment the railway gets to Malaba, then we shall link. If the SGR does not reach Malaba, we plan to have a water system that is going to connect to the railway –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and we have presented at least two reports to this Parliament on this issue. The issue of SGR is not about Kenya extending their line up to the border with Uganda. The issue is about Exim Bank refusing to approve the loan for Uganda because Uganda had exaggerated the costs.

Therefore, is the honourable minister in order to misinform and mislead this Parliament that the failure to start the SGR line from the border is because Kenya has not extended up to the border? 

THE SPEAKER: Is that what he said? Are you saying we have not moved because Kenya has not reached the border? I thought we had our own plan.

MR MAGANDA: Madam Speaker, I would like to clear the record. The railway will definitely have to link. Uganda is carrying out its mandate and we have not got any rejection in the negotiations that Government is carrying out with Exim Bank. We are not aware as Government. However, if the Member of Parliament is aware, that is still off record; for us, we are not aware of it. We are going ahead with the process of ensuring that we get this loan. At the same time, we are also reading the events that are going on in Kenya because we definitely have to link the railway. That is what I meant. Thank you.
 
MR AYOO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I conclude, I would like to thank Members for their contributions. I would like to say that there is a lot of information that needs to get to Members of Parliament and the public, which is not coming in from time to time. The law requires that the ministry reports to this Parliament quarterly and gives information so that we have ample time for debate, but this is not happening. I think the ministers should take this up. Time should be allocated for the Minister of East African Community Affairs to report to this Parliament so that we can have enough time to debate some of these issues. 

The truth is that we also have a report, which is ready, and it was written after we went round to the border posts and the ministries. There are so many things that need to come to the attention of Parliament. All these challenges and questions that have been brought forward by Members are true and we need to deal with them. 

A Member asked what we need to comply with. As stated by the minister, the Ministry of East African Community Affairs only coordinates but the actual work and implementation of the regional programmes, for example, could be done by the Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Trade and Industry, Ministry of Works and Transport, Ministry of Education for Kiswahili. Therefore, we recommended that they need to harmonise laws and policies so that they are able to implement those programmes. 

I want to give an example of Kenya, where they are very strict with people going into their country illegally, as well as Rwanda. However in Uganda, anybody will come to the country and nobody follows them up. Even though they say they are coming to stay here for three or four days, they will come and settle. These are questions that the ministries and departments of Government should begin to take seriously. We are now requesting that after dealing with the budget reports, we present the report of the committee so that Parliament can be able to debate this. 

With those remarks, I would like to move that Parliament considers the budget proposals for the Ministry of East African Community Affairs presented by the committee for the financial year 2018/2019. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House should adopt the report –
 
MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, you will bear with me. There is a burden of representation. I am sitting in for somebody and this is very important for the growth and progress of our country.

Basically, honourable minister, I bring to your attention, in summary, just an overview of the following: You could find time in the ministry to update us on the status of our regional commitments in terms of the protocols. Madam Speaker, you will recall that even your own Members here have often been confronted by embarrassments. You allow them to travel for official duty to represent our country effectively only to be turned away at some of the conferences because we have not made good on our commitments in terms of paying up our subscriptions. On that basis, I think that it is very important that you come back to this House and give us specifically the progress and updates of our regional commitments in terms of protocols.

Secondly, we are all aware that as a region, we have different constitutional arrangements and frameworks - term limits, no term limits; age limits, no age limits; seven years, five years. How do you reconcile the two? We cannot move, certainly. 

In addition, honourable minister, we need to track the progress of the East African Community integration. Specifically, we need to know where we were yesterday, where we are today and what our future is like in terms of scope, range and perspectives. 

Fourthly, can we improve on our trust system, honourable minister? We commune and say, “I am my brother’s keeper; I am my sister’s keeper” as a region. A certain country will ask us to support their candidate for the African Union and we commit ourselves to supporting them. However, when we get to the polls, we turn around and we do not support them. Therefore, we have neighbours within the region that have started looking at us with a suspicious eye. It is no wonder that every time we push a candidate from Uganda, our regional brothers and sisters do not support them. There is no trust in the system.

Madam Speaker, I do not know whether you are aware that Makerere University and other national universities charge the same tuition fees for students who come from Kenya, Rwanda, Burundi and South Sudan, but the same is not happening in other partner states. When you go to Kenya, a Ugandan student is charged as an international student and yet we are charging their students our local fees. Therefore, honourable minister, I think it is very important that you look into that.

Finally, honourable minister, you sit in Cabinet; we do not sit there. However, we remember the President has been very clear that we need to cut down on the cost of workshops and sensitization seminars. However, I see the same seminars featuring in the report. I thought if we had that money available, we would rather have those reinforced and cure our health or education system. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the committee on East African Community Affairs be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to the Committee on Trade.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

6.39
MR JOHN BOSCO LUBYAYI (NRM, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Madam Speaker and honourable members, allow me to report on behalf of my chairperson. This is the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the ministerial policy statements and draft budget estimates for the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities for the financial year 2018/2019.

Madam Speaker, this report encompasses the following votes:

    a) Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives 
    b) Vote 154 - Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS)
    c) Vote 306 - Uganda Export Promotion Board (UEPB)
    d) Vote O22 - Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities 
    e) Vote 117- Uganda Tourism Board (UTB)

Madam Speaker, the overall performance of the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives was at 39 per cent. Out of the approved budget of Shs 64.593 billion, Shs 16.1 billion was spent by the first half of financial year 2017/18. The underperformance was mainly attributed to the poor performance of the Government and external finance development budget. The ministry's wage bill is expected to remain constant at Shs 2.11 billion while nonwage, development (Government and external finance) are proposed to increase by Shs 2.l2 billion, Shs 10.56 billion and Shs 3.23 billion respectively.

Budgetary allocations to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives have declined from Shs 64.6 billion in the financial year 2017/2018 to Shs 62 billion in the fiscal year 20l8/20l9 represented by a four per cent decrease. The decline is because of the development budget as earlier specified. 

Allocations to the wage bill are constant. The total recurrent expenditure has increased from 19.5 billion in the fiscal year 2017/2018 to Shs 21.7 in the fiscal year 2018/2019 respectively.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chair, I think your report is available to the Members on their iPads. Can you to the observations and recommendations?

MR LUBYAYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was dealing with observations. However, let me rush to the critical issues that we handled. Let me go to the key physical achievements by the ministry during the year 2017/18:

1. 	The ministry undertook policy development and regulatory environment formulation, including Bills and sector supervision.

2. 	The ministry supported industry development through key development projects. Soroti fruit factory has registered near completion and a tea factory was set up in Zombo and Nebbi.

3. 	The ministry also continued with the implementation of the Buy Uganda and Build Uganda policy, with successive deepening across sectors.

Policy and Legal Framework 

The ministry has been working towards creating an enabling and conducive trade and investment environment through formulation of various laws, regulations and policies as follows: The Bills before Parliament include the Cooperative Societies (Amendment) Bill; the other Bills under development include the National Consumer Protection Bill, Competition Bill, National Industrial Development Bill, Produce Regulatory Bill, and so on.

Madam Speaker, the committee observed under the Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) sector continues to face challenges including limited access to affordable finance, limited technical and business skills, informal status of the sector, among other challenges which have impeded the sector.

The committee recommends that Shs 2.7 billion be allocated for the operationalisation of the Micro Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs).

Cooperatives Promotion and Development

(a) 	The ministry is holding consultations for a produce marketing regulatory Bill. 
(b) 	Three cooperative unions were investigated and verified for compensations. 

Observation and recommendation

The committee observed that the cooperatives revival is one of the core components of the National Development Plan. However, the budget allocated for it under vote 0620 in the past two financial years and in the medium term does not reflect Government’s commitment to revive this sector of the economy. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government makes it a priority and provides Shs 20 billion for the revival of the cooperatives, and the revival of the cooperative bank should also be fast tracked.

Border Export Markets Zones

The committee recommends that Government allocates Shs 15 billion for the construction of a pilot border market in Elegu since its master plan was developed and is ready. The committee further recommends that Government constructs other border markets like Goli and Bunagana, among others, to promote cross border trade.

Pending Laws

The committee observed with serious concern that a number of Bills have been delayed for a very long time. These Bills include the National Consumer Protection Bill, the Competition Bill, the Price Stabilisation Bill, among others.

The committee recommends that Government should expedite the process of these laws in the next financial year.

Uganda Development Corporation 

Madam Speaker, Uganda Development Corporation (UDC) was established by an Act of Parliament - the Uganda Development Act, 2016. 

Key achievements of UDC in the half year, 20l7/2018 include: 

(a) 	UDC transferred funds to the proprietor of Isingiro Fruit Factory. 
(b) 	Drafted a feasibility study of Lake Katwe salt project
(c) 	Did evaluation of bids in key areas. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government effects the transfer of its interests to UDC, which include-

    1. Amber House Uganda Limited 
    2. Embassy House
    3. Munyonyo Commonwealth Resort 
    4. Nile Hotel Limited 
    5. Phenix Logistics 
    6. Tri-Star Apparels Limited 

The committee further recommends that the process of capitalisation of Uganda Development Corporation with Shs 500 billion should be priority in the financial year 2018/2019, to enable the corporation embark on projects for industrialisation.

African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA)

The African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) is a non-reciprocal trade preference programme that provides duty free treatment to US imports of certain products from eligible Sub Saharan African (SSA) countries. 

The committee observed that the AGOA desk under the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is a presidential initiative that was created under State House. Its roles are to sensitise, coordinate, supervise and monitor all AGOA projects and facilitate investors to cut through the Government bureaucracy. The AGOA desk’s activities are not properly rooted in the ministry.

Madam Speaker, the committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that the AGOA secretariat be merged with the Uganda Export Promotion Board to ensure increased exports of the selected products to the USA market.

Uganda Warehouse Receipt Systems Authority (UWRSA)

Uganda Warehouse Receipt Systems Authority is a Government body established in 2O06. The key achievements for financial year 2017/2018 include:

    (a) The authority inspected and licensed 42 storage facilities. 
    (b) Developed warehouse standards for bagged cereals’ 
    (c) The E-system was developed and pre-tested awaiting finalisation of the procurement process.

The committee recommends that funds be availed to recruit and confirm the required number of staff needed to execute the authority’s roles. The committee further recommends that Uganda Warehouse Receipt Systems Authority be supported to become operational with equipment, tooling support, along with the quality assurance and delivery mechanism to increase household incomes and commodity financing. 

The committee further recommends the refurbishment and development of storage infrastructure to support the post-harvest national food reserve system and the national commodity exchange facility and an amount of Shs 12 billion be availed to fund these projects. 

The committee also recommends that a sum of Shs 5.92 billion be availed to effectively implement the above recommendations.

Vote 154 - Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS)

Madam Speaker, the bureau is responding for providing standards, measures and conformity assessment services for improved quality of life. Their key achievements for financial year 2017/2018 include:

(a) 	357 standards were developed. The high output performance is attributed to increased collaboration with other Government agencies and development partners. 
(b) 	The bureau conducted l,l28 market inspections/surveillances.
(c) 	Over one hundred thousand imports were inspected as a result of growth of the Pre-Export Verification of Conformity (PVoC) programme.

The committee recommends that Shs 6 billon be allocated to UNBS to recruit the 100 staff required. The committee further recommends that funds be allocated to complete the three laboratories for their work.

Vote O22 - Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities

Parliament approved a budget of Shs 92.2 billion to the tourism sector for the financial year 2017/2017. Shs 20.41 was for recurrent expenditure while Shs 6.72 billion was for development expenditure, and appropriation in aid was Shs 7l.9 billion. At the close of the first half of the financial year, the sector was able to access Shs 72.334 billion, representing a performance of 72 per cent. 

Some of the achievements realised include participation in international tourism marketing exhibitions and a domestic tourism awareness campaign (Tulambule), organised tourism competitions including a tourism week, engaged Public Relations (PR) firms to market Uganda’s tourism potential, and others. 

The tourism sector's budget was increased from Shs 99.48 billion in the financial year 2017/2018 to Shs 110 billion in financial year 20l8/2019, equivalent to an increase of Shs 10.5 billion(10.6 per cent). The increase is on account of UTB's recurrent budget that increased by 52 per cent. The increment in the sector allocation is mainly on account of an increase in the non-wage recurrent budget.

Key programmes to be undertaken in the financial yeas 2018/2019 include the following:

a) 	The ministry will undertake domestic tourism awareness campaigns and participate in international fora to popularise Uganda's tourism potential. 

b) 	Under a tourism infrastructure development programme, the sector will undertake the development of museums including the upgrading of the National Museum.

Observations and Recommendations

The committee observed that tourism is the fastest growing sector globally. It is a renewable resource that currently contributes nine per cent of the GDP. Tourism is listed among Uganda’s seven priority sectors. However, the sector has consistently been underfunded. 

Uganda is ranked least in funding tourism promotion and marketing among its regional competitors annually. Regionally, Kenya invests US$ 5O million, Tanzania US$ 27 million and Rwanda US$ 15 million. Uganda invests only US$ 5 million, equivalent to Shs 18 billion, making the least investment among our tourism competitors.

The committee recommends that in the meantime, strategic collaborations with selected airlines, especially those plying major source countries, are critical if the sector is to boost the tourism numbers. Reduced costs of air travel, connected with incentives for accommodation and travel to final tourist destinations, will incentivize those keen to visit.

The committee recommends that Government priorities the construction of alternative international airports in Kasese, Gulu, Soroti and Fort Portal. The Nakasongola airfield should also be redeveloped to boost tourism, promote trade and other strategic reasons.

The committee recommends that Government, under Uganda National

Roads Authority (UNRA), makes it a priority to construct and maintain tourism roads. The committee further recommends that Government gives priority to constructing sports infrastructure with emphasis on golf courses for golf tourism, and stadiums for regional and international soccer tournaments and athletics. The committee also recommends that Uganda Tourism Board strategizes to market Uganda in their key events.

The Uganda Tourism Board

The committee found out that the board does not earn revenue from licensing and regulating of tourism facilities and services as provided by the law.

The committee observed with concern that Uganda Tourism Board still faces challenges of funding hence cannot compete with other regional destinations. Note that even out of the Shs 18 billion allocated to the board in financial year 2017/2018, only Shs 4 billion was released by the end of the half year period 

The committee recommends that Uganda Tourism Board charges levies/fees through licensing and regulating tourism services and facilities to generate revenue that will enable it execute its mandate.

Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA)

Uganda Wildlife Authority’s strategic focus is categorized in six strategic programmes. The approved budget for the authority was Shs 66.487 billion. These resources were to be generated by the Authority by selling park entry fees, Government subventions, concessions and other internal sources. The half year budget performance reflected that 87 per cent of the budget was realised.

Death of 11 Lions in Queen Elizabeth National Park

The committee observed the tragic death of a family of 11 lions in Queen Elizabeth Conservation Area near Hamukungu village. The death was attributed to poisoning but investigations were still ongoing at the time. It is not the first time such an incident is happening; the park had lost nine lions to poisoning during the time the Basongora pastoralists returned and were resettled near the park.

The committee recommends that Government comes up with a strategy on how to mitigate this conflict.

Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute (UHTTI)

The Institute is the only Government owned institution specialising in hotel and tourism training. The institute was re-established as Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute under the Ministry of Tourism in 2015. 

Key achievements of the institute in FY 2017/2018 include:

a) 	All students of the institute were trained and assessed as planned.
b) 	The institute graduated 72 per cent at the ninth graduation ceremony.
c) 	100 students were placed for industrial training
d) 	The hotel achieved 76 per cent occupancy.

Recommendation

The committee strongly recommends that Government gives priority to the hotel institute to address the local employment gaps in the hospitality industry and training in a bid to boost quality trained personnel.

Madam Speaker, and honourable members in light of the above, the committee therefore recommends that the House do adopt the report and approves the proposed budget estimates for the ministries, departments and agencies contained herein for the FY 20l8/19 as follows:

Vote 015: Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives

Recurrent budget - Shs 20,071,863,000 
Development budget - Shs 38,184,828,000
Total – Shs 58,256,691,000

Vote 022: Ministry Of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities

Recurrent budget - Shs 86,004,132,000 
Development budget - Shs 6,081,969,000
Total – Shs 92,086,101,000

Vote 117: Uganda Tourism Board

Recurrent budget - Shs 16,961,583,000 
Development budget - Shs 553,303,000
Total – Shs 17,514,886,000

Vote 154: Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS)

Recurrent budget - Shs 37,731,661,000 
Development budget - Shs 10,109,748,000
Total – Shs 47,841,409,000

Vote 306: Uganda Export Promotion Board

Recurrent – Shs 2,682,717,000
Development – Shs 396,281,000
Total – Shs 3,078,998,000

I beg to move

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and members of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. Before I give the Floor to other Members, I take issue with your recommendation on page 17 concerning Development House. 

Honourable members, the President is occupying part of Parliament. We agreed that for us to leave him where he is, they should give us Development House. However, recently, Uganda Development Corporation (UDC) wrote to us asking for arrears of rent. I have been telling the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, “Can you clear this matter so that you give us our property!” We gave up our building so that the President can sit there and we get Development House in return. Now it is here and they are claiming it as their property. 

Honourable minister, we need you to amend this schedule and get Development House out of the list of properties of UDC or else you give us back our building. This is very serious.

Secondly, in 2015, we approved the National Development Plan and there was supposed to be a regional airport in Jinja. I do not think Soroti was part of those airports which you are reading. What you are saying is not part of the National Development Plan, which we approved in 2015. You are now introducing different things.

7.07
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, I need to thank the committee for the good work done, however I have two observations to make. 

One, when the chairperson was reading, he talked about the Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute and I believe he was talking about the Crested Crane Hotel in Jinja. However, the chairperson either intentionally or unintentionally failed to say something more. We are very concerned about that institute. Mr Chairman, during one of your committee meetings, and you need to clarify this on the Floor, we who come from that area were told that you reduced one floor from what had been originally proposed. 

Since the minister is also here, we shall need to hear from the chairperson and the minister about the position of Government and how far you have gone. We would want to know whether you are still working with our original stand or you have again shifted goal posts. This is a big concern to us who come from that region.

Secondly, Mr Chairman, I heard you talking about a given amount of money to recruit 100 staff for Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS). The other day, the President was saying there should be no more recruitment. After recruiting those 100 staff, who is going to pay their salaries in the subsequent years? Thank you.

7.10
MS AGNES TAAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and committee members for the work well done. 

My concern is on the issue of support to district commercial officers, which is placed under the unfunded priorities under the ministry. Commercial officers are the only staff under the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives based in the local governments. They are the only people who can help mobilise the communities and help Ugandans to take up the programmes that are under these ministries. Therefore, I am very concerned that facilitating these staff – moreover they are only at the district level - is a problem to the ministry. 

I implore Government to look for funds and allocate them to facilitate these staff. This is because there is no reason in paying them a salary when they are not facilitated.

The other issue, Madam Speaker, is about the Uganda National Bureau of Standards. They did a good job and went to the markets. However, after identifying the weaknesses that were there, where they could find meat injected with medicine for preservation of dead bodies, I do not know the strategies the ministry has put in place to improve the standards of the meat that is consumed in our country.

Madam Speaker, I always get very sad when I see meat hanging outside in the markets; it is sad. Actually, the scene is very bad. I do not know what the ministry is doing to improve that industry and restore confidence in the consumers of meat.

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

7.12
MR NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have a few issues to raise. 

First, I will look at rule 148 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, which says the budgets will include those of public corporations and state enterprises which fall under those sectors. The reasoning was that these public enterprises only bring their audited reports here but we do not know their performance and they do not remit dividends to the Treasury. These are our companies and we should earn dividends. Madam Speaker, you will make a ruling on that one at an appropriate time.

Madam Speaker, I would like to raise four issues. I do not know whether the minister in charge of finance is present. The first issue is about the Cooperative Bank. The Cooperative Bank was supposed to have been liquidated in 1998. As we speak now, there is no resolution on the Cooperative Bank and yet the bank had huge assets. With those assets, we do not now need to get more money to invest in opening up the Cooperative Bank. 

What should happen is that Bank of Uganda should bring that money from the sale of Cooperative Bank and it should be used to recapitalise Cooperative Bank. Madam Minister in charge of cooperatives, this money was to the tune of about Shs 90 billion in 2000. You should take care to look at that.

The second issue is on the stabilisation fund –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I can inform you that the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) has requested the Auditor-General to audit all those banks that were closed – I think they are about nine in the last 17 years - and then we shall be able to get the report on their assets and liabilities. Let us support our committee to do their work. There have been attempts to clamp down on them.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the resolution of the Cooperatives Bank is overdue. It should have been resolved by 1998 and you cannot bring it now with the Crane Bank issues.  That is where we shall make a mistake. Crane Bank, Greenland and Teefe are banks that should be dealt with but Cooperative Bank is urgent.

Madam Speaker, I would like to talk about the Coffee Stabilisation Fund. We collected Shs 58 billion for coffee under the Coffee Stabilisation Fund. This money was generated from cooperatives, which the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should be demanding from Bank of Uganda and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, to be used in the revival of cooperatives. I do not think we do not have that money. The problem in this country is that some people assume others will forget. That is how you get to see some people becoming rich, thinking Ugandans will forget. There is Shs 58 billion from the Coffee Stabilisation Fund, which has been on the balance sheet of Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) for some time - I do not know if it is still there. This money should really be used to take care of this matter.

Thirdly, there is no way this country will develop without cooperatives. You can talk about those local and foreign investors but the only thing, which would make this country become a middle income country - of course 2020 is near - is cooperatives. I think we should support the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. 

I am talking from an experience as the Chairman of Bugisu Cooperative Union. Madam Speaker, we have gone down there to work on those cooperative societies and majority of them are dead. However, since they are being revived, they will soon start working. If you go to these villages, you will get old buildings for cotton ginneries, tea, among others. I can tell you we will do very well. 

Madam Speaker, you may not be aware but the best cotton in the World is got in Namulesa –

 THE SPEAKER: Namulesa is in Busoga.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes. I would like to advise that you tell the Basoga in Namulesa that they have good soils for cotton. You can even grow coffee. I know there is coffee in Bushenyi and other places but the best coffee comes from Mt Elgon. You can conduct research on this. In the whole world, the best coffee, which is Arabica coffee, which I am advising all of you to drink, is from the volcanic soils of Mt Elgon. The chairman of the cooperative society managing the growing of that coffee is the one speaking. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I am talking about cooperatives because I think we need to help the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. They are talking about reviving cooperatives but I do not know why they talking about it because the revival of cooperative societies should not be done from the top; it should start from the grassroots. The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should ask for resources. Even if they compensated people and the money is misused by the top officials, if they just went down to the grassroots and say they would like to see where the old cooperative societies existed, and you get old men and women and tell them the reason you need them, you will see how these cooperatives will come up.  

Madam Speaker, I do not know if you have noticed that right now all villagers sell their food before it is ready for harvest. People come with money and buy their food or even coffee before it has flowered and at the end, the farmers become slaves to those who are buying, and many of the buyers are foreigners.

I think we should come up with something to protect the people. This hunger you are seeing in the villages is because these people sell their food and eventually they lack food for their families because they sold what they grew. This is very dangerous. In fact, they are both foreign and local middlemen -(Member timed out.)

7.20
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for its report and I have some observations.

First of all, for us to come up with a better strategy for our economy, we need to re-evaluate our policy on privatisation that led to liberalising the economy. It becomes very difficult for us now to come up with very good ideas, which cannot compete in the market.

The committee talked about the warehouse receipt system, which hon. Nandala-Mafabi talked about. This authority was set up to allow farmers to use their crops or goods to secure credit and when their crops get ready, they would sell them and pay back the money. However, to what extent has this authority done its job? How have we financed it? Unless we go back to the drawing board and re-evaluate the policy of liberalisation, we will not be able to achieve anything. We will come and pass resolutions here but they will remain on paper.

We have been talking about the revival of the Cooperative Bank. If we revived it, how much money are we going to use to re-capitalise it? Would it be about Shs 10 billion or Shs 50 billion? If we use Shs 50 billion to re-capitalise the Cooperative Bank, it will not even be able to compete with a small SACCO like Brac, which has more than Shs 300 billion and it can set its loan terms in the market. 

Therefore, we need to go back to the drawing board and re-evaluate that policy for us to be able to come here and pass it and have it work. 

What hon. Nandala-Mafabi has talked about is a fact; people grow coffee but before they harvest it – (Member timed out.)

7.22
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I am not only a Member of Parliament for Busongora County South but I am also a Member of Parliament representing the 11 lions that died in Queen Elizabeth National Park. The recommendation in the report is to the effect that Government comes up with a strategy on how to mitigate the conflict. However, I think Government will also need the support of Parliament on this matter because that conflict is exacerbated by lack of a legal framework that can provide a remedy. 

Madam Speaker, the present law only provides for the protection of animals; it does not protect the people. Every time these animals go to the community and cause havoc, the community does not have a remedy; that is why even when I highly condemn what happened, the people turned against animals.
	
The situation has become a one of counter provocation because people are now killing animals and the lions have turned against the people. I can report that in Mweya last week, as a way of revenging, a lion killed a child. This is becoming troublesome, so Parliament must come up with a law to amend the Uganda Wildlife Act to ensure that whenever the animals damage people’s property, there is a way of compensating. Unless we do this, this problem will continue.

The other issue is about Kasese Airport. In the 2014/2015 -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute for you to conclude.

MR MBAJU: Thank you. This issue had always been in the budget. However, we do not know where it went. It disappeared from the budget and the airport has never been constructed. Today, it is again appearing in the budget. I am not sure whether tomorrow it will not disappear again.

The other day we approved a loan request for the construction of an airport in Hoima. I would like to ask for the support of this Parliament; if again it is likely to disappear, we should approve another loan request to construct Kasese Airport. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.25
MS LUCY AKELLO	(FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to raise some few issues. 

I would like to start from where hon. Mbaju stopped. He talked about a law that protects only animals but not human beings. Madam Speaker, you will recall that I have severally come here to report cases of attacks by elephants - some crossing from as far as South Sudan, Ethiopia - in Bibia, Pachilo, Koch Goma and other places. They come and destroy people’s property. 

I have reported some of these cases several times to the relevant authorities but no action is taken. Human beings will naturally take the law into their hands. I do not intend to say that the people must take the law into their hands but as a Parliament, we must do something quickly about this so that the people also feel like something is being done for them. 

I would also like to thank the committee very much for allocating Shs 15 billion for the pilot border market at Elegu. For all of us who are aware, we know how this place suffers when it floods. I am sure with the construction of this pilot border market, incidences of flooding and people losing a lot of property will be reduced. Therefore, I ask the whole House to really support this cause so that we have as many border markets as possible to generate more income for us as a country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.27
MS JOSEPHINE BEBONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I also add my voice in thanking the committee for what they have come up with. However, I would like to get clarification from the concerned ministries on the following:

One, Bundibugyo has a border post called Busunga. Before I joined Parliament, I used to hear that it was going to be considered as one of the markets for cross border trade. However, I am surprised that it is not mentioned anywhere. Therefore, I would like to seek clarification on when it will be considered among the border markets.

The second point is on the Sempaya Hot Springs. Some of you who have gone to Bundibugyo are aware that we have got the hottest hot springs in Africa called Sempaya. However, the site has not been improved on up to now yet most tourists who go to Fort Portal at least endeavour to visit Bundibugyo to glance at these hot springs. One time I saw the President enjoying himself at the same hot springs. Recently, hon. Mary Karooro was also in Bundibugyo, where she had breakfast of goonja and boiled eggs at the same place. However, these hot springs are not mentioned anywhere. The site has not improved at all yet the hot springs bring in a lot of tourists. However, we have the best road in Uganda and we thank the Government for that. The road also serves as a tourist attraction.

Thirdly, I would like to talk about the wild animals. Recently, I reported on the Floor of Parliament that at some place called Burondo, wild animals from Semliki National Park always invade and destroy peasants’ crops. I also would like to call on the concerned ministries or Parliament to do something to make sure that these peasants are always compensated when they lose their crops. Something should be done so that these wild animals stop destroying people’s crops. Maybe they should be controlled to stay in their parks. (Member timed out.)

7.30
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity given to me. I would like to thank the committee for the very good report they have presented. 

I would like to comment on two subsectors and one of them is tourism. When you look at our National Development Plan II, tourism has been highlighted as one of the priority sectors. However, when you look at the previous year’s appropriations and current year’s allocations, the sector does not appear at all to have been aligned as the priority it seems to be. 

I know the tourism sector is one of the key sectors, which is expected to bring in very serious foreign exchange. Therefore, I would like to ask the minister to come up with a very serious comprehensive tourism business development strategy. Quite often, Government may not be in a position to provide the necessary funding for tourism development. However, we see that every other day, the Government of United Arab Emirates, for example, come to get their financing from Ugandans because it is part of their strategy. Therefore, we need to come up with a very comprehensive tourism business development strategy amidst the limited funding that we have at the moment.  

The other sector is the cooperatives. It is really shameful what is happening at this time in our history, when we know what cooperatives used to do, in terms of mobilising production and looking for markets across the world. However, when you look at the sector as one of the unfunded priorities, I think we should stand up as Parliament and compel Government to allocate money – (Member timed out.)

7.33
MR COSMAS ELOTU (NRM, Dakabela County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Because of time, I too will comment on majorly two issues. 

I think the committee has done a commendable job. In one of the findings, they compared the different budgets of the East African states on tourism. Indeed, if you go on the ground and see what is happening in our neighbourhood, particularly Rwanda, and you cross over from Kisoro down here, you will see a big difference. Therefore, what I am saying here is that what we spend on tourism promotion is directly proportional to what we reap. 

This speaks to what the previous speaker just said. We cannot simply come up with a budget because we want to match those in the region; that budget has to come with a very clear business plan that will help us come up and catch up with our partners in the region. I think the ministries in charge of tourism and trade are one of the most important ministries in terms of increasing our GDP; they do this through tourism or export promotion. 

I would like to comment quickly on one aspect, which hon. Nandala-Mafabi talked about - the marketing of our products. Maize and citrus crops are particularly immensely affected by what we call contract buyers. In Kyenjojo, you will find many trucks with foreign number plates all over the region simply parked at the farmers’ gates. What does this imply? This simply implies that we do not have control; we cannot regulate and promote our farmers. They cannot produce and set their prices because a foreign buyer will simply come and park at farmers’ gates. 

I think the Government’s policy on promoting the cultivation of citrus fruits, especially in eastern and northern Uganda, has worked. There are a lot of citrus fruits in that particular region. I think the farmers all over the region have been so bent on the operationalisation of the Soroti fruit factory. Madam Speaker, this has gone on for so long and this year, I must say, is probably the best year in terms of the fruits we are going to get from the farms. I would like to ask the ministry to do everything possible to ensure that this factory becomes operational at least by June or July this year. Otherwise, the farmers are going to lose all hope in the production of citrus fruits, Madam Speaker. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe in relation to that, that same factory will be supporting the farmers in the greater east; the Basoga and the Bamasaba are busy growing citrus fruits. So we need that factory really urgently.

7.36
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to speak about the promotion of tourism since it has been mentioned in the report as the fastest growing industry. We are not doing enough, maybe due to shortage of funds. 

I would like to request the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to work out a comprehensive plan on how they can carry out the promotion of tourism. They only did it during the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM). We brought an idea from Cairo where you reach the streets and tourism is on the mouth of every citizen there. Wherever you go, the first thing the Egyptians would ask you is, “Have you seen the pyramids” or “Have you been to the hanging church?”  In Uganda, we do not know that. 

Can we have all these people working in the hotels inducted in creating awareness so that our people have it on them to ask whoever comes to eat food or drink, “Have you already seen the source of River Nile? Have you been to Mt Elgon? Have you been to the best coffee growing place in Uganda?” 

Madam Speaker, we should go international. What would stop us from going to CNN? When you are in the USA and you say you come from Uganda, they will ask you whether you are near Nigeria; people do not know Uganda. If they do not know Uganda, how can they know about our gorillas? How can they know that we are the only country in –(Interjection)– They only know Idi Amin. So, can we go international? Can we save money, Madam Minister, and go out? Let us not limit ourselves to Uganda here so that the country and our treasures are known. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a lot of work to do but also one of the ministers is not here. The Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities is not here. Therefore, let me ask the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to respond to her part and then we defer the other part until the minister comes – We agreed we would have very few contributions, honourable members.

MR SSEWUNGU: The ministers do not allow clarifications, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: You will go to the canteen with the minister and she will clarify. (Laughter)

7.39
THE MINISTER FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will attempt to respond to some of the issues that have been raised here. First of all, I would like to thank the committee for the comprehensive report they have given today.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of Development House being struck out of UDC property and the airport at Jinja, I would pray that you allow me to consult; I will come back with the report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I wrote to the Prime Minister on 21 November 2016 about that house and I gave you a copy.

MS KYAMBADDE: Okay, Madam Speaker, can I consult the Prime Minister, please? 

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MS KYAMBADDE: Thank you.

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable minister. When I was in primary school, Gulu Airfield used to be second to Entebbe International Airport. In the 1990s when I was in the council, Gulu Airfield was supposed to be upgraded but probably because of the war, that did not take place. Therefore, I need clarification on what was reported; it has the longest runway in the country but the name does not surface anywhere. Can you clarify this to us? The northern part of Uganda also needs to participate in trade directly with buyers and also in tourism? Thank you.

MS KYAMBADDE: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, on the issue of Gulu Airfield, allow me consult because I am not prepared for it. 

On the hotel training institute, the African Development Bank (ADB) has allocated Shs 20 billion to improve the training institutes but to also upgrade that hotel –(Interjections)– it is a loan. Thank you.

On the issue of 100 workers of Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS), the question – (Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, as the former chairperson of the Committee on National Economy, I really would like serious clarification on that. The Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives can also stand in for the tourism sector on this point. 

First of all, as you try to reimburse UDC, Government should remember that the only surviving child of Uganda Hotels is Jinja Crested Crane Hotel. Because of its success story, it was retained. During CHOGM in 2007, this country had a problem. We ran to Kenya and South Africa to look for managers to manage CHOGM activities because our training curriculum and institutes could not compete with Utalii. 

Jinja Crested Crane is the Utalii of Uganda; it is a centre of excellence. However, I was surprised at what I found when we visited Jinja this financial year and yet we passed a large amount of money for a centre of excellence. What the chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs is saying is that any hotelier should be able to market Uganda. That is what we would like at Jinja Crested Crane Hotel. Unfortunately, you chopped the money and you did not come back to Parliament. We were expecting what we passed in Parliament but what you are giving that project now does not cover the critical areas - the training aspect we would like to achieve.

I would like to say, Madam Speaker, that beyond the limited timeframe we now have for these policy statements, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development together with the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities should bring us a comprehensive report on that very important issue. We would like to promote tourism but if we train the staff who will help market Uganda and run people’s hotels, it shall all be in vain and Kenyans will continue managing our hotel industry. I thank you.

MS KYAMBADDE: I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for recommending that the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities comes to respond to some of these issues. I am not so conversant with the issues that have been raised by the honourable colleague.

On the issue of the district commercial - 

THE SPEAKER: We will deal with the hotel issue when the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities is here tomorrow.

MR KIBALYA: The budget for the training institute is going to be handled by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives.

THE SPEAKER: No; let us wait for the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. Let her answer the issue on cooperatives, SACCOs and all those. 

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, on the issue of the district commercial officers, it is true that they do mobilise. The committee has recommended that we acquire some money for the district commercial offices in form of a conditional grant to the tune of Shs 12 billion so that they can be supported, if the Ministry of Finance allocates that money.

On the issue of the markets, UNBS has come out aggressively to work with KCCA to improve on the markets. There were some stores or businesses that were closed especially those that were found guilty of using formalin on meat. There has also been aggressive training on how they should handle this commodity. Therefore, the exercise is still ongoing with KCCA and UNBS. 

On the issue of the Cooperative Bank, it is true that we have been engaging Bank of Uganda on this matter but they have been a bit slow. We recommended that we should use some of the resources from some of the very active cooperatives, like Wazalendo and all the rest, to be the basis. This is because bank of Uganda was saying that they have no resources to capitalize or finance them. We are still struggling with it and I hope that by the end of this year, we will be able to give a position on how far we have gone with this matter.

I have to thank the honourable member for the information on the stabilisation fund. We are going to follow it up. However, I wish you could avail us with some of the documents so that we are able to approach them with some form of documentation.

The revival of the cooperatives involves a lot of work and the committee has taken this very seriously. They have recommended Shs 20 billion for the revival of the cooperatives. The minister has been very active in that matter as well.

On the issue of –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable minister. Hon. Kyambadde, I thank you very much for struggling to revive cooperatives. However, my question and clarification is: Have you taken keen interest in getting to know the properties of the cooperatives that have been sold?

Madam Speaker, I was in Soroti recently with the Committee on Education and at least I saw some properties of cooperatives still in existence though not functional. However, when you go to a district like Masaka, most of our properties were sold. I have not seen your ministry or anybody going to the land probe commission headed by Justice Bamugemereire to find out who sold our properties. 

This is important because although there is revival, what about the properties that were sold? We are seeing them being replaced with petrol stations and others. Have you taken interest? Do you have an officer in your ministry who is taking keen interest in finding out what those assets were from the register so that when Government is providing funds, we shall come to you and say that in Kalungu there was this one? Who sold this land and this property? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please conclude.

MS KYAMBADDE: Yes, Madam Speaker. Honourable member, we have taken special interest in that. However, I wish as my colleague could also aggressively push it. We have taken interest in some of these but most of them had loans and that is the challenge because they had to sell out. However, we are also pursuing the compensation, which we have carried out on a small scale in view of the resource envelope in the country that has limited the compensation exercise.

On the issue of foreigners buying food, I would like to say that we have aggressively come out with strategies. We have a warehousing receipt authority, for example, and this is supposed to regulate the warehouses and licensing so that instead of people selling food directly, they will be selling through warehouses. We have requisitioned - and the committee has approved - Shs 5.7 billion to support the Uganda Warehouse Receipt System Authority so that people could sell their goods or commodities through these warehouses.

We are also coming up with a national commodity exchange where we will be auctioning our goods online; we are launching this very soon. It will be able to coordinate the warehouses that we have in place. So far, we have 40 warehouses that have been constructed by private investors and we are sure this will be able to streamline and stabilize prices.  We are committed and believe that this year we will be able to achieve that. I have been talking about this for some time. We have a policy in place and we are working towards streamlining that industry –(Interruption)

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way and accepting these clarifications. You are aware that 90 per cent of our economy - our private sector - is made up of micro, small and medium enterprises. You are also aware they contribute 80 per cent of the manufactured goods and products in this country and contribute 75 per cent of our GDP.

You were talking about warehouses and all those other initiatives, which are very good. However, throughout this ministerial policy statement, I do not see your focus on the micro, small and medium enterprises. For the record, there was no money allocated to the promotion of those enterprises but thanks to the committee, they have at least proposed some Shs 2.7 billion.  

Honourable minister, I would like to get clarification; are you focusing on the most important sectors within your ministry?

MS KYAMBADDE: Thank you very much. We are focusing on micro, small and medium enterprises; I was just responding to the issues that were raised. We have Shs 2.7 billion allocated to the operationalization of MSMEs. We already have a directorate in our ministry which is organizing and training these MSMEs and we are also recommending them to UDB for support. (Interruption)

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving me this opportunity. You see when we talk about trade, we also think of commerce because trade and commerce are the same. I wonder if you know whether our chamber of commerce is working. We have some of our business community suffering very much and they have even gone out of business. I believe that is because of lack of structures which should support them in trying to see how best they can move forward.

I would like to know if the Uganda National Chamber of Commerce should help the business communities in municipalities, towns and cities. I seek that clarification. Thank you.

MS KYAMBADDE: The Uganda National Chamber of Commerce was supposed to be having elections for their new leadership but they went to court and they have been there. We tried to appeal and the Attorney-General won the case but they again appealed. So, we have been in and out of court. However, it is an issue we really want to focus on because it is affecting our trade and industry in the country.

We have changed the architectural designs for Elegu border market to be able to harness the over flooding. That is why it has taken a long time. We realised that after it was designed, the flooding had not been factored in. That is why we are now looking for support, and the committee has recommended Shs 15 billion. The border market at Bundibugyo is in the second phase. It is true that we have not factored it into first phase but it will be in the second phase. 

Other issues that have been highlighted here are for the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities issues but except -(Interjection)- Rest in peace Zakayo. We are going to operationalise the Soroti fruit processing plant. We have advertised for the job of manager and we are going through the implementation procedures for recruitment. However, there are still issues that we have to resolve; for example, the Ministry of Finance was supposed to provide funds for the waste management disposal plant for fruit processing. There are also some defects that we have to work on, that were made during construction. However, we are almost ready because the machine and equipment have already been installed. Next week, on Wednesday, I will be going to Soroti. We are going to see when we will commence operation. 

Someone wrote to me a note on the corporate tax on SACCOs. There was a petition against it. We are still engaging the Ministry of Finance but we also need your support as Parliament to see how we can reverse this.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on Saturday I was commissioning a building for Nakanyonyi SACCO in Jinja and this was the main point of concern. They are hoping that we can support the population; the taxation issue is very serious.

MS KYAMBADDE: It is everywhere. I know you are a powerful force; your will help us through. 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, the civil works have been done, the machines have been fixed but the Soroti Fruit Factory cannot operate simply because the treatment plant for waste management is not in place. The committee has recommended that the Ministry of Finance should avail funds but it has not stated the amount needed to complete the construction of the treatment plant for waste management. Can this august House know, so that the citrus fruits that our farmers are producing can be absorbed in Soroti Fruit Factory? How much more money do you need?

MS KYAMBADDE: Yes, I mentioned it but I did not state the figure. Anyhow, we need Shs 600 million. It happens in phases; it is a process but that was the first phase.

MR AOGON: Honourable minister, I know that there are issues to do with funding. However, citrus seedlings were provided to Soroti, Kumi and other districts but the amount of juice that we are able to extract from the varieties that we have given to farmers is unknown. 

You need to come and confirm whether when this machine becomes operational, the process will be sustainable. I am scared that one day when the machines are switched on, all the frits will be consumed in one day rendering the machine redundant. I do not know what will happen then. 

I am telling you this because I know that the only subcounty that I am aware of as having a lot of fruits is Gweri in Soroti. In Kumi, there are few farmers that have these citrus fruits. We need clear statistics as to how many tonnes are needed per day to feed the factory. How many people have you trained to work in that factory? Otherwise, it risks being a white elephant, I am sorry.

MS KYAMBADDE: We have done a lot of training and citrus growing is work in progress. We will continue growing and giving seeds. It is a process and it will continue.

However, we would like Parliament to help us with the Ministry of Agriculture. We requested them to give us their Odema farm so that we also have a nucleus farm of our own but they have not responded. The total cost of the central affluent plant is Shs 2.95 billion but we wanted an upfront fee of about Shs 600 million so that we start with the first phase.

Madam Speaker, allow me to emphasise some of the areas that have been approved by the committee. For MSMEs, it is Shs 2.7 billion; revival of cooperatives at least Shs 20 billion; and Shs 15 billion for Elegu.  

We also pledge to expedite the process of the pending laws. Under Uganda Development Corporation, Development House is still under consultation, Amber House Limited, Embassy House, Phoenix Logistics - The process of capitalising UDC with Shs 500 billion is also very important and I seek your support on this. We would like to reiterate the issue of AGOA being merged with Uganda Export Promotion Board because they are all markets. 

I seek your support for the Uganda Warehouse Receipt System Authority; we need to recruit and confirm the required number of staff needed to execute the authority’s roles and to operationalize it. We need Shs 5.92 billion for that and Shs 12 billion for refurbishment and development of the storage infrastructure to support the post-harvest national food reserve and the national commodity exchange facility.

We also need Shs 5.7 billion for the pipeline project to support Uganda Warehouse Receipt System Authority. I seek your further support for the Management Training and Advisory Centre to be given Shs 3 billion to fund the onsite support to enterprises and capacity development of indigenous firms.

Madam Speaker, we also need Shs 784 million for the replacement of asbestos. Uganda National Bureau of Standards is very important, as raised by most Members, and we need Shs 6 billion to be allocated to it to recruit 100 staff and complete three laboratories that are key in ensuring standards and quality in our commodities. The Uganda Export Promotion Board is focusing on trade and exports to key markets. 

I would like to conclude by saying that the recommendations made by the committee are ideal and if honoured by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, this will not only boost the economy but also the sector of trade, industry and cooperatives. 

I thank you for listening to me and for allowing me to leave the issues of tourism to the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. Thank you, Members, for your contributions.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a decision on this is differed to tomorrow when the tourism minister comes.
 
MR LUBYAYI: Allow me, Madam Speaker, to lay on the Table the minutes of the report.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the minutes and the report are now part of our record. Honourable members, the House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock. We shall start early because we have the other important motion. We shall work quickly so that we can maybe do another seven reports of the sectoral committees. The House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 8.06 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 9 May 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 

