Wednesday, 6 May 2015

Parliament met at 3.13 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

	ADMINISTRATION OF OATH	

The oath was administered to:

    1. Prof. Sandy Stevens Tickodri-Togboa

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Tickodri-Togboa, on behalf of Parliament, I begin by congratulating you and say you are welcome to this Ninth Parliament. You may be coming at the end of the road but we know that you are going to make a big contribution. You will be seated on this side of the House but on this side of the House are the Members of the Opposition and Independents. All are colleagues in this House and you are welcome.

I want to handover the instruments of office as a Member of Parliament. I hand you the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which you should use to do your work. I also hand over the Rules of Procedure of the National Assembly. Read them and they will help you in conducting your work. Good luck and I think I will leave you in the hands of the Government Chief Whip. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as our new Member takes his seat, I want to thank the government but more so the Vice President of the Republic of Uganda. During the second session of this Parliament, we had a long debate here on the issue of Science and Technology and we requested that the government takes steps to urgently handle that assignment, which was given to the Vice President. Therefore, I would like to thank him for delivering on what we requested. Thank you very much.

3.23
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I want to take this opportunity to welcome Prof. Tickodri-Togboa to the Ninth Parliament.

I am sure you are all aware of who Prof. Tickodri-Togboa is and what he has been doing but just to mention that his appointment at this time when we are at the tail end of the Ninth Parliament is a strategic deployment by the Head of State. I would like to thank President Museveni for having chosen a person who is an accomplished Engineer in Electronics and Computer Science. This is where the President has been laying emphasis and we hope that, much as some of us will be busy concluding the Ninth Parliament, I am sure Prof. Tickodri-Togboa is one of those who are going to concentrate in the Ministry of Education to ensure that we conclude our road map in that ministry.

I take this opportunity to welcome him to the NRM caucus of this Parliament. He has become a member of the caucus and we have no doubt that he will be able to guide us, given his experience in the caucus. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.24
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join my colleague to welcome the new Member, Prof. Tickodri-Togboa Sandy Stevens. I happen to have known him probably before the NRM team got to know him and I am very surprised that he has joined the yellow side; I thought he would naturally follow where I am.

Madam Speaker, I can only say that the arrival of Prof. Tickodri-Togboa is going to add value to our technical analysis of how we can move forward and more specifically, how we can create jobs for the youth at the moment. This professor was part of the team that was involved in the manufacture of the motor vehicle, which Uganda is very famous for now.

If I was given the chance to choose, and I did challenge him when he came before the committee, he would have been better deployed outside to create jobs and give skills to the people because whatever we do here, the youth outside there, who have now formed 76 per cent of the population, need employment. It is this kind of person who would be able to launch our youth in job creation activities. However, the President chose to bring him here. 

There is a lot of redundancy on the frontbench and many times, the ministers do not come unless there is something very urgent, which requires voting. I do not think the professor would associate with that because I have known him as a very disciplined and hard working person. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I stood up to raise a point of order before the person on the Floor left it. I listened attentively as you were talking a lot of sense about Prof. Tickodri-Togboa. Unfortunately, as you were winding up, you alleged or insinuated that the frontbench of this Parliament, which is full of members of the Cabinet, are actually redundant yet you are aware that it is the Executive, which, in most cases, initiates what Parliament consumes.

Is the honourable Member, Cecilia Ogwal, who is a veteran politician who failed to tap the capabilities and competencies of Prof. Tickodri-Togboa at that time when they met, in order to allege that the Cabinet has members who are redundant yet we always bring issues and programmes on a full time basis for this august House to handle? Is she in order, Madam Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, she is not in order and it is also not right to intimidate a brand new Member of the Cabinet on his first day in the House. Honourable members, as we proceed, I would like to welcome the family of Prof. Tickodri-Togboa. I do not know where they are seated. I would also like to welcome hon. Nkuuhe, former Member of Parliament. You are welcome. 

We also have a delegation from Kyenjojo District Local Government represented by hon. Kajara, hon. Muhumuza and hon. Timbigamba. Please stand up; you are welcome.

3.29
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here as the Chairman of the West Nile Parliamentary Group to receive one of our own into our fold. You are most welcome, Prof. Tickodri-Togboa, to this Ninth Parliament. You are a technocrat and I would like to strongly believe that it is the expertise in you that has earned you the favour of being nominated and ultimately appointed to the Executive of this Government and Parliament.

However, I would like to tell you that as a person who has been in this House a little longer than you, things here are tricky. You need to sail clearly between your technical expertise and the politics of this House -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think what you are saying is not in order. Please, just welcome him. He will find his seat.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, much as I am very -

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members. Just welcome him. We do not say the things you are saying when we welcome Members. It is just a courtesy to say welcome. You are now abusing my privilege.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I welcome the Member. At an appropriate time as the Chairman of West Nile Parliamentary Group, I will initiate him into the games of this Parliament. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. Honourable Members –(Members rose)– No, we do not debate. The Government Chief Whip has welcomed the Member. She has spoken for the government and hon. Ogwal has spoken for the Opposition. 

Honourable Members, let me now formally welcome you to the sitting. On your behalf, we want to extend our condolences to the following Members who lost close relatives: hon. Cecilia Ogwal lost her mother in the last few weeks. This afternoon, Mrs Idah Kamuntu is being buried and we would like to extend our condolences to hon. Ephraim Kamuntu. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi is also having his guardian and uncle, Mr Sam Magona laid to rest. We also give our condolences to hon. Dr Twa-twa Mutwalante who lost his brother and they are also burying as we are sitting here. I request you to stand up for a minute of silence in honour of all these people.

(The Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you may recall, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs brought a resolution to this House concerning our continued occupancy of rented premises. I would like to report that we have complied with the directives of the House and with effect from the 31 May 2015, we are relinquishing Baumann house. Therefore, the agreement between the Parliamentary Commission and Standby Investments will conclude on the 31 May 2015.

As such, Members will be required to move to Development House. Between now and tomorrow, we are going to issue the new list of allocation of offices, which has been approved. It will be uploaded on the Intranet so you are requested to check where you have been put. We expect you to remove your personal effects and valuable property from the offices in Baumann House latest by Tuesday. Please use the time between now and Monday to remove your items so that you can move to Development House. 

We would like to ask you to cooperate so that this is done and we can start the budget process when Members are well settled in a facility, which is given to us by the government. Thank you very much. Now there were some Members who had urgent issues.

3.33
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Around January this year, UNRA dismantled some parts of Kyolol Bridge along Kyolol River, which is about 16km from Amudat District headquarters. The steel bars were heaped and are still heaped in the middle of the road. An Irish bridge was constructed and it is that bridge that people are using right now. 

However, Madam Speaker, with the return of the rains, crossing that Irish bridge is becoming dangerous. For example, on 26th April, I was on my way to the constituency and it had rained all the way from Mbale to Amudat. When I reached there, I found vehicles lined up. I also joined the queue and waited for over two hours for the volume of the water to reduce. 

That river has its source at the slope of Mt Kadam and when the water comes, it comes with a lot of force. Sometimes some drivers risk crossing. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I call upon the Ministry of Works to hasten works on this bridge because some of the materials are already at the site. This saves us from being carried away by the river and we shall not be cut off from the rest of the country. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.35
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 1st May up to 2nd May in my constituency, we got heavy rains, which washed away over seven bridges. The rains destroyed a number of crops including one gentleman who had over 7 million seedlings of tea valued at Shs 3.5 billion. It affected the entire sub-county of Kaharu and my own-sub county. As I speak, the Minister of State for East African Community Affairs and I cannot access our homes because the bridge has been washed away.

Two years ago, we got a similar problem and appealed to Government to do two things:
    i. To undertake a study to know why our hills are giving way, especially during the rainy season when we have done our best to plant trees. We would like to know the actual causes of why our hills are giving way.
    ii. Although we appealed to Government two years ago when we got a similar problem, no form of assistance has ever come. The Bakiga do not want relief food but they would love to have seedlings given out and the infrastructure, which has been destroyed to be replaced as soon as possible. I hope that this time, Government will come to the rescue of our people sooner rather than later. I thank you.

3. 37
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in regard to road construction under the programme of District Livelihood Support Programme (DLSP). 

Madam Speaker, I came to learn of an abrupt and unexplainable stoppage of road works in district local governments, particularly my district of Busia and I know many other districts are affected under the programme of DLSP. The road works, which had commenced were almost half way when a circular came from the Ministry of Local Government stopping them midway without explanation.

Madam Speaker, as you are aware, indicative planning figures are supplied by local governments and as we speak, all the districts are in advanced stages of planning and especially approval of work plans and budgets. 

I therefore demand that the Ministry of Local Government comes to this House to explain under what circumstances these road works have been stopped and funds withdrawn, well knowing that all funds, once committed, are supposed to be left to local governments to complete their projects. Moreover, the financial year has not come to an end.

Madam Speaker, you will recall some time ago here that we demanded to know from the Ministry of Local Government about the bicycles. They dilly-dallied and in the end, we discovered that the money had been stolen. I am afraid that this could be a similar scenario that has also been occasioned on DLSP. 

I would therefore like the Ministry of Local Government to come and report and Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence that this matter be treated with the urgency that it deserves and probably within one week, the ministry should be here to explain to us.

In addition, on 7 October 2014, after a long debate over a report from the Committee on Trade and Industry concerning a petition that had been presented to this House by the Sugar Manufacturers’ Association, the Minister of Trade and Industry then, hon. Amelia Kyambadde, stood on this Floor and assured this House that the principles of the Sugar Bill had already been approved by the Cabinet and were before the Parliamentary Council. She requested for 60 days to table the Bill here. As we speak, from 7 October 2014 to date, it is well beyond a year and nothing in terms of the Bill, which was promised by the minister, has been tabled in this House.

I would like to demand that, that Bill be tabled urgently and also the minister explains as to why she made a pledge, which has not come to pass. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know see the Minster of Works to tell us about the issue of the bridge to Amudat and the destruction of several bridges in Kigezi. Can we ask the Government Chief Whip to inform him so that he can come and update the Members on when they will have access? Is the Prime Minister coming? Oh, the General is here. Welcome, Leader of Government Business.

3.41
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen.(Rtd)  Moses Ali ): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have recorded all these questions and the ministers responsible will be informed. They should be the ones to come and answer the questions raised. I will make sure they do that tomorrow. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The General has spoken.

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULES 148 AND 176 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

3.42
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker and colleagues, Rule 176 sub-rule 6 of our Rules of Procedure enjoins Party Whips the authority to designate sectoral committee chairpersons of Parliament. 

I have therefore designated hon. Medard Bitekyerezo, MP Mbarara Municipality as the Chairperson of the sectoral Committee on Health replacing hon. Kenneth Omona.

Rule 148 sub-rule 6 of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament enjoins Party Whips the authority to designate standing committee chairpersons of Parliament. I have therefore designated hon. Patrick Mutono Lodoi, MP Butebo County of Pallisa, as the Vice Chairperson of the standing Committee on HIV/AIDS and related matters replacing hon. Medard Bitekyerezo. 

Likewise, I have evoked Rule 176 sub-rule 6 to designate hon. Helen Kahunde, the District Woman Member of Parliament representing Kiryandongo as Vice Chairperson of the sectoral Committee on Presidential Affairs replacing hon. Peter Ogwang who is the Vice Chairperson of the NRM caucus right now.

I also wish to designate the following Members of Parliament on the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee as per Rule 176 sub-rule 6 of our Rules of Procedure: 
    1. Hon. Justine Kasule Lumumba, District Woman Representative, Bugiri District; 
    2. Hon. Rose Namayanja, District Woman Member of Parliament, Nakaseke;
    3. Hon. Richard Todwong, MP Nwoya County, Nwoya District; 
    4. Hon. Peter Nyombi, MP Nakasongola County, Nakasongola District.

Madam Speaker, Rule 148 sub-rule 6 of our Rules of Procedure enjoys the Party Whip the authority to designate Members of Parliament on standing committees of this Parliament. I wish to designate the following Members of Parliament on different standing committees of this Parliament: Local Government Accounts committee - hon. Justine Kasule Lumumba and Committee on Government Assurance and Implementation - hon. Rose Namayanja and hon. Richard Todwong.

Madam Speaker, I also would like to evoke the same Rule 176 sub-rule 2 to re-designate hon. David Ochwa, MP Agule County from the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to the sectoral Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we may have to defer the decision on the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs because we already have 30 members. We may have to review the membership but I note your proposals. That is with respect to the committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. But I put the question that the members be deployed to the following standing committees: Dr Mutono Patrick - HIV Committee; Hon. Justine Kasule Lumumba - Committee on Local Government Accounts; Hon. Rose Namayanja – Committee on Government Assurances; Hon. Richard Todwong – Committee on Government Assurances; Hon. Peter Nyombi – Committee on Rules and Privileges. I put the question that those Members be allowed to serve on those committees.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: We shall defer the one concerning the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Also as the Speaker, I would like to designate hon. Cadet Benjamin (Independent) to serve on the Committee on Natural Resources. He has moved from the Gender committee to Committee on Natural Resources. I put the question that hon. Cadet be permitted to serve on that committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION BY NON-ACADEMIC STAFF IN PUBLIC UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS IN UGANDA ON SALARY ENHANCEMENT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

3.47 
MS THEOPISTA NABULYA SENTONGO (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am standing in for hon. Rwakajara who is out of the country. I beg to present a petition under Rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. The humble petition of Public Universities of Uganda Non-Teaching Staff Executive Forum presented by hon. Theopista Sentongo on behalf hon. Arinaitwe, Workers’ MP. 

Your humble petitioners are members of the Public Universities of Uganda Non-Teaching Executive Forum.

Your humble petitioners are deeply concerned that in the proposed budget of financial year 2015/2016, proposals have been made to enhance the salaries of the academic staff in the public universities and other tertiary institutions leaving out non-teaching staff.

The humble petitioners are aware that in the spirit of Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act of 2001, the three categories of university staff namely academic, administrative and support staff are of equal importance.

Your humble petitioners are convinced that the proposed salary enhancement of the teaching staff, in total disregard of non-teaching staff, is in gross violation of the principle of equal opportunity and a clear act of open discrimination against the three categories of staff of all public universities in Uganda. 

Your humble petitioners are therefore seeking the Parliament’s intervention in order to avoid disruption in service delivery that could obtain from an industrial action among non-teaching staff.

Now therefore, your humble petitioners pray that Parliament reviews the proposed gradual enhancement of salaries for the academic staff of public universities with the aim of ensuring a holistic and equitable enhancement of all categories of academic, administrative and support staff of public universities.

Therefore, your humble petitioners are duly bound and will ever pray and hitherto, your humble petitioners have appended their signatures.  Madam Speaker, I beg to lay. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The petition is sent to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. They can get support from the Committee on Education to deal with that issue.

Honourable Members, I would like to amend the Order Paper to add the alternative policy for the Education Sector. It will come last.

LAYING OF PAPERS

RESOLUTIONS/DECLARATIONS ADOPTED BY THE 37TH CONFERENCE OF THE AFRICAN PARLIAMENTARY UNION HELD IN RABAT, KINGDOM OF MOROCCO
         
3.51
MR  HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker and honourable Members, in conformity with our Rules of Procedure, I beg to lay on Table the resolutions and declarations adopted by the 37th Conference of the African Parliamentary Union held in Rabat, Kingdom of Morocco between 29 October and 2 November 2014. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, the date will be appointed to listen to the contents of those resolutions and for discussion in the House.

ALTERNATIVE MINISTRIAL POLICY STATEMENTS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016 

Energy, Oil and Mineral Development

THE SPEAKER: Who is presenting, is it the shadow minister or the Leader of the Opposition? 

3.52
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF ENERGY, OIL AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Florence Ibi Ekwau): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for Energy and Mineral Development for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay.

Works, Transport and Infrastructure

3.53
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gilbert Olanya): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for Works, Transport and Infrastructure sector for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay.

Lands and Physical Planning

3.53
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF ENERGY, OIL AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Florence Ekwau): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement of Lands and Physical Planning for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay.

Gender, Labour And Social Development

3.53
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for Gender, Labour and Social Development for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay.

Communication, ICT and Technology

3.54
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gilbert Olanya): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for Communication, ICT and Technology for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay.

 Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries

3.54
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR KAMPALA (Ms Angelline Osegge): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay.

 Justice and Constitutional Affairs

3.55
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR ENERGY, OIL AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Florence Ibi Ekwau): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for Justice and Constitutional Affairs. I beg to lay.

Health

3.55
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR REHABILITATION, RELIEF AND DISASTER MANAGEMENT (Mr Odo Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for the Health sector for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay.

Special Regions

3.56
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR SPECIAL REGIONS (Mr Stephen Ochola): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for the Special Regions for the financial year 2015/2016. The Special Regions include Northern Uganda, Teso Affairs, Bunyoro Affairs and Luwero/Rwenzori. I beg to lay.

 Information and National Guidance

3.56
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gilbert Olanya): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for Information and National Guidance  sector for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay.

Public Service

3.57
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR REHABILITATION, RELIEF AND DISASTER MANAGEMENT (Mr Odo Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for  Public Service for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay.

 Defence and Security

3.57
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE AND SECURITY (Mr Hassan Fungaroo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On my own behalf and on behalf of the Leader of the Opposition, I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for Defence and Security – Vote 004 for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay.

Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities

3.58
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE AND SECURITY (Mr Hassan Fungaroo): Thank you very much. On behalf of the Leader of the Opposition and the sector minister for  Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, I beg to lay the Alternative  Ministerial Policy Statement for financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay.

Kampala Capital City Authority

3.58
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR KAMPALA (Ms Angelline Osegge): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for Kampala Capital City Authority for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay.

Rehabilitation, Relief and Disaster Management

3.58
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR REHABILITATION, RELIEF AND DISASTER MANAGEMENT (Mr Odo Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for  Rehabilitation, Relief and Disaster Management Sector for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay.

Karamoja Affairs

3.59
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gilbert Olanya): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for Karamoja Affairs for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay.

Foreign Affairs

3.59
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR ENERGY, OIL AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Florence Ekwau): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for Foreign Affairs  sector covering the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay.

Housing And Urban Development

3.39
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gilbert Olanya): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for Housing and Urban Development sector for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay.

Internal Affairs and Human Rights

4.00
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE AND SECURITY (Mr Hassan Fungaroo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On my behalf and on behalf of the Leader of the Opposition and hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, the sector Minister for Internal Affairs and Human Rights. I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay, Madam Speaker.

 Local Government

4.00
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR KAMPALA (Ms Angelline Osegge): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Alternative Policy Ministerial Statement for Local Government for the financial year 2015/2016 on behalf of my colleague, hon. Betty Nambooze. I beg to lay.

  Trade, Industry And Cooperatives

4.01
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for Trade, Industry and Cooperatives for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay.

Office of the President

4.01
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for the Office of the President for the financial year 2015/2015. I beg to lay.

Water and Environment

4.02
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gilbert Olanya): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Alternative Policy Statement for Water and Environment sector for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay.

Social Development (Youth)

4.02
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gilbert Olanya): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay  Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for the Social Development (Youth) for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay.

East African Community Affairs

4.02
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR ENERGY, OIL AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Florence Ekwau): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for East African Community Affairs sector for the next financial year.

 Education and Sports

4.03
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy statement for Education and Sports on behalf of the Leader of the Opposition for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We shall ask the committees to handle them expeditiously and make sure that if there are areas to be included in the report, they should be done. Thank you very much.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When the alternative ministerial policy statements were being presented, something kept bothering me because committees have finished handling ministerial policy statements. My opinion is that when we are considering the ministerial policy statements, we should have with us the alternative policy statements to enable us arrive at logical conclusions and give these policy statements the necessary criticism they deserve.

 
Madam Speaker, the point of procedure I am seeking from you is whether it is procedurally right for committees to go back and handle alternative ministerial policy statements when we have already considered the main ministerial policy statements. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I cannot answer you as I do not sit in your committees and I have not seen any report here. I do not know which committee has completed their reports as I do not have them. Also, we issued a timetable here on how the Budget would be handled and we included the alternative ministerial policy statements. We agreed on it here.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true and I would like follow what my colleague said that these statements have come a bit late, taking into account the processes at Committee Stage. However, I would like to propose that -(Interruption)

MR OCHOLA: Madam Speaker, you have just given a very wise ruling here and I expected hon. Akol, who is a commissioner, to understand how we proceed in the House. She is a senior Member who some of us should be learning from. We have not seen any report, which has been presented in this House from any committee. Is she therefore in order to continue dwelling on what you have already given a ruling on, yet she is a senior Member?

THE SPEAKER: There was something she wanted to say, which she did not finish. Let me hear her and then we shall take a decision. 

MS AKOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted to say that taking into account the fact that we now have the statements with us here and looking at their size, I believe they could be uploaded on our iPads. That is what I wanted to request, that these alternative ministerial policy statements be uploaded on our iPads so that we could look at them as we consider the reports on policy statements. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. 

4.08
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Madam Speaker, you will appreciate that this House was adjourned to give Parliament time to concentrate on committee work. You realise that on the 8th of last month, you issued a very strong statement urging the Executive to bring to Parliament the ministerial policy statements on time. Even at the time that we adjourned, many of the ministerial statements were not even uploaded on our iPads. I wrote a letter to you, Madam Speaker, expressing serious concern because we could not proceed without first looking at the position of the government. As a result and with your guidance, the Shadow Cabinet has been able to meet relevant sectors. 

In that regard, I am surprised that some Members are raising concern. However, many committees have actually been able to consider alternative policies because we knew that when Parliament resumes, we would be able to formally lay the ministerial alternative policies statement on Table as we have done today.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, everything that has happened has been done because in the first place, the new Budget calendar was not adhered to by the government and I cannot blame them because it was the first test of the new Budget calendar. However, it affected the entire process as you will experience later on when reports will be submitted to the House.

Therefore, I would like to assure Members that ministerial alternative policy statements have already been discussed by some of the committees and others are going to be uploaded on your iPads, which you can look at and which may enrich our debate. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Therefore, what you are saying is that there has already been some engagement and they are aware of the contents. Is this a formality for some of them or all of them?

MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I would like to confirm what the Leader on the Opposition has just said. As far as the Committee on Presidential Affairs is concerned, we received the alternative statement from the shadow ministers for the Presidency and KCCA. We have discussed and included some of their items in the main report. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Therefore, there has been some engagement. The committee chairpersons are aware that either they have been brought or they are on their way. In that regard, we shall create a bit of time for you to complete. However, the Clerk is instructed to upload them. I do not know whether they have got the soft copies to upload them on the Members’ iPads so that they can have access to them. Thank you very much. 

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

4.11
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister is currently in Sheema representing the government at the burial of our colleague, Prof. Kamuntu’s wife. Therefore, he is not here to answer questions during this time.

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure under Rule 34, Prime Minister’s Question Time, sub-rule (3) states: “In the absence of the Prime Minister, a minister may make a statement or answer questions put to him or her.” 

Madam Speaker, you are the custodian of the Rules of Procedure. Many a time when the Prime Minister is not around, we normally let this time go without anything yet within this same rule, there is a provision that a Member like Obua holding the Floor, can ask the Minister in charge of, for instance, Micro-finance, how many SACCOs have been supported in Ajuri and the minister should rise up and answer my question.

Madam Speaker, don’t you think it is procedurally correct for members, in the absence of the Prime Minister, to put questions directly to individual sector ministers, in compliance with Rule 34(3)?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would have to study how we can effectively implement it because I don’t know what you are going to ask. I don’t know which minister should be tasked to answer; I don’t know how many of them should be allowed to speak; and I don’t know how many questions should be asked in that time. Let me study it and advise you.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER

4.14
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, I beg to present the Report of the Committte on Budget on the National Budget Framework Paper from the financial year 2015/2016 to the financial year 2019/2020.

In accordance with the provisions of Article 90 and 155(4) of the Constitution, Sections 91 to 98 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and Rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, committees are mandated to, among other things, critically examine Government budget estimates and make recommendations for general debates in the House as well as making comments on any positive matters affecting ministries under their jurisdictions.

Accordingly, I beg to present this report to this august House for consideration and approval, as required by Section 98 of the Pubic Finance Management Act, 2015. 

The Executive complied with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 by laying on Table the following documents on 1 April 2015: the National Budget Framework Paper for financial years ranging from 2015/2016 to 2019/2020; the draft budget estimates for the financial year 2015/2016; the report on public debts, grants and guarantees; the expenditure estimates of self-accounting departments, commissions and/or organisations under the Constitution; the certificate of gender and equity compliance; the certificate of compliance for the annual budget for the financial year 2014/2015; the report on tax expenditures for the first three quarters of the current financial year; the Treasury Memoranda on the report of the Local Government Accounts; and the ministerial policy statements.

Madam Speaker, this report is structured in two parts: The first part is on the Government Medium Term Macro-economic Plan and the Fiscal Framework and Indicative Revenue Framework. This is what I will present in details.

Part two, which concerns the sectoral committees’ observations and recommendations is also available. I will not present that part, but members should feel free to quote or utilise the materials available in there; it is an integral part of the main report.

Part One- Government Medium Term Macro-economic Plan, Fiscal 

Framework and Indicative Revenue Framework

We examined the various sections or sub-sections within this part and the first section that we are looking at is the National Development Plan. 

According to Section 93 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, the National Budget Framework Paper must be consistent with the National Development Plan (NDP) and with a charter of fiscal responsibility.

The Budget Committee observes that the current NDP I, which was due to expire by June 2016, was extended for one additional year to allow for the capture of rebase national data, the alignment and updating of the macroeconomic framework, demographic changes and confirm public investment for NDP II. 

The extension however, raises a question for the planning framework and the strategic handcuff for the financial year 2015/2016 Budget, given the fact that the macroeconomic projections for the NDP I are expiring in June. On the other hand, the delayed NDP II has a created a vacuum in the planning framework and a challenge for the alignment and implementation of the financial year 2015/2016 Budget. 

Let me now comment on the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. The committee observes that Government is yet to finalise the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility. According to the IMF country report 14/354 of December 2014, this charter will be finalised by May 2015. 

According to Section 5 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility is expected to provide measurable objectives for fiscal policy at least three years ahead. It is also supposed to provide for the methodology for measuring performance of the fiscal policy objectives, fiscal macroeconomic data and assumptions and objectives for the performance of the national economy in the medium term.

The committee recognises the fact that Government will table the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility on the First Sitting of the First Meeting of the Tenth Parliament for approval, as required by Section 5(1) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. 

On the macroeconomic policy framework, we note that in the medium term, the macroeconomic goal is to deliver macroeconomic stability to support inclusive and sustainable economic growth and social economic transformation. We have outlined the macroeconomic objectives, which I believe you are familiar with because they were picked from the main document.

The Macroeconomic Policy Framework incorporates several infrastructural projects geared towards enhanced regional integration and emerging oil production. 

Key macroeconomic assumptions and macroeconomic focus:
This section presents information on the key macroeconomic assumptions and focus for the following economic variables - I beg that you refer to Table 1 - the average and the year-end GDP, the average and the year-end inflation rate, the rate of employment and unemployment, the average and the year-end interest rates and money supply.

The committee notes that a lot of information is missing in the National Budget Framework Paper. Because of this problem, credibility assessment of the key macroeconomic assumptions is not possible on specifically - 
    a) information about GDP and money supply does not have the absolute values for average and year end;
    b) information on year-end inflation rates is missing;
    c) information on rates for employment and unemployment is missing; and
    d) information on exchange rate and interest rates is missing.

The committee recommends that the missing information should be availed in the final documents for proper assessments. 

On page 10, we present the table on the macroeconomic assumptions whose data is provided in certain areas but not available in others. 

The committee observes that the economy has experienced a slower pace of growth in the first four years of NDP I at 5.5 per cent, lower than the anticipated growth rate of 7.2 per cent. This is attributed to both external and internal factors. The external factors include the slow global recovery, the weak demand for the country’s exports and the costly non-concessional borrowing channels. 

Some domestic factors include delays in implementation of major projects especially in the transport and the energy sectors and the prolonged drought periods, under execution of projects, stemming from lack of detailed feasibility studies, insufficient technical project preparation and weak public sector management.  These are some of the reasons for the slow growth.

The committee, in paragraph 18, notes that if the weaknesses of poor quality at entry of core projects are not addressed under NDP II, where envisaged projects are not well appraised to determine their impacts on growth, the macroeconomic projections will not be realised in the medium term. 

The committee observes that information on employment levels in the country is insufficient to undertake projections for the medium term. This is due to Government failure to undertake periodic manpower/labour force surveys.

In 20, despite the impressive data on unemployment rate from Uganda Bureau of Statistics of just 9.4 per cent being the unemployment rate in 2012 -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairman, I do not know whether the report was posted on the iPads. Is it there?

MR LUGOLOOBI: It is there, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: If yes, then maybe you can go to the key areas and recommendations because the members can read unless the members want it all read out.
 
HON. MEMBERS: Yes, because that is the executive summary. 

THE SPEAKER: That is the executive summary? It is okay.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, because we have the minority report on this matter, I need to mention some of these issues. 

Despite the impressive data on the unemployment rate from Uganda Bureau of Statistics of just 9.4 per cent in 2012/2013, the general perceptions of Ugandans on unemployment is that it is still very high. This is evident among the university graduate youth; the economy can only absorb less than 20 per cent of the university output per year.

The foreign exchange rate is projected to depreciate further in the medium term despite the projected rise in foreign direct investments in the energy and oil sectors. 

The committee recommends that the long-term solution to foreign exchange stability is for Government to deliberately support the export sector. 

The committee further observes that given the facts in Table 1, the projected growth in money supply far exceeds growth in GDP, implying that inflation is likely to rise much faster than the projected levels averaging six per cent. 

This is further confirmed by the Central Bank monetary policy statements for the month of April 2015 where real output was estimated to be above potential and projected to accelerate over the medium term, exerting upward pressure on prices for goods and services. Bank of Uganda’s forecast for core inflation is in the range of seven to nine per cent in 2015/2016 in the absence of any adjustment to the monetary policy stance.

The committee recommends that Government gives a more realistic inflation projection figure, harmonised with the Central Bank and consistent with the GDP gross projection.

Medium Fiscal Framework and Forecast

Section 4 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 requires that Government provides the target for fiscal variables consistent with the fiscal policy objectives set out in the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. However, the fiscal objectives for the 2015/2016 Budget are outlined as below. I will not read them, but in 20(6), the committee notes that Government has set fiscal targets for the medium term demonstrating increased revenue and grants collections - refer to Figure 1 - on the basis that the tax system will be stable and there will be improved tax compliances and focussed administrative measures for enhancing tax collection efficiency. 

The main contributor to the overall revenue will be the tax revenue. While the tax revenue is projected to grow by an annual average of 15.5 per cent, grants will decline by an annual average of 4.4 per cent. The projection is consistent with Government overarching goal for self-sustenance. In the medium term, the framework assumes no oil revenue because the requisite infrastructure to support oil production is not yet in place. 

The committee notes that there will be no new tax measures according to the Budget Framework Paper in the forthcoming financial year. Focus will be on strengthening tax administration. 

The committee recommends that more human resource should be availed to Uganda Revenue Authority to ensure improved surveillance and compliance to the approved tax revenue measures. 

On the expenditure side, Government is demonstrating an increased expenditure level in the medium term projected at an annual average growth of 14.9 per cent. Development and recurrent expenditures are projected to grow at an annual average of 17.8 per cent and 12 per cent respectively. This is in line with the government’s commitment for further infrastructural development and to attain sustainable growth by reducing consumption in favour of investment, in the medium term.

The overall balance/fiscal deficits including grant, is projected to continue worsening fast at an annual average of 29.1 per cent till the financial year 2017/2018, when it will start improving at 5.2 per cent per annum. I wish to draw your attention to Figure 1 presenting the three graphs: the first is on total revenue and grants; the second is on expenditure and the third on the overall balance; you may call it the fiscal deficit. 

The fiscal deficit or the overall balance is in a line graph at the bottom. You can see how the fiscal deficit is widening from about Shs 2 trillion in 2012/13 to between Shs 6.5trillion in 2019/20, according to the projections. Therefore, the deficit is indeed alarming. 

The committee observes the following issues on the fiscal framework: 
    a) While tax revenues are projected to grow at an annual of 15.5 per cent in the medium term, investment spending is projected to grow at 17.8 per cent. This implies that investment financing will require a mixture of domestic and external financing, which is projected to grow by nine per cent on average.
    b) Commercial borrowing is projected to grow by 34 per cent annually, on overage, over the medium term, which is much higher than the average growth rate of domestic revenue projected at 15.5 per cent. 

Therefore, the debt sustainability objective for Government may be threatened over the medium term unless revenue mobilisation efforts grow much faster than debt acquisition on commercial terms.

The above condition may create unstable macroeconomic environment, arising from increased interest rates with crowding out effects to the private sector, hence affecting the growth momentum that is projected in the medium term.

The Resource Envelope for the Financial Year 2015/2016

I now turn to the resource envelope for 2015/2016 - see paragraph 32: The performance of the resource envelope for 2014/2015 was not presented in the National Framework Paper. This made it hard for us to realistically confirm the projections for the next financial year 2015/2016.

However, the resource envelope indicates that while domestic revenues will rise by 14.8 per cent, external budget support and projects will decline by 35.6 per cent and 24.7 per cent respectively. It also indicates that domestic borrowing to finance the budget for financial year 2015/2016 has been maintained at levels for the financial year 2014/2015. 

The committee observes that the domestic financial market is still under developed and shallow to raise sufficient resources to finance the budget without crowding out private sector borrowing. 

External debt repayments are projected to increase significantly by 135 per cent in 2015/2016. The committee observes that external debts falling due in the next financial year will rise at the same time when the country is acquiring more commercial loans projected to increase by 8.25 per cent from Shs 1,129 billion, in financial year 2014/2015, to Shs 3,269.7 billion, in the Financial Year 2015/2016.

The committee observes that the resource envelope in the Budget Framework Paper does not indicate the commercial borrowing, hence understating the amount of resources available to finance the budget. 

The committee recommends that Government avails projections for commercial borrowing in the final Budget Framework Paper. 

The committee noted that since financial year 2012/2013, Parliament has not been approving domestic borrowing to finance the budget as required by the Constitution. The committee recommends that Government addresses this anomaly. 

Tax expenditure 

Subject to Article 152 (2) of the Constitution and Section 13 (10) (d) and 77 of the PFM Act, 2015, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, reported to Parliament, on the tax expenditures for the first quarter of financial year 2014/2015. The total amount of tax foregone was reported at Shs 14.19 billion.

The committee notes that the socio-economic effects, costs and benefits overtime, of the tax foregone to Government as required by Section 77 (2) of the PFM Act, 2015 were not given. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should provide detailed and measurable costs and benefits to Government as a result of the tax exemptions in the final Budget Framework Paper.  

Further, the budget committee will draft guidelines to be approved by the House on the criteria to be followed in granting discretionary tax incentives to private sector companies and NGOs. 

The statement for policy measures for financial year 2015/2016

The theme for the financial year 2015/2016 is, “Maintaining infrastructure Investment and Promoting Excellence in Public Service Provision for Wealth Creation, and Socio-Economic Transformation.” The sub strategic themes are just listed there. You could read them later.

But in paragraph 43, according to the Budget Framework Paper, the formulation of the financial year 2015/2016 Budget priorities is premised on lessons learnt from the implementation challenges of the NDP I and at the same time focusing on the priorities set out in the draft NDP II. This implies that the financial year 2015/2016 Budget neither follows NDP I nor NDP II, but a standalone.

The committee notes that the major expenditures and revenue policies cannot be explicitly aligned to NDP I as presumed, but also have some bearing on NDP II, which is still in the draft form. This phenomenon will pose challenges for assessing the performance for the financial year 2015/2016 Budget, just in case the final and approved NDP II is significantly altered by Parliament. 

The committee observes that capacity for increased domestic revenue mobilisation is available in the medium term. However, Uganda’s average tax: GDP ratio has remained stagnant at about 11.65 per cent; the lowest in the East African Region. The informal sector that constitutes 43 per cent of GDP is not contributing that much to tax revenue. This is in addition to tax exemption regimes and weaknesses in tax administration, particularly with URA remaining city bound and with limited presence in upcountry areas. 

The overall expenditure, excluding arrears and appropriation in aid, is projected to grow by 19 per cent, from Shs 15,041.8 billion, in 2014/2015, to Shs 17,956.43 billion. In other words it will be from Shs 15.0 trillion to Shs 17.9 trillion in 2015/2016. This growth is mainly attributed to increases in energy and mineral development, works and transport, interest payments, and expenditure on security. 

For the 19 per cent overall growth, from 2014/2015 to 2015/2016, energy, works and transport, interest payments and security contribute 6.3 per cent, 5.4 per cent, 4.5 per cent, and 2.4 per cent respectively.  
The productive sectors remain extremely underfunded thus causing very serious challenges for the stability and resilience of the national economy. 

The projected fiscal deficit, averaging at is 6.4 per cent of GDP over the medium term, is higher than the East African Community convergence criteria limit of three per cent. 

Facilitating private sector to increase the level of investment, employment and economic growth will be constrained by the rise in the fiscal deficit, the likely rise in domestic interest rates, the projected rise in inflation and the underdeveloped and shallow domestic financial markets, which are offering limited long term credit products. 

The private sector will further be hampered by the high cost of doing business. Such high cost stem from lengthy processes for the registration of businesses, constrained access to long term credit financing, the high cost of power, inflation, inadequate infrastructure, poor maintenance of infrastructure and governance challenges, including corruption, which is yet to be effectively dealt with at different levels of Government. 

The delivery of infrastructure development and maintenance will be done at rather high cost as sources of funding for most of the infrastructure projects in the energy and transport sectors are from known concessional sources, for example, Entebbe Express Way, Karuma and Isimba Hydro-power projects, including their respective transmission lines. This may compel Government to charge user fees or raise tariffs or taxes to recover the cost of investment. All this will have a cost bearing on the private sector growth and competitiveness.

Increased sensitisation and public participation is what would help to minimise these challenges. We are, therefore, calling for more public participation because we can justify this investment, but the implications are what we are concerned about. 

The risk of a rise in the contingent liability resulting from the projected PPPs will have a bearing on the level of public debts in the event of any default or shortfall in revenue returns from PPP projects.

The inadequate capacity in the preparation of appraisal and execution of projects in Uganda will impact on the delivery of infrastructure services to the population. 

Defence spending will increase by 30.9 per cent in financial year 2015/2016, compared to the spending levels in the financial year 2014/2015. This share in the national Budget will increase from 7.7 to 8.5 per cent. This is consistent with the budget strategy for financial year 2015/2016.
The agricultural sector allocation is projected to increase by a decimal 2.3 per cent. However, its share in the national Budget is projected to decline from 3.1 to 2.7 per cent in the financial year 2015/2016, compared to the previous levels in financial year 2014/2015. Please refer to table 2. 

The visibility of the agricultural sector is strongly declining in the regulation role in the sector, which poses a huge challenge in sustaining our export markets. For instance, disease control is no longer adequately effective; research and the dissemination of research findings have been largely left to the whims of external financiers. You will note that when the donors reduced funding to NARO, there was no corresponding increase from the GOU funding to support this agency. In that case, value addition is likely to be at a higher cost as quality inputs become hard to come by.

Commercialising production through productivity enhancement and value addition comes with improving agricultural production, mechanisation, irrigation, regulation, standardisation, disease control, long term financing, land reforms, and mind-set change especially for the youth and market infrastructure. However, the agricultural sector continues to face the above challenges; the commodity approach is only emphasising production and not productivity and an effective value chain approach.

The agricultural extension system is short of manpower to implement the single spine, especially in the district local governments. Minimal allocation to this effect has been made, but gaps still exist and will continue in the medium term. 

Long term financing that is required to improve mechanisation, small irrigation, and value addition has eluded the market. This is an area Government has to rethink its approach to achieve productivity gains in the sector. Bulk marketing is the only solution for smallholder farmers through cooperatives, which are in dire need for reorganisation and financial support to expand and become self-sustaining.  

The tourism industry has the potential for generating foreign exchange earnings to the country’s endowment with a variety of tourist attractions. However, the tourism promotion, training, regulation, maintenance and infrastructure development to internationally acceptable standards is still a challenge.  The tourism industry budget - I must commend Government - has however, been projected to increase by 60 per cent, this financial year, from the previous level.

Regarding the transport infrastructure, Government has continued to focus on improving conditions of the road network and is committed to fast-track development of rail, air, and marine transport. Roads and works sector allocation is projected to grow by 34 per cent and the share in the national Budget will rise from 16 to 18 per cent.   Further Government plans to procure roads maintenance equipment for all districts to undertake periodic maintenance of rural roads. 

The committee recommends that in the medium term, Government needs to make adequate provisions for the cost of running and maintaining this road equipment. 

Regarding the energy and mineral development sector, we wish to report that Government is committed to addressing the power deficit by constructing more hydro-power stations. The energy sector allocation is projected to grow by 52 per cent from the previous year figures. Table 2 presents the sector allocations of the budget for the financial year 2015/2016. You will see, in the second column, that is the budget that was approved for 2014/2015. The column in the middle has the Budget Framework provisions and the fourth column has the draft estimates for financial year 2015/2016, which have been drastically revised away from the national Budget Framework Paper. For instance, when you look at the last column, you realise it shows the year-to-year growth. You will note that security has a growth of 30.9 per cent, works and transport - 33.8 per cent, while other sectors are on a decline. Water and environment is also growing at 23.9 per cent, law and order and so many others. 

We would like to make the following comments on the medium term expenditure framework: projections of Government expenditure, in respect of each vote for 2014/2015, have been split into recurrent and investment expenditure. This is consistent with the PFM Act.  However, the projected expenditure allocations for 2015/2016 do not reflect all the budget strategy objectives. For instance, social services and accountability sector expenditures are instead projected to decline significantly. 

The committee notes the meagre budget allocation to productive sectors such as trade, industry, and tourism, ICT, lands, rural electrification and water and environment, in the budget for the financial year 2015/2016. It recommends appropriate actions during the consideration and supply for the financial year 2015/2016 budget estimates. 

On the fiscal risk statement, which is required under the PFM Act, while the main sources of fiscal risks have been identified in the document to include the macroeconomic risks, due to accuracy and sensitivity of the assumptions and fiscal aggregates, public debt level, debt servicing, and limited fiscal space to respond to unexpected shocks, contingent liabilities arising from PPPs, geo-political risks, due to likely instability from neighbouring countries and trading partners, the poor weather conditions, and the supplementary expenditures. 

However, the quantified estimation of the fiscal impact of the risks on the economy and the generation of an alternative fiscal framework based on more realistic assumptions, have not been provided in the Budget Framework Paper as required by the PFM ACT, 2015. The committee recommends that Ministry of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development addresses this omission. 

The committee observes that one of the important and recurrent fiscal risks has been omitted and that is the internal governance issues in Uganda especially around the general elections period. 

The other fiscal risk is the institutional capacity of sectors to absorb and effectively implement the flagship projects, particularly those in the NDP. The committee recommends that these two risks be part of the risk portfolio. 

On the Public Debt Development, 2015, we note that the total public debt as at February 2015 stood at Shs 7.28 billion, equivalent to 26 per cent of the GDP and away from $ 7.0 billion as at March 2014. Out of this amount, total external debt contributes 57 per cent, a figure of $ 4.18 billion. Domestic debt contributes 43 per cent, which is about $ 3.1 million.

Total external debt exposure stood at $ 6.27 billion of which total debt dispersed is only $ 4.18 billion for 66 per cent and $ 2.09 billion for 34 per cent a loan commitment, not yet dispersed. However, information from the Ministry of Finance indicates that some of the loans contracted have exhibited poor absorptive capacity. This is illustrated where during financial year 2014/2015 a total of $ 992.28 million of external support was budgeted and only a total of $ 433.87 million, which is 44 per cent, has so far been dispersed as at February 2015. This is an indicator of inefficiency in the implementation of projects. 

Poor absorption of loanable funds has resulted from capacity challenges and the lack of preparedness, on behalf of the implementing agencies. This is coupled with inadequate provision for counterpart funds in the budget. The committee recommends that more stringent actions be taken against accounting officers who have failed to demonstrate justifiable cause for the low performance of the loans under their portfolio.

The total stock of outstanding Government domestic debt as at end February 2015 was $ 3.1 billion compared to the stock of $ 1.4 billion as at the end of June, 2014. This represents an increase of $ 1.7 billion of domestic debt issued during 2014/2015. This is substantial within a period of one year, arising from the high fiscal deficit projected for the financial year 2014/2015. Since 67 per cent of the domestic debt is in terms of long term instruments, the refinancing risk is minimized. However, the interest cost over the medium term, will continue to rise.

Debt sustainability

Despite the rising public debts, which include both external and domestic debts, public debts in Uganda are still sustainable and the country is not under debt distress, given the present value of the public debt to GDP ratio of 20.5 per cent as at the end of June 2014. This is below the public debt management framework threshold of 50 per cent. 

However, the anticipated infrastructure project over the medium fiscal framework would raise the present value of debt to GDP by seven per cent from the current 20.5 per cent to 27.5 per cent of GDP, assuming efficient implementation of the planned infrastructural project.

The committee notes that the inefficient implementation exhibited in some infrastructural projects poses risks to the country’s debt sustainability levels. In addition, borrowing on highly non-concessional terms, on projects with both low financial and economic returns, also impairs the country’s sustainability profile.

The committee recommends that Government ensures timely and efficient implementation of public projects in order for the projects to create productive capacity to repay the loans.  The committee further recommends that counterpart funding required for any outstanding non-performing loans above three years, should have a first call on the budget of any vote to which the loan relates.

Consistence between the National Budget Framework Paper and the Draft Budget Estimates for financial year 2015/2016

The committee observes that the macroeconomic framework that generated the National Budget Framework Paper from 2015/2016 to 2019/20 has significantly been adjusted to generate the draft budget estimates in the ministerial policy statements for financial year 2015/2016.

The adjustment in part, addresses the shortcomings highlighted in this report. The revenue numbers have been adjusted upwards to reflect new revenue measures and to balance up with the rise in the government expenditure as enshrined in the budget estimates for financial year 2015/2016, in the medium term.

However, the fiscal deficit has remained high and above the EAC convergence criteria, owing to the intended increase in the government investments in the infrastructure development. The nominal GDP figures to be targeted were not provided and therefore, the projected growth rates may not be confirmed for the financial year 2015/2016, under a medium term.

Section 13(5) of the PFM Act requires the annual budget to be consistent with the NDP and the Charter of the Fiscal Responsibility and the National Budget Framework Paper. However, again there is a glaring departure between the draft budget estimates for 2015/2016 and the National Budget Framework Paper. The expenditure framework is very different - there is no explicit planning framework and no Charter of Fiscal Responsibility to guide allocations and monitoring of the budget.

Conclusion

The government macroeconomic plan, fiscal and indicative revenue frameworks

The National Budget Framework from financial year 2015/2016 to 2019/20 was prepared with considerable information gaps in the macroeconomic and fiscal frameworks as illustrated above.

The planning framework applied in developing the National Budget Framework Paper is a combination of NDP I and a draft NDP II, as already mentioned, hence contradicting Government’s intention to extend NDP I to cover financial year 2015/2016 estimates.

At the time of presenting this report, NDP II, which would be the appropriate anchor for the National Budget Framework Paper is still in a draft form and was only laid on Table a few days ago for approval by Parliament.

The committee noted that the preparation on the National Budget Framework Paper did not exhaust the procedures and requirements as set out in the PFM Act, 2015. However, this may be accepted given the fact that this was a first attempt and in the middle of a transition period from the old to the new budget calendar.

Observations

The observations and recommendations identified in different sectors and outline in part two of this report should be given special consideration in the process of approving the ministerial budget estimates for financial year 2015/2016 and the medium term expenditure framework.

Madam Speaker, as I indicated at the beginning, part two forms an integral part of this report but I will not present it. However, members may use information in this part during the debate on this motion. I would like to make my final conclusion on behalf of the committee which is on page 44 of the report.

The main conclusion

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that Parliament approves the National Budget Framework Paper from the financial year 2015/2016 to 2019/20 with amendments as detailed in this report. I beg to move. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson of the Budget Committee and your members. I also would like to thank you for the elaborate and comprehensive report.  I invite members to make use of part two, according to their sectors.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I beg for you indulgence. There is a minority report on the National Budget Framework Paper from the financial year 2015/2016 to 2019/20 and with your indulgence, I beg to lay on Table these two documents and other documents that have facilitated this process. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson. Who is presenting the minority report? Opposition Chief Whip, go ahead.

5.05
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Madam Speaker, I think I am talking for the first time since the 20 of April, 2015 and so I would like to plead with the House that since I am now a total orphan, I hope dear Speaker and the members, you will treat me with mercy and kindness. (Laughter) It is not a comfortable world. In the last couple of days, I have found out that I really need a lot of comfort and good handling. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Please go to the report. Of course, we sympathise with you and I know that many colleagues came to support you when your mother died. You are well come back, please read the report.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, in accordance with Rule 194 of our Rules Of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, and as a member of the Budget Committee, I hereby present a different view from that of the majority report. 

The budget process, to the best of my ability and in accordance with relevant laws and your guidance - the minority report disagrees with the following: the new budget process calendar. The budget process, according to the new calendar, should have been in very advanced stages by now.

By law, for example, by the time of presentation on the National Budget Framework Paper on 01 April, 2015, Parliament should have scrutinised and approved the Budget Framework Paper and received the ministerial policy statements. But these stages have not been taken by Parliament. This is in total violation of the provision of the law particularly Section 9(5) of the Public Finance Management Act of 2015. I do not want to read it but it is very important that members address their minds to that section of the PFM Act.

Though the new law was assented to by the President on 23 February, 2015 and published in the Uganda Gazette on 06 March, 2015, there was no cause for stampeding Parliament because the Budget Act of 2001 had remained intact, Madam Speaker, and which could have guided the process.

I call for members’ attention to the Budget Act, Section 7 (1) (2) and (4), which put that in a correct legal perspective. If we could ask ourselves, what will happen to the Budget Act of 2001, as far as the budget calendar adopted this year is concerned? This is important to know because the Budget Act is not yet repealed. Why should the same Government run to parallel laws regarding the budget process? This is a very serious matter, which I would like this House to address. 

Some ministries, departments and agencies presented their ministry policy statements basing on the old law and others on the new law, while others ignored –(Interruption) 

MS KAABULE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I really need to understand where the Opposition Chief Whip is reading from, because according to what was uploaded on the iPad, we only have a minority report starting from page 1 and to page 3. Is it procedurally right for her to continue reading from a document which we do not have? 

THE SPEAKER: Which report are you reading, hon. Cecilia Ogwal? Unfortunately, mine starts at page 3. So I do not know what is at pages 1 and 2.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I have already asked that I should be treated with mercy.  (Laughter) I was actually proceeding correctly because in uploading, they missed out one page but I did not want to cause a storm on that. 

When we go to page 3, which you have, on the National Development and Charter of Fiscal Responsibility, besides the above, Section 9 (3) of the Public Finance Management, Act 2015, provides the Budget Framework shall be consistent with National Development Plan and with the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. 

Therefore, this particular provision was not fulfilled because the Charter of the Fiscal Responsibility is not yet in place and the National Development Plan ended last financial year. The new National Development Plan has not yet been approved. This again is a matter of the law. There is no legal instrument that guides the extension of the National Development Plan I. So what was the basis planning policy framework that guided this year’s budget framework paper? Why did the Executive not provide for transitional provision that any other law that the implementation is started when all institutions and framework are ready? 

Though the National Planning Authority provided a certificate of compliance, as required in Section 13(7) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, we wonder how the budget could be compliant to a non-existent plan or should we assume that it was based on a draft which we have? Otherwise, the last National Development Plan has expired and even if it was extended for one year, as reported in the National Budget Framework Paper, then it could have – sorry, Madam Speaker, I am again in a big problem of binding - we cannot take this as being compliant since the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 does not recognise extended plans.

Paragraph 40 on binding was left but as I said, I did not want to cause unnecessary delay. The Minister of Finance and Economic Development chose to follow the new law. However, we are concerned that at the time of presenting to Parliament, the proposed annual budget for financial year 2015/2016, a number of provisions in the law were not complied with yet they are very detailed about the budget process. I have quoted that already. I do not think that is necessary for us to read, that is Section 13 of the new law and Section 7 of the Budget Act. 

The government’s or the ability of finance ought to have known better that by presenting the Budget Framework Paper based on the new law, they were going to end up in an ambush; they ought to have known that better. I do not know why they did not look at that.

At the time of presenting the annual budget, in accordance with the law, on the 01 April, 2015, the following requirements, under Section 13 of the Public Finance and Management Act were not adhered to. I just want to cite a few: One of them is Section 13 (9)(10), which provide that “The annual Budget shall be presented and accompanied by: (i) the recent trend and development on the indicators of the economy and provide focus of the indicators for a period of five years; (ii) Period considered by the minister to be appropriate for the planning of the fiscal policy of Government; (iii) Recent fiscal development and forecast in respect to: revenues, recurrent and capital expenditures, borrowing and debt serving, contingent liabilities….” Other information in respect of the assets and liabilities were not accompanied, Madam Speaker. In paragraph 4.1 I cite other relevant laws which have been flawed.

But also Section (10) of the new law talks about domestic financings, which were not adhered to. See page 5. I do not want to go into details.

Government Debts 

Outstanding Government debts, as at February 2015 was at $ 3.10 billion compared to $ 1.4 billion in 2014, indicating an increase in the debt by $ 1.7 billion. This implies that huge amount compared to the figures of the previous year. That renders Uganda a debt driven economy.

Non-performing loans

Various loans, which were acquired four to five years ago, were performing at very low rates. These include, but not limited to, the Vegetable Oil Development Project Phase II, under the International Fund for Agricultural Development, approved in April 2010; the Higher Education Science and Technology Project, under the African Development Bank, approved in May 2013; the Rural Electrification Project by the Saudi Fund, under the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, which was approved in April 2011; as well as financing the BTVET institutions, under the Ministry of Education and Sports, which was approved in May 2010.

The outstanding debt in loans alone is at $ 4.038.8 billion as at the end of February 2015. The $ 1.586 billion was disbursed, representing 39 per cent of its performance. Out of the 61 per cent of undisbursed, 30 per cent is payment of interest on money that is not utilised. This is point which is very serious. That is why I am surprised that the Chairperson of the Budget committee did not draw the attention of Parliament to this very grievous economic matter.

Madam Speaker, accounting officers have not played their roles in the effective utilisation of loans thus creating a huge hinge from the national budget as out of the Shs 15 trillion of the financial year 2014/2015 national budget, Shs 1.5 trillion was for paying interests alone. Such accounting officers must be sanctioned.

Various ministries lack master plans to carry out their activities. This is part of the duty of every ministry and sector because the Public Finance Management Act requires them to do just that. For instance, the Ministry of Works and Transport does not have the transport and infrastructure master plan. The Ministry of Defence work plan has long expired and has never been laid on Table before Parliament. The Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports master plan needs to be reviewed for it to comply with the quality and completion rates. The Plan for Modernization of Agriculture expired long time ago but has continuously been referred to.

Madam Speaker, the lack of master plans shows that there is no well-coordinated approach in planning by the government and technical staff. This has led to issues such as poor sector prioritisation, accumulated domestic arrears, unfunded priorities and funding unproductive sectors like defense and security and of course not leaving out State House, hence deeming the legislative institution to be irrelevant and a non-performer yet I believe we are not, as a Parliament.

Concurrently, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has failed to utilize its overseas mission to make itself a centre of attraction to lobby for investments for this country. Where is the master plan?

Conclusion

Madam Speaker, we pray that the National Budget Framework Paper for the financial year 2015/2016 be reviewed because it has issues that lack clarity, consistency and deviates from the facts of the relevant binding legal documents like the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and the Budget Act, 2001.

Otherwise, Madam Speaker, we will be opening the windows and doors for fraud, self-seeking behaviors and allocation for funds to unproductive sectors.

Once again, I would like to say that these are legal challenges. There is no politics in the issues I have raised because they are matters that are facing us as an institution. When we make a law, we should base our decision on that law. So, I would like to appeal to the House to focus on those and see whether we are moving in the right direction. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much, honourable member. I do not want to get into the debate but I just wanted to respond to one comment. I think you have made a very serious indictment on the foreign mission and yet as a country, we have not provided them the resources. They cannot even hold Independence Celebrations where they can gather people. We do not give them that – so the way you have put it, you are inviting them but I think it is us who have failed to give them the resources to do that work. I just wanted that to be noted.

5.21
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Budget Committee and the acting Leader of Opposition for their comments. 

We made a law here, the Public Finance and Management Act. This law lays a serious foundation for the future of this country. But we are surprised - and members should be concerned - that the same Government, from the onset is violating the law with impunity. It is the responsibility of this Parliament to rise above to save its integrity and the country as a large. Violating the budget process is a beginning of corruption. Whatever you do - Auditor-General, IGG, Police is all nothing, if you do not follow the budget process from the beginning!

The Chairman of the Budget Committee has categorically stated that the budget is not grounded on any development frameworks. To save the image of this country and even to make the work of the Auditor-General to be valid and any process beyond, we expected the Minister of Finance to lay an instrument here, extending the NDP I, which has expired, really to save the whole process. Kindly, honourable Minister of Finance, we can do this to redeem our image. We need an instrument, short of which the process violates the Constitution and is a total violation of the law. Please, before we proceed and approve this, bring an instrument. I can advise you on that. (Laughter)

Secondly, when you make an analysis, you notice that most of the sectors lack sector investment plans and no wonder every sector has unfunded activities and that is a recipe for disaster and corruption.

Therefore, resources are planned on sheer lack of total planning. I would like to call upon my colleagues that we cannot continue to move like this. Year in, year out, we ask Government departments to have sectoral plans and sectoral investment plans in line with the National Development Plan. There is a serious gap.

Furthermore, I would like to call upon my colleagues to take the report of the chairman very seriously. On page 8, the chairman raises fundamental issues. Honourable colleagues, you remember in 2011, the inflation that this country faced. If we do not address the issue the chairman raised on page 8, he was categorical. I have talked about lack of planning, which we need to extend.

On page 9, the information about GDP and money supply does not have absolute value for average and year ending. This means that Bank of Uganda can print money because there is no clear projection upon which we can sanction and monitor the economy. The chairman said information on the end of year inflation is missing. These are very serious issues that affect business people and the private sector.

Today, I met many private sector and business people. They are saying they are worried. They do not know the trend of this economy. How can we have lack of serious information? What are the technical people doing in Government? The chairman said information on rate of employment and unemployment -IPU, the World Bank and IMS have raised the issue of youth unemployment. When we invest and direct resources, we address resources to create jobs for the young people and Government does not give this information. The chairman further said information on exchange and interest rates is missing. These are serious issues. We have stated in this House that Government has failed to reign in on everybody in this country using the US dollar currency in collecting rents and trading.

That crowds out people who operate forex bureaus because anyone can open a hotel or a shop and say, “The only currency acceptable here is the US dollar.” It is very dangerous for an economy and distorts the economy. Anybody can enter in this country, collect foreign currency and walk out. That is the economy we are operating and it is very dangerous. The chairman has said it. So, honourable colleagues, we need to take this very seriously.

On page 10, the chairman has said, the foreign exchange rate is projected to depreciate further in the medium term despite projection in foreign direct investment. If foreign exchange rate depreciates further, that will affect imports and exports and balance of trade and we shall have a budget deficit, which means the budget we are implementing - for instance, the foreign missions that we are talking about; you plan to give them may be Shs 1 billion but if the foreign exchange rate depreciates further as projected, we need to borrow more to send them –(Interruption)

MR ISABIRYE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Ekanya is a member of this committee and the procedural point I am raising is on whether he is debating or seconding the minority report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, earlier this morning, I had a meeting with the chairperson and hon. Ekanya. He wanted to present a minority report but there was already one by hon. Ogwal and we could not have several minority reports on the same issue. So, I said he would be able to raise a few points on that matter. He is doing it with my permission.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker and colleagues – (Interjections) - I am just –(Interruption)

MS AKOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. According to what I understand and when I look at this report, this is a report of the whole House. In here, we have the various reports from all sectoral committees of this House. My understanding is that when the chairperson presents the report, Members can only stand up to enrich this report before it is forwarded to the Executive. That is the best I understand about the report that has just been presented by the chairperson of the Budget Committee because his role has been to compile the various reports of the committees by this House so that he can present the position of Parliament regarding the Budget Frame Work Paper to the Executive before the budget is finally read. 

I would like to seek guidance from you, Madam Speaker, as to whether, now that we have received this report of the whole House that we are meant to present to the Executive, whether it is us again to critique our own report and yet, it is we who participated in the making of this report. I need your  guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether we can just hand over a report without making any comments. You talked about enrichment; for instance, hon. Ogwal brought out the issue of the loans that we have taken and have not been utilized, which was not in the main report. They are just enriching it very briefly and we shall hand over to the Executive. (Applause) Conclude, please.

MR EKANYA: In fact, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much. Hon. Akol needs to be informed that under the new law, the process has changed. The old process was just to lay and it goes to the Executive. Whatever we do in this report is binding, by the way, if we are a serious Parliament. However, if you want it to be ceremonial, please, we can go that way. Even the chairman’s information - because the chairman has raised very serious issues about debts and I want to invite Members to read this; not all the information was given - according to me, the chairman is talking about debts, the document given was wrong but I have made an analysis of it. Our total debt stands at $7.7 billion; this excludes Isimba and Karuma dams. If you add Isimba and Karuma loans, it will increase to $9 billion. Again, if you add the standard gauge, since it has been signed and already attracting interest, you are in $12 billion.

Therefore, we need Government to give us correct information. That will move us beyond the level that is required for us since our GDP ratio is growing at 15 percent; yet, our external debt is growing at 134 percent. 

Within 10 years, if we are not careful, by implementing these projects, we might be like Greece. Therefore, these are very serious issues that we all need to take time and debate on. I would like to thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for allowing us to make analysis because whatever we do in this law - we have allowed Government to do multiyear commitment. Colleagues may not know what multiyear commitment means – it is where you authorise Government to spend even for the next two, three, four years and enter into a contract without approval. When you do that without making analysis, the financial implications are - when you come back here next year, they will say you authorised that expenditure and your hands will be tied. So, they are glaring issues. We need to spend time and debate this report.

Finally, if you look at page 11, the chairman and members of the committee have done their job. Page 11 raises very serious issues about the Central Bank Monetary Policy for the month of April, money supply and inflation. We have to look at these issues because they will have a post-election impact.

Page 12, about budget deficit, the projection of Government, and some people are planning to go to court. Government has been drawing money domestically without authority. Government is holding domestically, more than Shs 5 trillion. We are supposed to fund this budget by domestic borrowing of about Shs 3 trillion. If you do that, interest rates in commercial banks will sky-rocket because commercial banks will not be able to lend to the private sector.

Last time, when we were with you in Kamuli, you complained that banks cannot give you money. Why would they give you, if the treasury bills and bonds by Bank of Uganda are at 16 per cent? The other one is more guaranteed. This one will affect growth, including tax and revenue collection. I beg to rest my case.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us have one more comment from hon. Waira. Please, enrich.

5.34
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is on the theme. I am not comfortable with the theme because it has many redundant words. 

A theme is what guides you to achieve what you would like to achieve and to define where you would like to go. I feel that the theme is too long. (Interjections) On page 14, it is just a story not a theme. (Laughter) I would like to suggest that the committee tries to do an abstract so that it is summarised in a very short form.

THE SPEAKER: It came from the government not from the committee.

MR MAJEGERE: We need to advise Government because once the theme is not clear; you cannot achieve what you want. You cannot find the way. We need a very clear, short and precise theme. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much. Honourable members, this is our report as a House; we would like to give time to the government; we need responses, including the story in the theme. Maybe, you may want to make adjustments if it has not gone too far. When will it be ready? We need to debate from a point of information.

5.36
 THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and members of different committees that contributed to this. Certainly, the Budget Framework Paper, after the adoption of this report, will be enhanced and improved.

We would like to ask for two days to look at it and give some answers because some of the issues that are being raised are public information that the committee probably could have picked. Others are not true. For example, to say that the first National Development Plan has expired is not true. However, there are things that are actually true in the report, which we need to incorporate. So, we are asking for two days –(Interjections)– so that we can come back and clarify some of these issues.

THE SPEAKER: The adoption of the National Budget Framework Paper would come after we have received response to the comments and the amendments?

MR BAHATI: It would be better and neater that we first make some responses to some of the issues so that when the House is adopting, at least, there are some things that -

THE SPEAKER: Do you anticipate knocking out some things here?


MR BAHATI: Yes, we anticipate knocking out some things. However, we agree on some things and disagree on others. (Interjections) For example, as a House, we sat here and agreed that there were some difficulties in following the current law. We took a decision as a House on how we should move this process forward. 

The minority report is saying that actually, we should not have done it that way, when the person who is moving it was part of this decision. Some of those things must be corrected; there are things which are - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is our report. We have listened to it. The government will have their own time to come back to us on that issue. For now we should adopt the report because it is our report. Honourable members, I put the question -

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I know we can just adopt this report or extend it but as I said, there are legal issues that I thought we would give Government time to correct.

If we adopt this report like this, the way I think the minister wants it, let me put you on notice, I am going to raise legal issues, which you brought in your Budget Framework Paper, which you have summersaulted in other documents. I do not want to remind you here.

For example, for the sake of this Parliament, it is very wrong for the Minister of Finance to say the National Development Plan has not expired.

This budget is for 2015/2016, the other National Development Plan expires in June, this year. This budget starts on 1st July.

There are serious glaring legal issues and I thought that -(Interjections)- hon. Bahati, I have the document here- (Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the current National Development Plan is 2010/2011 to 2014/2015. The second National Development Plan, which we laid to the House last week is for 2016/2017 to 2020.

In other words, the current National Development Plan has not expired and we have submitted a new National Development Plan to cater for the next five years, from 1st July. The document is with us. Therefore, it is up to Parliament to work quickly and adopt this. 

Is the senior legislator in order to put the House in confusion? The document is with us for approval, as a House and the period has not ended. The period for the current National Development Plan has not ended and is still valid. We have presented a new one to cater for the following years.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I believe that document was laid here; it is before the committee. So, it is in our hands.

MR EKANYA: This is the document, the National Development Plan, 2015/2016 draft, which was laid here four days ago. (Interjections) The Budget Framework Paper, which we are handling, should have been based on that, after approval. 

That is simply what I am saying. I am trying to help the minister by being very candid. The Budget Framework Paper, should have been after we have approved the National Development Plan. It was laid last week.

The best way to be neat is for the minister to just issue a Statutory Instrument to extend the other one so that this one will now move because the chairman even mentioned in his statement that the National Development Plan has been extended. We agreed.


THE SPEAKER: I do not think he said it has been extended. He said it is hanging alone. He neither based on the past nor on the future one. He said it is hanging alone, he did not say it was extended. I thought that is what you said in your report.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes, Madam Speaker, we indeed mentioned that it is a stand-alone document because we are talking about the financial year 2015/2016, where we do not have an approved National Development Plan. (Applause) and that is a matter of fact. What we would have expected was for the minister to have presented the draft NDP in good time for Parliament to approve but that did not happen. (Applause) He needs to admit that there was a problem and then, we proceed.

THE SPEAKER: But isn’t there a possibility for the committee to complete this work before the end of the financial year? We have the document.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for raising this very important matter. To be on record, the NDP-I was presented on the Floor without parliamentary approval, which was a very big mistake. The law requires parliamentary approval.

However, this time round, the draft has been brought to Parliament. What we should emphasise in the interest of the mandate of Parliament is that this draft should have been presented to Parliament and the committee report produced and we approve it because the next budget we are going to look at is year one of NDP-II. Therefore, it is paramount that we align the budget to the NDP. It would be erroneous for us to proceed with the budget of year one, when the planning framework is still hanging. I would like to request that we prioritise the approval of the NDP as we simultaneously bring in the budget.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I think you now fully understand our concern [Hon. Ekanya: “We shall educate them.”]

The best way to move is that the Minister of Finance should agree that we extend the other one for one year, to give us time, to thoroughly analyse the draft that we have. The draft has very many issues; you cannot look through it and approve it in a matter of days and yet, we have to approve the budget.

That is why I brought this minority report to guide the House. If we are to move legally, we have to be conscious of our steps. 

If the minister could agree with our free advice; the only way is to extend the NDP for one year; we anchor the budget process on that and then, take time to study the new plan, which is in a draft form. That is the right way to move.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to draw the attention of Members to the fact that when we were passing the Public Finance Management Act, we did not make a provision for this transition period. 

Now, we are caught up by our own omission because there should have been a transition period between the various laws that have expired and this new law. It is up to this House to decide the way forward together with the Executive because we are dealing with the transition period but we did not make a provision for the way forward.  I would like to propose -(Interjection)

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, there was no need for Parliament to provide for transition. What you may not be aware of is that the Budget Act has been retained intact.

I have quoted in the minority report that section 7 gives you a complete leeway to go through the budget process without any interruption and without demanding for a transitional period.

I do not know why, I think somehow, somewhere, the Ministry of Finance was deliberately playing on our intellectual ability.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to confirm that I was chairing the House when we passed that law and the proposal to repeal the Act was rejected. (Applause) There should be no question about review of the Budget Act; it is still our law. 

MS AKOL: Thank you, for your guidance, Madam Speaker. I propose that - first of all, to do with the report, I would believe there is no harm in the House adopting the report and then, enriching it after we have received the statement or the reply from Government because this is one report that we are enriching.

Two, on the NDP, as proposed that we extend, I do not know how we are going to extend a plan that I would believe is about to come to its end. 

Now that this one is not yet approved, this should not hinder the budget process. This budget can still be passed without the approved NDP so that the new one takes effect from 2016/2017 because it is not yet approved and it can only take effect after approval. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to conclude this matter. I put the question that the minority report be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the main report be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: We ask the government to take into account the comments and proposals so that when you come back to us on Tuesday, we do have some answers. Thank you. (Members rose_) We have finished. Both reports have been adopted.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

5.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I move that the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2015 be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Has it been seconded? (Members rose_) Justification -

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2015 is to amend Cap. 349 to define certain terms used in the Act and also to increase the annual registration threshold to provide for tax treatment of the oil and gas and mining sector and to exclude florescent bulbs from the exempt category and to add the Global Fund to fight HIV/AIDS, Malaria Tuberculosis and Red Cross to the list of public international organisations; to provide for zero rates for the supply of cereals grown and milled in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to mention that this Bill and the tax Bills that will be coming are in respect to the fundamentals of tax policy, which is fairness, equitable and also balancing the need to grow our economy. It is also to say that Members, as we debate this issue, it is important to note that the total requirement for our budget now stands at Shs 184 trillion but the resources that are available to us are Shs 18.3 trillion. Therefore, we need to balance those issues as we debate this Bill. I beg to move.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, Order.

THE SPEAKER: But he has finished. 

MR EKANYA: Order, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, there is nobody on the Floor.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I raised the point of order to hon. Bahati. This is a very serious order based on the document that we have just approved, where the minister [THE SPEAKER: “Which one?”]- the Budget Framework Paper.  

THE SPEAKER: No, we finished with that, please. We are on the VAT Bill.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER:  May be, raise a point of procedure not order.

MR EKANYA: Thank you, very much, for your guidance, Madam Speaker. Hon. Bahati is my good friend but because he had started on a war path, we take him on a war path.

For that matter, let me go on a point of procedure. I am raising a point of procedure. The document we have just approved, the Budget Framework Paper, which was laid here and approved by this House - I would like to read page 12 because of time “The committee notes there will be no new tax measure in the forthcoming year.” But the Minister of Finance has just read the Value Added Tax Bill for the second time and will be strengthening tax administration.

We discussed this matter at committee level but now, I find a serious contradiction and this is why some of us were being sympathetic to the minister saying that he needed time. I wonder how we have just approved a position that there would be new tax measure; immediately we are summersaulting without receding this position. It is on page 11 and 12 of the report we have adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, is this VAT a new tax measure? [MRS OGWAL: “It has to be.”]- Minister, how do you respond to that?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the Shadow Minister of Finance is trying to insinuate that actually, this House can make a decision that Government cannot have new tax revenue measures to finance the budget. I find it very difficult that the Shadow Minister of Finance can propose that, because there is no way Government can work- let us be realistic –(Interruption)

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, this minister came to the Budget Committee -(Interjections)- excuse me, look at my face – (Laughter) - [THE SPEAKER: “No, you address the Speaker. Do not intimidate Members.] (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, he was looking down and that is why I had to whip him a bit. (Laughter) The minister came to the Budget Committee and he was able to reason out some issues, which were of grave concern to the Budget Committee. Among some of those issues, which he raised was the issue of taxation and this statement was not just cooked up by the committee or the chairman. This was your own statement that there would be no new taxes in this financial year.

Therefore, this is your statement which we took in good faith and brought to this Parliament. Now, you disown it. Madam Speaker, is the minister in order to disgrace the committee, to which I belong, to make it appear as if we are doctoring reports or misquoting the ministry? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I did not attend the meeting of the Budget Committee, so, I do not know what was said there. (Laughter) 

You know, we have adopted the report. Let them come back and answer to us what they meant. We have adopted that report where it is said that there will be no new measures. Therefore, when you come on Tuesday, come with an answer explaining what you meant by “there is no new taxes” because it is in the report we have already adopted. Chairman of the finance committee, please, come and present your report.

6.00
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Anthony Okello): Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on Value Added Tax Amendment Bill, 2015.

In the report, we have the introduction, methodology and object of the Bill. I am not going into all that because of time constraints. I would like to request that you allow me go straight to committee observations, which is 3.0

Increase VAT threshold from Shs 50 million to Shs 150 million. Clause 3 seeks to increase the annual registration threshold from Shs 50 million to Shs 150 million. The minister stated that the low threshold has been overtaken by many events, such as exchange rates, depreciation and inflation leading to an increase of non-value adding agency; low effective VAT rate for businesses whose turnover is and consequently, a lower VAT to GDP ratio.

The proposal is expected to generate Shs 2 billion. The committee observes that;
    1) Since 1996, the size of the economy has greatly improved.
    2) URA lacks sufficient capacity to audit, track all business units under Shs 150 million. Increasing the VAT threshold will lower the administrative costs on account of enforcement on small businesses and increase their profitability but also reduce the administrative costs incurred by URA in managing a large number of VAT agents who are not yielding much revenue.
    3) Government will not lose revenue in form of refunds. The committee recommends that URA should be more vigilant in scrutinising companies that apply for VAT registration to weed out under-declaration of VAT.

Tax treatment of the oil and gas and mining sectors; with respect to the oil and gas and mining sector, the Bill seeks to amend VAT Act to;
    a) Allow companies to register voluntarily for VAT during the exploration and development phases of the resource project and allow the registration during the construction phase of mid trim facility.
    b) Allow oil companies an input credit for there is VAT charge. It is the supplier of a service who must account to the URA for any VAT due on its supplies.
c) Repeal the VAT exemption for petroleum products and reduce the excise on this product once the refinery commences production of finished product. The minister submitted that VAT was a disincentive to operation under this sector and hence, the need for a special regime to support the growth of the sector.

The Civil Society Organisations submitted that preferential tax treatment for a given sector sets a precedent for other sectors to demand for preference. VAT principles should not be applied selectively.

The committee recommends that given that the sector is still in its infancy, more studies should be conducted to establish the ideal tax regime for the growth of the economy.

The committee further notes that the definitions of “petroleum operation” and “petroleum agreement” are not in line with the principle laws on petroleum and will propose amendments to this effect.

VAT zero rates on the supply of cereals grown and milled in Uganda

Clause 11 seeks to reinstate the supply of cereals grown, milled in Uganda among the zero rated supplies. Last financial year, the committee thought that zero rating the supply of cereals will build the milling capacity in the country and equally add value to the cereals product.

The committee observes that the bulk of the cereals are gathered from farmers by the middlemen who are below the threshold for VAT registration. Standard rating the supply of cereals has been found to be counterproductive by making Ugandan rice, maize and other cereals uncompetitive for it encourages influx of rice, maize and other cereals from other COMESA countries whose farmers are heavily subsidised.

The committee further recommends that clause 11 should also include supply of cereals produced in Uganda. 

VAT on handling fees by National Medical Stores (NMS)

The committee was petitioned by the NMS who submitted to the committee as follows;
NMS receives donations of medicines and other medical supplies on behalf of Government destined to government health facilities. A handling fee is usually given to NMS from the respective donors to facilitate the handling of the donation. Currently, NMS is obliged to pay VAT on the handling fees. The donors are not willing to meet the VAT component. NMS appeals to Parliament to zero-rate the handling fees payable by them. 

In response, the URA stated that VAT relates to the supply of goods and services. Whenever NMS engages in avertable activity, they have to pay tax. The committee observes that;
    a) It is government policy that Government pays tax on its consumption of goods and services.
    b) URA is the competent authority on VAT. The committee, therefore, recommends that like any other government institution, NMS should budget for the tax component in the annual budget. A blanket exemption by Parliament without proper audit of the operations of the institution would not be proper.

VAT on computers, computer accessories and computer software; The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Act 2014 standard-rated the supply of computers, desktops, printers, computer parts and accessories and supply of computer software and software licence. The ICT association of Uganda, Indian Business Forum and the Prince Kimbugwe Foundation submitted to the effect that tax exemption structure has limited growth potential of the sector primarily due to the double taxation and most especially that;
    1. VAT charge on imported services is not allowed as claimable input to VAT and that becomes a cost to the IT companies in Uganda unlike other East African countries like Kenya, Tanzania and Rwanda.
    2. URA has authored conflicting opinion on whether imported software is a product or service.
    3. The exemption of VAT on the supply of computers, desktop printers, computer parts and accessories and the supply of computer software and software licences should be reinstated. The rationale is to support the IT and business process out-sourcing sector in Uganda because of its potential to generate employment for the Ugandan youths.
    4. Prince Kimbugwe made a case for the abolition of the ban on old computers. The petitioners proposed that;
    a) VAT on imported services should be allowed as a claimable input specifically for IT and Business Processing Out-sourcing (BPO) sector. 
    b) IT and BPO sectors be exempt from VAT on imported services. The URA clarifies that imported software is a service. The committee notes that there is need to generate revenue by widening the tax base given that the demand for technological development is inelastic; the IT and BPO sector is a good target.

VAT on insurance services

In the financial year 2014/2015, the supply of insurance services except the supply of health insurance services, micro insurance services and reinsurance services was subject to VAT. The Uganda Insurance Association petitioned the committee with regard to the time of supply for insurance services. Under section 14(1)(c) of the VAT Act, the time of supply, that is, the tax point for accounting for VAT is the earlier of the following three, that is;
    a) Issue of a tax invoice or 
    b) Upon completion of performance of a service, or
    c) On receipt of payment.

The Uganda Insurance Association submitted that the time of supply for insurance services should be deemed to be at the point when the premium payment is received by the insurance company or upon completion of performance of service, whichever is the earlier. Such an approach has been adopted in South Africa especially for the insurance industry.

Rationale; By virtue of the statutory payments terms imposed by the Insurance Act, there is significant delay between insurance of the policy with an invoice and receipt of the premium. Therefore, if the standard time of supply rules under the VAT Act are applied to insurance companies such as VAT, is accounted for at the time of invoice that forces significant detrimental cash-flow impact. This directly impacts the solvency of operation of insurance companies and may force the companies to liquidate results.

The committee examined the taxation regime with respect to insurance in other countries and found the following; In Kenya, Tanzania and Burundi, insurance services are exempted from VAT while in South Africa, there is recognition of the unique nature of the insurance industry and the time of supply for insurance services is at the time when the premium is paid or when the performance of service has been completed.

The committee appreciates the case presented by the insurance players. However, the committee is also concerned with the risk distribution vis-a-vis revenue to Government. Several questions arise;
    1. Whether the URA has capacity to detect when the premium are paid -here it is written policy, Madam Speaker, but it should be premium.
    2. Whether this would not encourage tax evasion. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance and URA should hold more consultations with the insurance players to address this issue in the next financial year.

Conclusion

The committee recommends that the Bill be passed subject to the proposed amendments. I beg to report, Madam Speaker. 

However, there is a minority report attached to this Bill and it is by hon. Tayebwa. Before he presents the minority report, allow me lay on Table the original copy of the report of the committee on Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2015 and minutes of the committee meeting, which took place on 27 April 2015. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and members of your committee, for the fine work.

6.14
MR ODOO TAYEBWA (FDC, Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am presenting a minority report on Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2015 - (Interruption)

MR BESISIRA: I have a copy of the main report and the signatures thereon and he is one of the signatories. Is it procedurally right for him to have a minority report when he signed?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Speaker, indeed, it is true that the member had earlier on signed on the committee report but when he changed his opinion he decided to officially withdraw his signature by writing to the Clerk. I think that could be procedurally right; he withdrew his signature by writing officially.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is setting an interesting precedent. You sit in the committee and agree; then, after two weeks you reflect and say, “No, I am now withdrawing my signature.” It is setting a very dangerous precedent.  

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Speaker, we were guided by the committee clerk and he told us that procedurally, that would be right if he wrote.

THE SPEAKER: No. Honourbale members, I do not want to endorse that precedent. It is going to be dangerous. Every member will wake up and withdraw from what they have done. I am sorry let us stick to the main report.

6.16
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion with one exception. I am particularly very uncomfortable with the taxation of medicines and the supply chain of medicine. 

The story about the NMS is that the NMS is the national agency that receives medicines for and on behalf of the Government of Uganda. It stores medicines and supplies them to the various health units. If you tax any aspect of that supply chain, you will do two things: That you introduce a disincentive to the many donors that give us medicines. If you tax even the so- called handling charges, which is paid by the donors - I will give you an example. The donor community pays a total of Shs 400 million for antiretroviral treatment in Uganda. If you ask them to pay on top of the Shs 400 million for treating AIDS patients in Uganda, 18 per cent VAT for the supply chain of that medication, you will be doing a very big disservice to our health sector.

I want a situation where a person in the Health Centre IV, in Nagongera that I represent in this Parliament gets medicine at zero cost and I want a situation where we can encourage donors to freely give us medicine. I would understand if the NMS was for example running rental property. You would then charge them VAT but we need to be very clear; what are we going to impose this VAT on?

Secondly, the Committee on Health reported to the Committee on Budget that right now, the NMS is indebted to URA to the tune of Shs 19 billion. They reported to the Budget Committee that the Shs 19 billion is not budgeted for. The government has not given them that money; it is unfunded priority but you still insist that we must pass in the VAT Amendment Act, that they should pay that money. 

They should pay and yet, you have not budgeted for it. URA is threatening to close them down; you are going to close down the only entity that supplies you with medicine. For heaven’s sake, we are talking about medicine given to sick people.

What kind of legislation would that be? Even taxation must have a human face. Why do you collect the money in the first place? To provide services to your people and it is better if you provide services to people who are not sick. 

It is our responsibility, Madam Speaker, that we look at this very critically and we pronounce ourselves on it. That is the only objection I have to the committee report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what hon. Odoi has said is important and it brings a question in my mind; did the Ministry of Finance comply with the human rights checklist, which is provided for in this House and also with a certificate of gender equity in making this provision? That is just my comment.

6.20
MS RONAH NINSIIMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for this report but to also bring my reservations on the issue of VAT for NMS. I sit on the Committee on Health and we already have a lot of challenges regarding the amount of drugs this country is getting as a result of limited resources.

I know that when we present our report, we are even going to find that already, NMS is going through an exchange loss of about Shs 25 billion because the suppliers want payments in dollars and therefore, when we have an issue with the dollars here, we are the ones at a loss.

Therefore, with all that, I also pray that Ministry of Finance or Government and URA devise other means of getting money but not from NMS because it makes no sense even if finance committed itself today to say, “We are going to pay this tax for NMS by bringing money from the Consolidated Fund” and taking it back to the Consolidated Fund to me adds no value. 

We would even get this money if Government can commit itself to seeing that we add more drugs into the facilities for our people to be helped other than thinking of taxing an entity, which is not profit-making. If we continue like that, we shall be treating it like ENHAS or any other organisations that are supplying drugs, making profits and yet, this particular organisation is working on behalf of Government to help the people. I thank you.

6.22
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to support the motion but I have the following observations to make. On the production and milling of cereals in Uganda, we export a lot of grains and maize to Kenya but some of our people who are at the border are forced to buy milled maize from across because we cannot afford our own. Therefore, I would like to support the committee that it is prudent that we make maize produced and milled in our country affordable.

Madam Speaker, on abuse, I would like to say something about the committee report on the Red Cross and Global Fund. It would be very unfair for us to receive assistance or aid from foreign countries and look ungrateful. You have been given and then you are forcing the one giving you to pay taxes. This would be very unfair and I would request the committee to look at it and we have zero-rating on these drugs and assistance from donors.

I have only a reservation that sometimes this is prone to abuse under the guise of importing; maybe, Red Cross is giving us assistance but as a result, somebody may abuse the opportunity. However, this must not hinder the noble cause, which is assistance coming from donors to our country. 

I would like to support the motion with those reservations that it would be very unfair for NMS to pay taxes on assistance given by donors. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.24
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Pleading for NMS, Red Cross and others may not be the solution. We need to find a permanent solution for this. On page 5, we need to scrap “Government policy to pay tax on its consumption of goods and services.” Today, we will plead for NMS, tomorrow there will be another essential government institution giving an essential service.

For example, in my constituency, I have a power project. They planted the poles 10 months ago but they have not put wires and they are saying that Rural Electrification Agency (REA) has got to pay tax. The Ministry of Finance is supposed to give REA money to pay to URA and then URA is supposed to collect money to give to finance. 

With that circus, Madam Speaker, in the end, Government services suffer. The contractor is now penalising REA to pay. Consequently, the works delay and then we have to pay penalties to the contractor because the contractor has been on the ground and has not been working.

I would suggest that to get a permanent cure for this, if the services are for Government, let Government not pay tax on its own services and goods consumed. I thank you.

6.26
MS FLORENCE EKWAU IBI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I implore colleagues to support the petition brought by the NMS. Honestly, speaking, NMS is a non-profitable organisation. By the time URA extends its hands there, I think this is being unfair. It is like a parent in a home – (Interruption)

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleague for accepting this clarification. When you are a non-profit making organisation, you do not make profits. When you do not make profits, you do not pay income tax. I felt this clarification was necessary.

MS EKWAU IBI: Thank you very much, for that support and giving credence to my argument. Madam Speaker, when you look at the Shs 19 billion NMS is pleading for, honestly speaking, we are going to look at ministry budgets, Shs 19 billion is like equating it to the budget of the ministry of ICT. It is far much more than the total budget of the Cotton Development Authority. It is a lot of money to get from a body like NMS and it was not budgeted for.

Madam Speaker, I implore this House to yield to the plea of NMS because at the moment, if it has not budgeted for these funds and at the end of the day, we still expect the little it has to be milked out of them; it would be very unfair.

These donors are talking about being fatigued. At the end, it is the local man and woman going to suffer. We have new cases of Hepatitis B which are disturbing the whole country. The Ministry of Health and the budget of the country cannot shoulder some of these special cases. We rely on donors for some of this support; if they feel that we are not putting in enough on our side, they would not be obliged. (Mr Kasule rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Information from the chair of finance committee.

MR SSEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleague for yielding the Floor. It is in this House that we exempted medicines and even in the PPDA Act, we exempted most of those supplies from paying VAT. Unless, there is another explanation given to what supplies are being charged VAT.

THE SPEAKER: Do you have the law exempting medicine? 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Ibi, you have raised a good point, everybody is now interested.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. If I may draw your attention to Value Added Tax Cap 349 section 24 (4), talking about zero-rated supplies. When you look at 1(c), the supply of drugs and medicines is zero-rated. So, there is no VAT on the supply of drugs and medicines.

What the committee is talking about, like any Government institution that supplies other taxable services such as rent, NMS, has got stores from which they rent and generate income.

So, what we are saying is that VAT is usually charged when they generate income out of rent from those stores and we expect them to collect that money and remit it to URA.

Even an institution like Parliament, if you are earning any income, the provision of the law requires you to submit VAT to URA. (Interjections) Allow me finish then you can come.

NMS has got stores, which they rent out, and VAT is payable on rent. This is the major component of VAT that NMS needs to budget for.

In any case, NMS does not incur the VAT but it passes it on to consumers of their services. Why shouldn’t they pay if other Government institutions are paying? However, in relation to drugs and medicines there is no VAT at all.

MS EKWAU IBI: Madam Speaker, if NMS was home and dry, they would not have come to the level of a petition, Mr Chairman. By the time they petition the committee, then there is a problem.

National Medical Stores is saying they did not budget for this money. It is not in their budget. At the end of the day, Ugandans are the ones going to pay for this.

There are some other supplies like mama kits, polythenes- you are talking about exemptions on drugs, that is okay but there are supplies like the mama kits, the polythenes. Some of these are bought on donations and most of these donations at the moment are what we are relying on. At the end of the day, if we end up squeezing National Medical Stores, we shall be squeezing the common man and woman behind there. 

Madam Speaker, I plead with this House; National Medical Stores is pleading with us. They have not budgeted for this money this financial year - to the tune of Shs 19 billion. Let the Ministry of Finance at a later date come up with another mechanism. If they are talking about income generated from keeping the medicines and other supplies, it is ok. However, with this other case, it is not really proper for you to go ahead and tax National Medical Stores.

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the chairman what the definition of goods and services within the context of the National Medical Stores is. I want to know what comprises goods and services within that context you are talking about. Let the minister come in.

6.34
THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (IN CHARGE OF POLITICAL MOBILISATION) (Mr Abraham Byandala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My dear colleagues, I have listened to you and I totally appreciate your concerns. 

The question here is not whether you are making profit or you are an NGO; the question is not whether you have the ability to pay; the question is: how do you manage to selectively discriminate companies on payment? It became so difficult - Even with the money we get from donors, let us say from the road sector, they had to impose VAT to make it easy. So, what National Medical Stores needs to do, if they are charging anything on their medicine, is to budget for it and ask for that money from the Ministry of Finance –(Interruption)

MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. How much VAT do we charge on military equipment? You are talking about selective treatment. We do not charge any VAT on guns or tanks but you want to charge VAT on the storage of medicine. What kind of logic is that?

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I think we did not do a neat job at committee level. I was in between supporting and objecting. 

I have just seen the Public Finance Act that we passed, section 29 on cash and assets.  The chairman convinced some of us that stores handling services is an income, which is true, and National Medical Stores or any government parastatal should pay if they earn income. However, the law we made here, and we were categorical, says thus: “(1) Revenue shall not be collected or received by a vote, state enterprise or public corporation, except where the vote, state enterprise or public corporation is authorised by an Act of Parliament… 
(2) Revenue collected or received by a vote, state enterprise or public corporation under subsection (1) shall… form part of the Consolidated Fund”. 

This means that if NMS uses the stores and they earn income, that money goes directly to Consolidated Fund account. That is the law we made. So what has been happening? I think URA has not updated their records and systems in line this current law; they now impose VAT and then the medicines and drugs are held in the store and the rural people suffer. 

Therefore, Mr Chairman, imposing VAT is wrong in relation to this law we made. National Medication Stores cannot collect any revenue now, even if they have business. The money goes there and then the books are balanced. This is the law we made. So I think imposing VAT is not proper because we made a law barring any public enterprise or corporation from collecting money; all the money they get goes directly. 

THE SPEAKER: I think that is the law we made.

6.38
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to depart from what hon. Ekanya has just mentioned. When you are talking about revenue, you are talking about rent but not the VAT component that is attached to the rent. So VAT is not revenue for that organisation. However, the element of rent is what we are talking about. So they cannot pass on VAT.

The clarification I want to get from the chairperson of the committee is: what is the implication of this VAT on the handling of NMS medicines? What this means is that when medicines come, a handling company is going to bill NMS and they are going to ask them to pay VAT on that – (Interruption)

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I would like to give clarification on how the handling fees we are talking about arise. There is an organisation called Centre for Diseases Control (CDC). They import medicine from wherever and they ask NMS to store and handle these medicines before they are distributed to the intended beneficiaries. What NMS does is to provide this service and they issue a “see note” to CDC which is called a “handling charge”. This “see note” should be inclusive of VAT. It should say, for example, you have handled for us, we are giving you a “see note” of Shs 12 million plus VAT and then it becomes maybe 14 of 18 per cent. 

What the law is seeking is that since this is a service that is of value, Government should get VAT. There should be some tax that goes to Government.

THE SPEAKER: Should supporting sick people be taxed by Government? 

MR LUBOGO: Madam Speaker, I fail to understand hon. Musasizi properly. From his explanation, it would mean that actually, NMS would be collecting this VAT from the companies it is handling for; in which case, it would not require money to pay but it would be collecting money from other companies –(Interjections)– Let me finish this and I will get the clarification later. My question is: if I perceive it rightly that they are supposed to pay a company which has handled this amount of money, how practical will it be for us to discriminate that when you are handling donated medicines to NMS, you should not pay VAT but when you are handling medicine for others, then you go ahead and pay? 

Ideally, VAT of that type is supposed to be recoverable. It may cause a temporary financial cash flow problem but it is supposed to be recoverable afterwards. It is not supposed to be incurred and the money is lost. So I need some clarification from the chairperson of the committee on this issue. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairman, I want us to go to committee stage but I want you to explain to me what goods and services are within the context of National Medical Stores.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Speaker, my understanding is that VAT relates to supply of goods and services. When you talk about goods and services in relation to NMS, then probably you are talking about nothing else but drugs and medicine. 

However, the concern here is not really putting tax on drugs and medicine. If you get to understand the history of NMS, you will know that it was a business entity; it was a business arm of Government but now it is not. The point is that NMS has got facilities that it rents out. When it rents out these facilities, what happens in such a case? They earn income and in the process of earning income, there is a component of VAT that they are supposed to collect and remit to URA. So, this is the kind of idea that we are saying should be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: But is it reflected in the bill that relates only to the rent? 

6.44
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honestly, I did not think that we would debate this matter. This is because it appears to me as if we are saying that we should tax this person who has been on their sick bed suffering from TB or whatever. Ultimately, we are making it so difficult for these patients to receive the medicine.

Madam Speaker, let me specifically address the issue of stores and rent that you are talking about. Storage of medicine primarily is a service National Medical Stores does. They actually even have limited space. The information we get is that they have been looking around for more money to build more stores. So, how can we begin thinking that they are renting out stores and, therefore, we should get VAT from these stores? The space they have alone is not enough; they actually even rent. So if they are renting, what is this rent that they getting and from whom when they are actually paying rent?

I think that this is a very critical matter. We should unanimously agree that this organisation be exempted from VAT; let us not even spend so much time on this. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think there is general agreement on many issues; the only bone of contention is the issue of National Medical Stores. So I want to put the question that the VAT Bill be read for the second time

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR ANTHONY OKELLO:  Madam Chairperson, in clause 2 (a) insert between “supplying” and “services” the words “good or”. The justification is: to cover the suppliers of goods as well

Under clause 2 (b), substitute the definition of “petroleum operations” for the following: “(1c) ‘Petroleum operations’ means an authorised operation under a petroleum agreement for petroleum exploration, development, production and export including planning, installation, transportation of petroleum, storage or decommissioning, and for the construction of a pipeline or petroleum refinery.”

The justification is: to clarify on the entire value chain in petroleum operations. This should not be determined by a petroleum agreement.

Secondly, insert a new paragraph to read as follows: “(1d) ‘petroleum agreement’ means an agreement entered into by the Government of Uganda with another person in accordance with the Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Act, 2013 or the Petroleum (Refinery, Conversion, Transmission and Midstream Storage) Act, 2013.

The justification is that any petroleum agreement should be in line with the relevant laws on petroleum. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I think what you are proposing is for the principal Act, isn’t it? Are you amending the principal Act? 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Yes, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 (b) be amended as proposed

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2(b), as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, under clause 3 (b), substitute paragraphs (a) and (b) with the following:
“(a) a licence undertaking mining or petroleum operations”
The justification is: to correct an error. Licensing applies to both mining and petroleum operations. 




THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Under clause 5, delete the expression “as the case may be” appearing at the end of the subsection. The justification is that it is a consequential amendment arising out of the amendment in clause 3.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I wanted to ask the chairman for clarification so that we move together. Is the issue of National Medical Stores under clause 3 or 4, so that we do not miss that very important point? You have the red book; I do not have one. I wanted this one here but I cannot get it. We need to delete it from the list and add it among the exempted supply. It is on the schedule, which we need to repeal. 

MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, in order to achieve what we have been asking for, we have to amend the third schedule to -

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are going to amend the third schedule under clause 11; so watch out for clause 11.  

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Under clause 5, if I may repeat, Madam Chairperson, we propose to delete the expression “as the case may be” appearing at the end of the subsection. The justification is that it is a consequential amendment arising out of the amendments in clause 3. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, in clause 8, insert the word “licensee” after the words “or contractor”.  The justification is: To enable the contractor also enjoy the benefits of this provision. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 8 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, in clause 11, insert the word “milled” immediately after the words “or produced”. This is to include cereals produced in Uganda among the zero-rated supplies. Therefore, the sub clause would read, “the supply of cereals where the cereals are grown and milled or produced in Uganda.”

MR BAHATI: Madam Chair, the ministry has worked very well with the committee. As you can see, we have agreed to almost every amendment of the committee. However, we have a slight request that we do not adopt this. This is because if you say “cereals which are grown, milled or produced in Uganda”, it will create confusion in tax administration. Some people can go to another country, bring wheat, pack it here and say it is produced in Uganda. 

The purpose of this amendment was to benefit the people of Uganda. That is why we are insisting that we should make it very clear – grown and milled in Uganda, not produced in Uganda. Colleagues, this clause in particular is actually amending the previous decision that we had made in the House to make sure that we cater for people of Uganda who have been in this business. We should also note that this provision has tax revenue of close to Shs 40 billion. Therefore, I would like to beg that we do not accept the word “produced”. The words “grown and milled in Uganda” are sufficient to cater for what we want in this clause.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, I would like to seek clarification from the minister. This law was just introduced last year. The House opposed it and the Government insisted on it. In fact, some of us warned Government that you are not going to benefit. As a result, many mills and companies lost business.

I come from a border district and there are many of us here. If farmers in Busia-Kenya, Malaba, across the island or Katuna on the other side have no power and on the Ugandan side there is a mill – we even asked the committee – can the Rwandese, Kenyans or Congolese bring their produce and mill it in Uganda? We were told, “Yes, that provision will allow them to”. Now, what is the value? If you mill a product in Uganda, the by-products of that milling are animal feeds which we used to complain about. In the past, people used to export their products un-milled and therefore they would export animal feeds too. It was a crisis for the poultry and animal industry and even jobs. That is why we needed to have these exempted. 

Honourable minister, from the way you are stating it here, you are now telling us that it is only the ones grown here. Somebody across the border has to go far. Therefore, we shall lose jobs and feeds. By the way, another by-product is even fertilisers. I would like to plead with you because when they come to mill here, they will pay money. They will create jobs and income for this country.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Ekanya, can you explain to me how somebody from Kenya who does not own a business here just comes and mills their produce here?

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, I can explain. Under agri-business trust, I have farmers across who have even got support from Government like Kibimba and so forth. Therefore, because of the law we have, when farmers from across are bringing rice or maize to mill, they tax it. This is under the law we introduced last year. However, if we open it and we do not tax because it is considered a raw material, farmers from across the border can come and mill, and even those from islands where there are no mills would come to mill.

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, I think it was this year when members from the eastern region brought a petition and you sent it to the committee. They said that the likes of Kibimba and other companies had found challenges in the proposals that we had passed last year. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That was on Excise Duty. That is what I recall.

MR SSEBUNYA: It was on Excise Duty and VAT. Therefore, I do not know whether we should agree with what they were saying because we did not go there. However, the members from that general area had said that if we removed the word “produced” then they would find challenges.

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Our President has been complaining that we are giving jobs to people by sending raw materials out to be processed there. However, this time round we are saying, let us process our products here so that we send something of quality outside. If there are people outside there who would like to bring their products to be processed here in Uganda, why don’t you accept that? They are bringing business to us. Our people who are milling are getting money. We are going to use the by-products like husks. 

Now, what we need to find out is, once these products are milled, do they carry them free of charge or we tax them as they cross the border back to Kenya? Otherwise, we need these products to come here so that we become the processers and gain from them. I think I support this idea.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chair, I think we need to make a distinction in what hon. Geoffrey Ekanya has suggested. This cross-border business is catered for under a different law. For somebody to suggest that you can get goods from Rwanda and bring them to Katuna and process them, I do not know whether he is suggesting the tricks we normally use at the border. (Laughter) However, formally there are things that we should do. 

All we are saying, Madam Chair, is that let us support our own people to process these things and add value before they export; that is very important. We are saying “grown and milled in Uganda”; it is very clear. Let us not use the word “produced” because it really creates confusion. I can import from countries that are not charging as high as Uganda’s, pack them and say they are produced in Uganda. That is all we are asking fort; there is nothing much. It will create confusion and yet we should also provide for a tax measure that is easy to administer. If a tax measure is not easy to administer, then it is not right.

I, therefore, appeal to the House and to the chair; we have really conceded on a number of things, we should not be derailed by this simple word “produced” vis-à-vis “grown and milled” and then we can move forward.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is why I asked, how will a Kenyan use my mill and say he has milled his produce? This is my mill and I am Ugandan; how will he take it as a Kenyan good? You talked about the fellows coming from the other side to bring their maize, but how do you distinguish between a Ugandan product grown and milled here and a product imported and milled here? 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chair, this issue has been coming up year in year out and all the proposals have been seeking to amend the original position in the Third Schedule, which states thus: “Supply of cereals where the cereals are grown, milled or produced in Uganda.” Originally, this was the position-

THE CHAIRPERSON: What section is that?

MR MUSASIZI: This is the Third Schedule of the Income Tax Act and Value Added Tax, Cap 349.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are they saying the same thing? You read it.

MR MUSASIZI: This is page 266 on zero-rated supplies – (f) “the supply of cereals, where the cereals are grown, milled or produced in Uganda.” This was the original position.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it under 1(f)?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, under 1(f).

THE CHAIRPERSON: The present law says, “Supply of cereals where the cereals are grown, milled or produced in Uganda.” Is that the existing law?

MR MUSASIZI: I have further information to this. You will note that this is not the current law that we are applying. This has since been amended many times. My argument is that when it first came, the issue of “produced” brought us problems because the argument in the committee was that we want to protect and give leverage to our own farmers and producers.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes. I think what you should have said is that the proposal of the minister is exactly what it was before. That is what you should have said. This was 2013.

MR MUSASIZI: No. Madam Chair, the proposal of the committee is as what it was before. This is what the committee is proposing.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is what I am saying. I think you should have said that the minister is bringing back something that was repealed. 

MR MUSASIZI: No.

THE CHAIRPERSON: This is your Bill, minister. It says, “Supply of cereals where the cereals are grown and milled in Uganda”.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chair, in this provision, there are three things to note: the words “grown”, “milled” and “produced”. Each one of these words has got an implication. By allowing “produced”, which the minister is objecting to, it means we have opened up to both producers from within and those who import and mill within Uganda; they also get that benefit of the exemption.

Madam Chair, zero-rated supplies means that Government is incurring the cost of VAT. It means Government is paying VAT on behalf of the beneficiaries. I am wondering how someone can grow maize in Kenya, come and mill or produces it in Uganda and then enjoy the same benefits Government gives on VAT for a Ugandan who has grown up in Kabale. I believe that is why the minister is saying “no”. It is going to be costly for Government to incur this cost on behalf of Rwandese and Tanzanians. Do you want them to come here and enjoy these benefits?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, what position would you like us to take?

MR MUSASIZI: I would like to support the position of the minister that -

THE CHAIRPERSON: The position in his Bill?

MR MUSASIZI: Yes. The position in the Bill is the one I am supporting – “supply of cereals where the cereals are grown and milled in Uganda”.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I have a clarification. I do not know whether there are Members of Parliament from Kapchorwa here. Let me just give you a case in point. Hon. Mudimi, you are from that side of the mountain. The wheat from Kapchorwa, because there are no roads, all goes to Kenya 100 per cent, it is milled and then it comes here. Honourable minister, how is that handled? The wheat from Kapchorwa goes to Kenya, it is milled and processed there and then comes back here as imports. How is that handled?

MR BAHATI: Madam Chair, we need to understand the importance and purpose of this amendment. The purpose of this amendment is that in 2013, we put VAT on cereals and we have been getting complaints from farmers, producers and millers. This year, we are saying we go back to zero-rating. 

In 2013, as you have read, we talked about cereals grown and milled in Uganda. That is the current law. However, the principle is that these grown and milled in Uganda were being taxed – there was VAT. Therefore, we are saying no, let us go to zero-rating.

THE CHAIRPERSON: There will be no tax?

MR BAHATI: Yes; it is zero-rating. The bottlenecks hon. Geoffrey Ekanya is talking about are bottlenecks we can handle internally. We know that the people of Kapchorwa should actually be milling in Uganda. However, there are some bottlenecks, which we need to work on and which we are working on, so that this can be corrected. Therefore, that cannot be used as an example to handle the tax for the entire country.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Just to complete this picture, hon. Ekanya, when our people in Kapchorwa take the wheat to Kenya and it comes back, does it come as a product of Uganda or Kenya?

MR EKANYA: Kenya.

THE CHAIRPERSON: In that case, there is no problem.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, I have listened very attentively to the explanation by the honourable minister. I have understood that the provision by Government intends to protect the local growers and I accordingly concede. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, I hope that you have addressed this matter again in the Excise Duty Bill. The petitioners, who came to me, came because of the Excise Duty Bill.

There is no amendment to the existing clause 11, but we are going to receive a proposal. I put the question that clause 11 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chair, we propose to amend the Third Schedule to the principal Act by inserting paragraph (m) to read as follows -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it the Third Schedule under clause 11?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Yes, under clause 11. It should read as follows: “handling fees payable to National Medical Stores for handling donations of medicines and other medical supplies.” 

The justification is that the National Medical Stores receives donations of medicines and other medical supplies on behalf of the Government of Uganda destined to health facilities in Uganda. The National Medical Stores then stores and distributes these items. Handling fees are usually given to the National Medical Stores from the respective donors to facilitate the handling of donations so that they reach their intended destinations since the Government of Uganda does not provide enough money for this purpose. The handling fees are calculated on the basis of the different components involved in the handling. 

Currently, the National Medical Store is obliged to pay VAT on the handling fees and yet the donors are not willing to meet the VAT components of the handling fees. We propose, therefore, that the National Medical Stores should be exempted from paying VAT by classifying the handling fees paid to the National Medical Stores as zero-rated supplies. We do propose.

MR EKANYA: Honourable member, why don’t you exempt the entire chain other than only restricting it to handling fees? Supposing they charge them for the store and it is not from donations? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, medicines are already exempted. Therefore, they are targeting only the supply chain. The storage is part of handling. This is the ridiculous nature of VAT. The handling includes transportation of vaccines in refrigerated trucks and storage and they want to impose VAT on that. That is still classified as a handling service.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, did you want to say something?

MR BAHATI: Yes, thank you. Honourable, in this thing, I may concede even before I speak. (Laughter) I want to say that we are all concerned and no one would want tax medicine. Indeed, the law exempts medicine. When you look at schedule two, these are exempts of supplies. Schedule three is zero-rated supplies. Therefore, there is no institution that you are going to exempt for supply.

As Government at this time, we can commit ourselves that if there are any activities that National Medical Stores is involved in that require it to pay tax under the law, then Government should pay those taxes. It should not touch the budget of National Medical Stores. The Government should budget for the tax of National Medical Stores. Where do you fit it now? We need more studies done to see where we can fit in as an institution. So, we can commit ourselves and say we are going to budget for any tax which is under the law.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, if the minister is suggesting that we stand over this entire discussion, then it is acceptable to us. However, if he is suggesting anything short of that, that we pass this law today and we go back to a study of our proposal, it is not acceptable. 

Mr Bahati, you should be very honest with yourself. The reason we are asking that you do not impose VAT on handling services is because for donkey years, you have never provided a single penny for that purpose. The donors do two things: they give you the medicine and then they pay for the transportation, storage, distribution and everything else. Again, you want to impose a component of tax! You are punishing them for helping your sick people. Hon. Bahati, you are better than that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Odoi, are you saying that the budget for taxation is an unfunded priority?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: It is an unfunded priority. It is in the report of the Committee of Health.

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you. Madam Chair, this issue of National Medical Stores is becoming so contentious because Uganda Revenue Authority is demanding Shs 19,000,000,000 as arrears from National Medical Stores. There was no provision in the budget for paying that money. That is why we are saying that we exempt National Medical Stores; as simple as that. We change the schedule. The minister should concede.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Maybe what we need to clarify on is precisely this: The Government of Sweden gives us some medicines of whatever type and National Medical Stores receives them. In addition to that, the people of Sweden still give the National Medical Stores some money to store and distribute this medicine. It is from that money that we are saying, “Please, pay VAT” and the donor says they are not going to give you even a coin. We are saying that Government of Uganda, through Parliament, budgets for that VAT and pays it back itself.

First of all, we cannot even predict how much medicine will be donated in a given year. Secondly, you cannot clear the arrears. We have arrears of Shs 19,000,000,000, which have not been cleared. We are here saying that we go ahead and see that we charge VAT on handling services. Honestly, - (Interruption)

MR BAHATI: It is friendly, by the way. (Laughter) First, we need to state here that the tax liability which is on the books of accounts for National Medical Stores was as a result of audit. It was not that Government did not have money, and we undertake to write it off.  

The point I am making is that when we say let us exempt handling charges, National Medical Stores also has other charges which we need to look at; it is paying electricity and other things. If we want to do a really good job, we would rather do a good job because it is not only handling charges where we are saying they are paying VAT, there are also other things. 

That is why we are insisting that it would have been better that we commit ourselves to having National Medical Stores exempted. If there is any tax, according to the law, that National Medical Stores is supposed to pay, then the Government should budget for it. It should not touch the budget of National Medical Stores. In other words, the budget for National Medical Stores should not be deducted by a shilling to pay tax. Government should budget for it and we commit ourselves to that.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you. How I wish it was friendly. The proposal that hon. Fox Odoi read to us is very specific; it is not a blanket proposal. He said we can achieve this by amending the third schedule by initiating paragraph m – “handling fees payable to National Medical Stores for handling donations of medicines and other medical supplies”. 

We are not talking about anything like the rent you mentioned. We are talking about the medicines that we receive in form of donations and the handling fees and transportation that are given for that very medicine. Let us not charge VAT because when you tell the donors- 

Madam Chairperson, I would like to inform colleagues that for that reason, sometimes National Medical Stores may have been forced on a number of occasions to refuse certain donations because they realise that the tax implication of VAT is going to be so big. So, they turn down donations because they cannot afford the VAT. This should not be so difficult.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I really appreciate the concerns of the minister. However, hon. Bahati, you have the goodwill and I wish you had the way and the means. You know we have a non-performing loan of over US$ 2,000,000,000. Colleagues, do you know why we have this non-performing money? It is because we do not budget for counterpart funding. If you cannot budget for counterpart funding and yet you bring a loan request to Parliament and we approve it and you do not even put money for counterpart funding, how on earth, hon. Bahati, you who has just gone there, can you assure us that from today onwards, if medicine stays in the store for two weeks you will release money? You will be like Gen. Salim Saleh while people are dying in Tororo, Kigezi and so forth. 

Madam Chairperson, Government has failed to budget for counterpart funding and that is the reason for the non-performing US$ 2,000,000,000. The only way that this Parliament can help our mothers and sisters is to have the process of drugs and medicine distribution in this country not interfered with by a single procedure in the same way bullets and artillery from wherever come without anybody questioning or opening them. Why should we allow bullets in and not medicines?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what would you, as Government, lose by conceding to this arrangement?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I have listened to the proposal by hon. Fox Odoi and it was supported by hon. Gerald Karuhanga. However, I also have this red book. It is called the Income Tax Act, Cap 340, and Value Added Tax Act, Cap 349. I am looking at the Third Schedule, where our colleagues are proposing to insert these ideas, but the Third Schedule is about zero-rated supply. It does not talk about zero-rated organisations. 

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, we need to be careful. Much as the proposal is good, can we find where it best fits because you cannot start saying that handling fees payable to National Medical Stores. You cannot start listing institutions under this schedule. 

I have also thought about where it would best fit, but Madam Chairperson, I also want guidance from you and the minister whether an entity of Government can qualify to be among the listed organisations for tax purposes? Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, there has been lack of funds at the National Medical Stores to cater for the handling fees. That has been an issue. I wanted to find a middle ground over this issue to say that when we are coming back here with the Budget Framework Paper, we would commit to provide for handling fees for National Medical Stores. 

When it comes to tax policy, we need to do it thoroughly so that we do not distort; one decision can affect a number of other institutions. Today you are talking about National Medical Stores and tomorrow another institution can come with a compelling issue. Therefore, can we say that we come here to this House, and this time we are not talking about unfunded priority for taxes, hon. Ekanya, but we are talking about coming here with a provision to cater for National Medical Stores so that we sort out this issue? I beg to move, Madam Chairperson. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, this is the same minister who presented the Budget Framework Paper saying there will be no tax and we conceded and we are moving. I have seen Uganda Red Cross here, hon. Musasizi; what is Uganda Red Cross? Is it a private company? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where have you seen Uganda Red Cross? 

MR EKANYA: Uganda Red Cross is in the first schedule. We have just introduced it. Uganda Red Cross is a Government organisation. It is an international organisation but here it is registered as Uganda Red Cross. Therefore, it is an organisation of Uganda. 

MR MUSASIZI: It is not a state owned enterprise. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is it? 

MR EKANYA: We have just introduced it in the first schedule in this Bill. 

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Is it not in the existing law?

MR EKANYA: It is not in the old law. So, there is nothing stopping us from putting National Medical Stores here because Uganda Red Cross is like National Medical Stores. Uganda Red Cross is not a private organisation; it has a board appointed by Government. I know it very well. You can google the Act and the setting up of Uganda Red Cross. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can someone make a proposal specifically? We are addressing the third schedule; we are not addressing- 

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, I think instead of us risking any mess among the schedules of organisations, we can insert in the schedule the service as prescribed because putting it as a whole organisation will go into other activities. Let us be specific on the activity. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want us to revert to the Third Schedule and deal with the services rather than the institution? Is that not what you wanted to address? 

MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO: That is what I had proposed, that we go to the Third Schedule and we only deal with handling - “fees payable to National Medical Stores for handling donations of medicines and other medical supplies”. It is very specific. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I have listened to the views of both sides of the House and also because of the fact that this issue has been on for some time, I would like to concede so that we can make progress. (Applause) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question that a new paragraph be introduced as proposed by hon. Odoi-Oywelowo. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Third Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati):  Madam Chair, I move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House do report thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

                                  REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati):  Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2015” and made some amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE VALUE TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

7.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2015 be read for the third time and do pass

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) ACT 2015”

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the title settled and Bill passed. We congratulate our new minister on his first performance. - (Interjections) - Is it the second? We are doing well. 

MR BALIDDAWA: Madam Speaker, I am glad that we have handled and passed this Bill, but I wanted clarification. What happens to the Shs 19 billion outstanding arrears about which there was a petition? 

THE SPEAKER: He is coming back on Tuesday. When he comes to respond to the Budget Framework Paper, he is going to also make a commitment on writing-off. That is what you said and it is on the Hansard. You said that you are going to write off. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, that was part of the negotiation. (Laughter) We will look at it and see what is possible. If it is not possible, still we shall be honest and come here and let you know. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay.  Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much for the work done today. We have done virtually everything on the Order Paper except one small Bill. 

I have also noted that committees have not completed their work. We should have started reporting on the 4th but so far no sectorial committee report has come. I would like to give the Members tomorrow and Friday to complete all the reports of the sectoral committees. When we resume on Tuesday, we shall complete these Bills and run through the reports, unless you want to do it now. 

MR SSEBUNYA: No, we thought tomorrow we would work and then-

THE SPEAKER: I cannot come for one Bill. I cannot call the House for a Bill of three clauses. 

MR SSEBUNYA: I have two Bills ready.

THE SPEAKER: We shall handle them on Tuesday. House adjourned to Tuesday.

(The House rose at 7.36 p.m. and was adjourned until Tuesday, 12 May at 2.00 p.m.)







