Thursday, 2 May 1996

The National Resistance Council met in Parliament House.

PRAYERS

The Deputy Chairperson, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.

The House was called to order.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSEQUENTIAL PROVISIONS BILL, 1996

MR WASSWA NKALUBO: Thank you Madam Chairperson. Madam Chairperson, I stand to support the bill.  In supporting the bill, I would like to make the following observation.  I wish to complain formally that we passed a Leadership Code which was assented to in 1992.  Since then, we have been waiting to have a committee to implement this Leadership Code.  Now it shows the public has been complaining that look! Members of Parliament passed a law but because this law was affecting us, we refused to implement the same law.  I wish to put it on record and put the record right that we as legislators, we do not implement the law.  It is the executive to have implemented the law.  But then the taxpayers think that it was this House which refused to have the law in place.  

I wish to put it to the Front Bench that brought the bill which bill we debated and we gave it our blessing.  But then the same Front Bench refused to implement the law.  Now that the Minister is requesting us that the same bill while we are waiting for other formalities be implemented by the IGG.  I would have requested that if it were possible, he should have come with a list of proposed names so that we could choose or implement this law other than referring to the IGG.

MR DRANI:  Point of information.  Thank you very much Madam Chairperson.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that from experience countries like Tanzania, Zimbabwe and others have Leadership Codes of conduct or Codes of ethics which have never been implemented and it is a leadership that fears that they can be followed if they try to implement.  So I think the same situation is happening here.  That is why there is foot dragging.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO: Well, if they borrowed the leaf from the other countries, I think we put it on record that well, for us, we did our own job.  It is up to the executive to have implemented this law.  Now it is four years since it was assented to and I think it is unfair to hold us responsible for something we are not answerable for.  The public should know that it was the executive which failed.  We did our own job and similarly, I would have preferred that the Minister had brought in a list of names he had proposed we would vote for.  But then somehow, he decided to withdraw the list.  We had even been given the vote forms for us to vote.  I do not know what happened.  Maybe he will tell us why he h as been so quiet and why he has refused to give us a chance to vote for people we think should execute the law and put it in place.  Why does he think that the IGG will be a better man other than the committee?  Because I do not think -maybe he has enough on his plate.  Either we shelve it until we have an independent committee in place, or let him bring the names tomorrow; we tick and see who should implement the law.  

Madam Chairperson, while I leave that one, I have looked at the district land board.  The Minister is proposing that we shall have the district land boards and among those, under section seven, sub-section 1(b), he is quoting that a member of the board shall be a person of high moral character and proven integrity and at least two members shall be persons who have qualifications and experience in matters relating to land.  Now when you speak of these two persons who have qualifications and experience I n matters relating to land, what do you mean by qualifications?  You mean they have to be surveyors?  They have to be landowners? What qualifications?  Can the squatter have more experience having been antagonized by landlords?  That is another experience.  I would like him to be very specific when he speaks of experience in matters relating to land.  I could have experience by having been antagonised by landlords.  Is that not experience?  What qualifications do you mean over this?  When we speak of profession, do you need to be a surveyor?  And if a surveyor, of what rank?  We have surveyor assistants, we have qualified surveyors.  Now what do you mean?  Now we have in some areas customary land tenure, we have mailo land, we have all this freehold.  Now what do we mean?  We have to be very clear when we are actually debating this thing because this thing has been so controversial and it has been a ticket for some people to say when we come in, the government wants to take our land.  This has been one of the issues which has been articulated by candidates. We have to be very specific when we are legislating what we mean by experience and qualification otherwise this one is a useless clause which may not be applicable; and even when we look at this, when we speak of experience, when you are choosing a board, can we co-opt a man say from Arua to be on the board in Masaka if none of the citizens in the district is qualified?  Because the problem is that not all districts have had land boards or qualified surveyors.  We know very well where we had the survey offices.  If we do not have such qualified people, are they free to have members who are non-residents of the district who can form the district land board?  If not so, what happens if we find that in the whole district, we do not have a man qualified in land matters?  What do we do?  I think the Minister should tell us whether it is the board.  The Council is free to choose any person from anywhere in Uganda to constitute the district land board.  

Madam Chairperson, we come to this section II where we have the national citizenship and immigration board.  It is proposed that there shall be this board consisting of a chairperson and not less than four other persons appointed by the President with the approval of the Legislature.  That one sounds nice and reasonable but then the question is, when will this be done?  Now we are saying we are too busy.  Maybe it will be after the new Parliament is in place.  Today I do not see how the President can appoint and then recommend to the Legislature for approval.  I would rather have it shelved until we have a new Legislature and a new government in place, with a new President to do this such a job.  Similarly, under sub-section 1(a), we speak of each member of the board shall be a person of high moral character and proven integrity.  Now when we speak of proven integrity, who is going to prove?  You see, some of these - we need a committee to do the censoring of such people who are coming in.  But you see when you speak of somebody has all this; I do not know whether we have such data.  Some of these are for consumption and just only for record purposes.  I do not see how applicable it is.  

I also have a problem Madam Chairperson that this board will be responsible for registering and issuing national identity cards to citizens.  This has been a request for a long time.  For a long time since we came in, we are promising that we shall have national identity cards.  I pray that this should be a priority that we have national identity cards and I think whoever will be around will not tell us that it is too expensive.  This has been an excuse and say look! we have this problem, we have that problem.  But then it should be a priority we get national identity cards.  We should know who is a Ugandan and who is not.  We should know and I want it to remain on record.  I do not want to be in this government, whoever comes in next should know that we need identity cards; not these where you go to the car park and say this is an identity card.  No, we need a national identity card and it should be an item in the next budget.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Point of information. Thank you Madam Chairperson.  I think this was provided in the constitution but the problem has been that there is a feeling that you can issue identity cards for 17 million people at the same time and that is what has created a problem.  I think it can be staggered over a period like people who get passports and you start now, within the next four years, this country will have identity cards.  It is a priority because we would not be having certain talks around the country if we had identity cards.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO:  Thank you for the information.  At least we need to take a step in the right direction.  I am not saying that all the 17 or 20 million people should get their identity cards tomorrow.  But at least it should be phased out and you move in the right direction; positive one that we could know that we are moving.  But if you are waiting for all the money for the 17 million people, we may not succeed.  Madam Chairperson, the other point where I have some apprehension is that the Minister is proposing that the functions of the board may be decentralised to the district level.  Well, I could accept but then we have seen that most of these districts are lacking the logistics.  

We have seen cases where at the moment the issuing of the passports or travel documents is centralised in Kampala.  But we have heard cases where you find one person with three, four, five passports.  Now I do not know how he is proposing.   Once you have decentralised, how will it work?  How he intends to work because we can see Wasswa from Masaka getting a passport in Masaka.  I am also a resident in Kampala, I pick another one, I go to Mukono and I can go to Gulu.  You find that one person can get about four, five passports because unless he can assure us that he is going to computerize but we have been lacking data, we have a case in point, that for example, most of these districts which we have created have not written accounts.  Some of these local authorities, their accounts are not written for the last ten years.  If they cannot write their accounts, how do you expect them to keep record of their citizens and know who is who.  For example, we have had problems that as we speak today, we do not know the exact number of schools.  If you cannot tell the number of schools we have in the country, how can you say you can tell the number of teachers?  Because the records are not proper.  So if you cannot tell the number of teachers you have, well, somebody is saying you can guess.  Okay, if you go on by guesswork, that is a risk which I think may not be in the interest of this country.  

Lastly, I have been looking at section 12, where it says that; until the assumption of office of the first President elected under this constitution, the President may by Statutory Instrument may with the approval of the Legislature amend or modify any law.  I wish to put it on record that if we have a law in place and we need any amendment, the correct procedure would be to bring in a bill, not Statutory Instrument to amend the law.  It should be a bill here that we amend.  It is us to amend not to give the powers to the President to pass Statutory Instrument to amend the law by Statutory Instrument.  It should be a bill brought to this House, we debate for and against the amendment.  But where you permit the President to amend by Statutory Instrument, that is wrong and I would request the Minister that if he wants any amendment, let him bring in a bill, we shall debate it.  If we have expired, then I would advise that we do not accept this clause.  Otherwise, when we have expired, before the new President comes in, we may have some Statutory Instrument being amended; the President amending, now we are not around, we may have a problem.  I would advise that this clause is deleted.  We should not have amendment by Statutory Instrument.  If there is any emergency, let us be called.  We are still here until the 7th of July.  We debate the bill, whatever we want to amend.

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  Point of information.  Madam Chairperson, I think the hon. speaker does not seem to have read the entire clause.  I think the purpose of the desired amendment by Statutory Instrument is to bring the application of the law within the constitution.  Now I do not see the problem there because it says here with the approval of the Legislature.  So as long as there is a legislature to give approval in order for the amendment to be within the Constitution.  I think that is sufficient safeguard because if you say the bill must come and so on.  Supposing there is a matter which h as to be brought within the ambit of the constitution and on the basis of the Legislature giving approval, what is your objection Madam Chairperson?

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Point of information. Thank you Madam Chairperson.  I think the hon. Member should not be worried because there is no further problem since it says until the assumption of office of the first President elected under the constitution and of course we have elections next week.  So we shall have no problem.  However, you have got to provide for the situation in case there is going to be a crisis.  You must anticipate that if there is going to be a crisis, somebody must come in and solve the crisis.  If you do not and there is a crisis, we can be in chaos because somebody has got to take care of a situation where there is a constitutional crisis as an emergency.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO:  Thank you for the information.  That is the very thing why we think it should be this House.  The moment you say the President can amend the law by Statutory Instrument, we are now having a problem where we are passing over the responsibility.  If he can do it, why not this full House?  It should be the House to amend the law.  There is no way you can say there could be a crisis.  If there is a crisis, we are still here until the 7th.  We can amend this law.  The responsibility is ours and we should not delegate to one person to do it because the moment you say by Statutory Instrument, I do not know whether the Members who have been giving me the information are aware that once the Statutory Instrument is in place, the law can be implemented unless we come back and object.  Now, if we are not here, then we can amend the law and some amendments may be detrimental.  I am not saying that whoever will amend has any ill feeling.  But we are looking at a situation where we are passing over, we are delegating our responsibility to the executive.  Though the President is a Member of this House, let us keep this responsibility; whether you are from Koboko or you are from Kampala.  If there is anything which requires any amendment, let us do the job up to the last date but we should not pass over the responsibility to another person.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Point of order.  Madam Chairperson, would it not be in order for the Minister of Justice and Attorney General to explain the kind of situation envisaged by this clause?  Because as I read it, it seems to me merely a normal thing to bring existing laws into conformity with the constitution.  But we have been informed that it is meant to bring a crisis, to meet a crisis.  What kind of situation does the Minister envisage would be met by this thing before we go on to debate on speculation?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Member, I expect the Minister for Justice to touch that when he is replying.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO:  Madam Chairperson, thank you very much.  I have put my points.  I think the Minister has taken note.  He will reply when he is ready.  Thank you very much.

MR ORYANG:  Thank you Madam Chairperson.  Let me congratulate you before I start; belated congratulations and many of them.  Madam Chairperson, looking through the clauses, they are 12 in number.  I see that in fact all of them were necessary if enacted by this Parliament.  In the last one, to start with the 12th, I can see a possibility of this one being called to play.  Now we have got three candidates campaigning.  In the event of a win being somewhere or in case one wins, the President, if there is no clear cut win, the government should be i n position to extend the bid from July to another day in future.  I think this clause is to give effect to the President to do that kind of thing.  If we do not have it, there will be nobody to take that responsibility.  

Madam Chairperson, when I look at all these sections which were deemed to have come into force, with promulgation of the constitution, I feel this Parliament is duty bound to do something.  If we wait for the new Parliament, what will happen in the meantime to give effect of the transition?  We want the transitional period to be legal and by passing these clauses, we are legalising the transition.  You can look at clause three; Interim Judicial Service Commission.  You cannot have pending cases done without this Interim Judicial Service Commission legalised and appointed.  Probably clause number 4, Interim Uganda Human Rights Commission could wait and it is rightly stated here that that one could wait perhaps it is deemed to have come into force with the Constitution.  But number five; other persons to be appointed under article 272 of the Constitution and these are supposed to legalise the interim or the transitional government.  If they are to be legalised and we leave this pending waiting probably for two months, what is going to happen?  There will be a vacuum; because of that, Madam Chairperson, I feel that something should be done and before I sit down, I want to comment a little on the district Land Board. 

There is a lot of development awaiting the legalising of district land boards to start working in the countryside.  There are many applications that are pending; applications for land leases, etc. Well, let us put it off for two months or two years as somebody stated but this is going to affect development.  There are people who want to start doing something; entrepreneurs who want to have land ready and use land titles maybe and you are asking them to wait.  This is detrimental to the spirit of development that some people have.  Existing institutions clause 8 Madam Chairperson, these are to continue and if we do not pass this interim Consequential provisional Bill, existing institutions have to be dead and weak for everything.  Who knows? Elections may delay in case of no clear-cut winning.  If we continue, it means it is more than two years.  

Most of all, clause nine, pending cases before courts.  This one as somebody said that justice delayed is justice denied.  If you delay justice taking course, you are denying justice.  So, it is automatic that we must look into this one and then all other pending matters and amendments Acts like Immigration Act, we know that at the moment, we have people coming into the country and the immigration board under the new constitution may be not empowered to do the duty.  We need that national citizenship and immigration board to be appointed quickly.  

What I am wondering at is, what spirit are we going to appoint these and have them confirmed?  This is why I am wondering because we are late.  If you are not, this national censorship and immigration board should exist so that what my Colleague Nkalubo Wasswa was trying to labour on would be put into effect; that is the national identity cards for everybody in Uganda should be in place.  That would assist greatly even in election problems. 

With these few remarks Madam Chairperson, I want to support this bill.

MR NTIMBA:  Thank you very much Madam Chairperson.  As I rise to support this bill, I must place on record my disappointment of the fact that whether the intention of this bill is good, but ideally it would have been more beneficial to this country if this bill had been brought in immediately after the promulgation of the constitution last October.  So far almost seven months have elapsed since the constitution was promulgated and since the bill was supposed to take care of possible stopgaps in between some sections of the bill may no longer be relevant.  However, considering the fact that even when the new Parliament comes in maybe next month or soon after, it will be quite some time before it is in position to sit down and amend a number of relevant laws.  I give an example to those concerning land, the appointment of the district land board and so forth and so on.  There is no guarantee that the new Parliament will be able within two, three months of its election to be able to amend the necessary laws.  So, the effect of this bill may go on up to one or two years after the election.  

Talking about the setting up of the district land boards, I want to report to the House that those of us who represent a number of constituencies have been very much pressurized and told that the activities of administering land especially in urban areas which some of us represent is very, very serious.  The town boards and municipal councils are saying they have been very much disabled, they have a lot of pending work accumulating over a number of years and the fact that the constitution sort of suspended the activities is not good for the functioning of these councils and it is not good for the interest of the public.  So I would like maybe to urge the next Parliament that as soon as it is put in place, it should cover their priority that this deserves mainly the amendment of all the laws concerning the administration of land in this country.  

Coming on to clause number 11 concerning immigration Act 1969, I want to point out the fact that we have failed to issue national identity cards and it has put us in a very, very embarrassing position.  As far back as 1987, there was talk about issuing of national identity cards.  If we had been serious, this would have cost us about ten million pounds.  I am sure nine years later, if we are going to think in terms of issuing national identity cards, it will cost us much more.  

Furthermore, this question of citizenship is still with us especially now that we are going to embark on two national elections.  Right now in my constituency, we have a problem of a number of people who registered and voted during the constituent Assembly elections of two years ago.  Now what the election officials did in 1995, they simply took the registers and wrote out new identity cards.  Hundreds of these identity cards in my own constituency have remained uncollected.  Right now I think somebody is now moving around my town with a loud speaker saying please come and collect your voting card and so forth and so on.  Whether the owners of these voters’ cards - it is highly suspected that these may have been non-citizens or fluked their way into getting voters cards and are no longer in the country.  So the election officials are there stuck with heaps and heaps of uncollected voters cards.  Now, -(Interruption)

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of information.  Madam Chairperson, the issue of citizenship though it is touchy in Uganda and i n this House indeed and hon. Ntimba has previously complained about that, indeed recently several people in the press and in rallies have complained about non-citizens even pointing fingers at some of the candidates.  The question has been of course not many of us here would know who John Ntimba’s father is or later on the grandfather.   Those who have been outside this country whether it is to the United States.  I know one hon. Member who used to sit there, now he is in the US, for whatever reason, remains a citizen as far as I know.  Dr Obote in Zambia remains a citizen. There are many of our people who are in Kenya, Tanzania or Rwanda for whatever reason but remain citizens and by the way, Madam Chairperson, it is not only in Mbarara where voters cards remained uncollected.  We have been informed that Entebbe, for example, not long ago had only about 40 or 45 percent of the cards collected.  But hon. Ntimba might be under the illusion of the conspiratorial forces that surround him.

MR NTIMBA:  I thank the hon. Member for the additional information he has given.  I would like to urge you those responsible to ensure that in keeping with the provisions of clause number 11 sub-clause 1(a) sub-section (d) to ensure that the question of registering and issuing identity cards to aliens is embarked on as quickly as possible without even waiting for the next Parliament.  I am of the view that before we issue national identity cards, we should first filter out those who are not citizens, have them properly documented, identified before we embark on the issue of national identity cards to Ugandans.  

Madam Chairperson, I wanted to comment on clause number 6, sub-clause number 2.  It says that, ‘Until Parliament prescribes any other authority to be responsible for enforcing the Leadership Code of Conduct, the Inspector General of Government shall be responsible for enforcing the Code.’  By this if I am not mistaken, I understand it to mean that since we failed sometime last year or a year before to appoint or approve the appointment of Members or implementation committee of the Code of Conduct, somebody thinks that the Inspector General of Government is in position to undertake this task.  If I am mistaken, I am subject to correction by the Attorney General.  But I think this is very unfair on the part of the drafters of this bill to expect one person or one office to undertake the responsibility of setting up that implementation committee which job we as a Legislature have so far failed and failed through no fault of ours but through the fault of the executive.  Since April 4th 1992, when the assent was given to the Code of Conduct, if the Attorney General’s chambers had done enough homework to bring here names of the implementation committee with the same speed as the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs brought in for the approval of the members of the Interim Electoral Committee, by now that implementation committee would have been in place and the criticisms that we often get from the public would have ended.  So with these few words Madam Chairperson, while I urge those responsible for implementing this bill to pull up their socks and work double speed.  I support the bill in the hope that it will serve the purpose for which it was intended within the shortest period of time.  Thank you.

MR ADAM IMAGA:  Thank you very much Madam Chairperson.  Madam Chairperson, I would like to support the bill.  Before I make my contribution, Madam Chairperson allow me to inform the House about the problem the people of Arua are facing regarding the transport since the ambush.  There are about three routes.  One is Karuma-Apach route which sometimes takes a person two to three days.  The other route is by air.  Then the third route is Turf Park.  Madam Chairperson, what really the people of Arua are complaining about is the charges.  The people of Arua are now becoming like tourists because they are just trying to get to Arua.  But the other route which was supposed to be via Panyamuru has not started.  So any person who passes through the park is to pay.  Now since these people are in problems, would it not be worth for the government at least to suspend the payment through the park on the passengers not the tourists; because the other day, the woman went with two children, they were combined and charged.  So, I am requesting the government that at least this charge should be waived or a reasonable charge should be imposed because these people are not tourists.  They have no way to get to Arua. 

Coming to the Bill, Madam Chairperson, I am a bit confused with the land management in urban authorities.  When I read the Minister’s pamphlet and read this bill, there is nothing indicated on this bill regarding urban land and here there is a contradiction which reads:  The constitution provides for the Uganda Land Commission in view of Article 237(1), 239 and 241, the Uganda Land Commission ceases to be a controlled authority of land with effect from 8th October, 1995 and cannot therefore continue to allocate land.  Then it continues, The Commission will continue to hold and manage land which is owned by the government of Uganda.  Madam Chairperson, the land in urban authorities, the Minister stated clearly that it belongs to the government.  It is public land which falls under the Commission.  Now why has the Minister stopped the urban authorities to allocate land and administer the land in urban authorities?  Because that land does not belong to the citizens.  It is land which government owns and any land which government owns is administered by Uganda Land Commission.

DR MAGEZI:  Point of information.  Madam Chairperson, the hon. Member should really refer to article 237 of the constitution which affects even the Statutory leases.  These are the leases which granted land to urban authorities.  For ease of reference Madam Chairperson, I will just cite what it says in Article 237 having defined the ownership of land.  Article 237(6) says - no, let me start with (5): “Any lease which was granted to Uganda citizen out of public land may be converted into freehold in accordance with the law which shall be made by Parliament.”  Then six says: “For the purposes of clause 5, public land includes Statutory leases to urban authorities.”  In other words, freehold applies to urban as well as rural.

MR ADAM IMAGA:  Madam Chairperson, it means the Minister’s statement is misleading because if the constitution says no land is to be administered, then this section is misleading.  The commission will continue to hold and manage land which is owned by the government.  So I think there is contradiction here.  Madam Chairperson, I finally agree with hon. Nkalubo Wasswa.  I think this Parliament exists.  I do not see the reason why the President is to make Statutory Instrument which will also be approved by the same Legislature.  If there is any amendment, I think the office of the Attorney General should be contacted and draft a bill.  So, I concur with hon. Wasswa Nkalubo that this section be deleted.  With these few remarks, I support the bill.  Thank you.

MR KASAJJA:  Thank you very much Madam Chairperson.  Madam Chairperson, I would also like to join my Colleagues to congratulate you on having assumed that office since we come from the same district.  I know you have done very well and I am sure you are going to continue performing to the best of your ability. Madam Chairperson, I stand to support this bill but as I support it, I also wish to accept the comments made by hon. Ntimba when he said that most of the provisions here are long overdue.  In fact we should have had this bill passed as soon as the constitution was promulgated.  I think I accept that one because there are a number of areas which needed to be implemented as soon as the Constitution is in place.  

Like Madam Chairperson, the land board in Busoga; you are very much aware about how the people value this mvule tree.  In fact when they heard that the Constitution had given them freehold, one of the land tenure systems, they were very happy because they knew they were going to have at least access to their valuable mvule tree because Busoga has suffered a lot.  We have had that resource which is really so valuable but we have not benefited.  In fact at the time when we were going to start benefiting, then this law was passed but then most of the trees had been felled; so which means we may not really benefit much.  But that being that, it is better than nothing.  So, Madam Chairperson, I think this section should have been at least implemented because I know by now, people would be able to sell their mvule trees.  

I remember recently when I was addressing the people in my constituency, they were asking me that now that the land is ours, are we now free to sell to prevent people from coming to fell this mvule tree?  Because what has been happening Madam Chairperson has been that if you want to fell a mvule tree in Busoga, you have to have a certificate from the Forest Department.  So which means all those trees which were there though in Busoga we say they grew on their own, meaning dhamera dhene, in fact we have not actually benefited according to that statement; because it would mean they are there and therefore whoever happens to subsist with those trees there has a right to them.  But it has not been so.  These trees have been belonging to government.  You would never fell a mvule tree without getting a certificate from the Ministry of Natural resources.  

So, I think this issue should have been done by now so that the people are aware whether now they have the right to this mvule tree.  That is why I am supporting strongly the Minister for having brought this thing so that he can be able to put some mechanism in place to allow those people to have access to their resources.  

Madam Chairperson, coming on to the last section of this bill, I would like to start from the last coming to the first.  This one is to do with the president being given power to make Statutory Instrument.  Hon. Members, I am not seeing any problem at all with this statement because it is saying until the assumption of office of the first President elected under this constitution, the President may by Statutory Instrument with the approval of the legislature and the legislature is us.  So, I am really wondering why the fear because if the President was going to make the Statutory Instrument on his own and then start operating like the Ministers are given the powers in most of these laws we make, then maybe there would be fear.  But if he is going to initiate maybe there is an emergency, then he brings it here, and then if Members find that it is not necessary to pass that Statutory Instrument, you will not accept it or approve it.  

So, for me as long as there is this provision that with the approval of the Legislature, it means that the President has not been given a free hand because first of all it will have to come here.  Unless you are saying that once it comes and if it has come from the President, that the Members of Parliament have to accept by all means.  It is not so because with the new constitution, most of the power actually has been given to Parliament.  That is why you find that the free hand of the President has been reduced; that most of the things, the President will do them with the approval of the Parliament.  So, with that for me I think the Minister has a point to say because if he had left out this with the approval of Parliament, I would also have been actually very suspicious.  

But I would like to tell hon. Members that the period we are going in is a period which is testing for our security here and our stability.  Anything can happen, there are some people who may not really like maybe the stability to continue.  So they may just come up with any situation which might really disturb peace.  So supposing the President just brings in an Instrument to see how best to deal with the situation for the best of the majority of Ugandans so that we can come here and approve it, I do not see any problem there.  So I strongly support this.  Thank you.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Madam Chairperson, to substantiate a little bit what the hon. Member is saying as to the fears of probable troubles, I would like to inform him that if he listens to radio broadcast, he will certainly hear one of those likely things to happen.  First there is a sound of gunfire, then a voice in the background says there is chaos and if you would like that kind of chaos to be repeated, vote for President Museveni, I think it says.  The implication I think here is that if you do not vote for him, I do not know whether it means that he will start the chaos.  It is something like that.  So what he is saying is certainly having some kind of proof in this broadcast.

MR KASAJJA:  Madam Chairperson, whereas I would like to thank the hon. Member for giving the information, but I think he has misconstrued what I am saying and what he is saying actually is not relating much to what I am saying because it is as if he is saying that the President is going to cause insecurity.  I am just saying that should the situation come up with some people who do not want Uganda to have peace and that one of course is there.  Some people would not like.  So what happens?  But I am not saying that the President is going to do so.  So I am sorry that the information was really from a different angle.  Now Madam Chairperson, I would like to comment the land boards also because some Members were talking of the qualifications.  In fact this was hon. Wasswa Nkalubo.  He feared when the Minister said that one or two of the Members of the land board have to have qualification related to land.  In fact, the qualification related to land is in most cases referred to as valuation and the other one is land surveying, then another one is land economics. Generally land qualification is related around those areas.  So, maybe if the Minister was just to come up and make this one clear just maybe to say that some of these members who are going to be some of the members of the land board should be people who have attained at least a valuation maybe at a diploma level or people who have had experience in land economics or some people who have had maybe land surveyors.  But I think for me the way I am seeing having also worked in Ministry of Lands, unless somebody is not sure but surely as you are talking of area related to land, those are the areas.  Maybe the fear is if the area does not have the chance of having people originating from that area, who have the qualification in those areas, what does the Minister say?   Should these people be imported from another district at least to come and strengthen the board with this experience?  I think maybe that is a point which could be strengthened here; because actually there are some areas which may not have qualification in the land management.  

The other point is to do with the leadership code.  Here the Leadership Code. I still think the Minister has a point because ever since we passed the Leadership Code of Conduct, I do agree that of course the Ministry has delayed to bring up the names so that when they brought the names, the Minister did not follow up to come and read them so that we can approve.  But these names also were taken by time and then the Constitution was passed.  When the Constitution was promulgated, there was a provision which said that the Leadership Code of Conduct will be implemented by the Inspector General of Government if I remember very well.  So, I think the Inspector General of Government is the right person, not us again here to come and find a way of implementing it because already it is constitutional that as soon as maybe the names have been proposed by the Minister, then the power to oversee the implementation of this code is the Inspector General of Government.  I think for me I like it because the Inspector General of Government was strengthened.  He has been sort of naked in dealing with some of these cases like embezzlement, misappropriation and so on.  So maybe if the Minister can as soon as possible try to find a way of making Statutory Instrument to make the Inspector General of Government start practising his powers as for the constitution, I think it will be -(Interruption)

DR MAGEZI:  Point of information.  Madam Chairperson, I thank you for giving me this opportunity to inform the distinguished hon. Member from Bulamogi county.  But actually the enforcement of the Leadership Code can be either by the Inspector General of Government or any other authority as Parliament may prescribe.  So it is not the monopoly of the IGG.  This Parliament can appoint some other person to enforce the leadership code.  It is here written in the Constitution Madam Chairperson.

MR KASAJJA:  I would like to thank hon. Magezi for that information, and for strengthening my argument.  But still, it does not erase the fact that the Inspector General has the power unless Parliament has come up and complained that the Inspector General of Government has failed.  But if it is one of the alternatives that either the Inspector General of Government can implement or the Parliament can make, there is an alternative -(Interruption)

DR LUYOMBYA:  Point of information.  Thank you Madam Chairperson.  I would like to inform the hon. Member that the IGG’s office is really over loaded.  At the moment, it is responsible for fighting corruption and abuse of office, at the same time, it is responsible for looking into violation of human rights and similarly, following on the promulgation of the Constitution, it is also to look after the leadership Code.  So, I would like to give him information, that it is prudent for this House to off load some of these duties from the IGG.

AN HON. MEMBER:  I thank the Member for the information, but I would also like to remind him that when the Inspector General of Government was given this authority by the Constitution, since I was one of the delegates, we also found it necessary to strengthen the office, I think he is right that at that time when we were making, it was over loaded, but we even said, it has to be strengthened and be given more officers.  So, he is going to be given more officers who can handle some of these laws which he is talking of.  So, I do not think whether there is really a real problem as long as we have given more officers, so that he can off load himself with that load he is talking of. 

Madam Chairperson, I would like to end with the comment on section 5, which is talking of the appointments, because, it says that for the avoidance of doubt, pending the appointments to be made to the corresponding offices under Article 272 of the Constitution, then he is talking of the areas where some people are to be appointed, some officers like the Chairperson and members of the Electoral Commission, then the Inspector General of Government, then persons - then may be Judicial Service Commission.  

My problem here, Madam Chairperson is to do with sub-section (iii) which is talking of that - when these people -those who were holding offices before the coming into force of the Constitution, that automatically they continue in those positions, that one, I have no quarrel, but my biggest quarrel is, where it is saying that, the term of a person continuing in office under sub-section (ii) says that, persons continuing in office under this Section shall hold office in accordance with the law applicable to them and any vacancies occurring in their offices shall, subject to Article 272, be fed in the matter provided by the law; okay , they can be fed by the law, but there is that blanket.  

Madam Chairperson, may be I am a lay man in the field of law, but if a person continues in office and supposing that person has not been performing, it seems this gives a blanket, authority to these people to continue. I had wanted as soon as the President who will be elected, the first elected President assumes office, let him have the authority at least to look into this very important post and try to fill them where we find that some people have not been performing, they should not have this blanket that they assume automatically.  

I would like the Minister to help me with this, because, it really is defeating my understanding why a person should be given that blanket.  I would like to get information from a Learned lawyer.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of information.  Thank you Madam Chairperson.  This provision actually is derived from the transitional provisions of the Constitution, but I would like to inform the hon. Member now holding the Floor, that particular provision does not stop the President or indeed any authority from doing what you suggest to do, you already have power to weed out people who are not performing or who are not conformity with the law and therefore, that power has not been affected by that provision, we can still exercise it.  

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you very much for learning from the distinguished Colleague of ours.  Now, Madam Chairperson, with that, I would like to thank for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this Bill and I would like to ask the Members, so that we can expedite the approval of this Bill, so that the Minister can start working on some of these provisions, because, I think they are very important.  Thank you very much.

MR ABUBAKER MAYANJA (Busujju County, Mubende): Madam Chairperson, I thank you for recognising me at long last.  I would like to request your indulgence for me to draw the attention of the House, to the fact that some two days ago, I think, there was an alarming announcement in the media on radio Uganda especially and Uganda Television, that with immediate effect, patients, emergency cases, delivering mothers, and so on, should not be taken to Mulago hospital, because the National Water Sewerage Corporation had cut water supply from Mulago Hospital. 

Madam Chairperson, I find it very difficult for departments of Government to understand why, departments of Government, indulge in this kind of washing dirty linen in the public as though there are no elements of coordination.  Mulago hospital is the most important medical institution in this country and for an announcement to be made that it has been put out of action, because another branch of the Government has disabled it by cutting off water supply or electricity supply, is a matter which Ugandans do not view with a great deal of respect; Government should be ashamed that one parastatal cuts off water supply from an essential service.  Madam Chairperson, these services are so important that we have provided in other laws that it is even right workers therein - we deprive workers in those services of their otherwise constitutional right to strike, because, they are essential services and work should not stop there, but work to stop there because of non payment of a water charge, so that people can die and babies are not delivered properly or whatever, it is something which is really unacceptable and I think I really express my disgust over this matter, I will not -(Interruption)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Point of information.  Thank you Madam Chairperson and hon. Mayanja for giving way, I want to give information which really will emphasise his point of disgust by the nation. I think the condemnation is not that there was an announcement put on the radio, but because, the water was actually cut off and I have been in Mulago this morning and it is a fact, that water had actually been cut off and as what you observe, for lack of payment or clearing some bills and as discovered in fact, there was a misunderstanding between Mulago and Water and Sanitary department and this, to me, is really disgusting, because, water not only is it vital to life, but in the case of Mulago, it is really vital to the lives of the people. So, I suggest that it is information, that water and electricity should never, under any circumstances be cut off from vital areas like Mulago; it should be a matter for Government.  If there is -(Interruption) 

MR D. LUBEGA:  Point of order.  Madam Chairperson, is it in order for hon. Members to make such prodigal statements and complaints and the Chairman of the National Water sits here with out assisting as to why that was so?  Is it in order for the Chairman of National Water and Sewerage Corporation to sit?

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON: I think he is not in order.  Could you please explain to the House, what has been happening?

MR ORYANG:  Thank you Madam Chairperson.  I would like to make a very brief statement.  This is to the effect that there is responsibility for services being rendered and services rendered is not free of charge, it should be paid for.  It is true that the operatives of the National Water and Sewerage Corporation are under direction to cut off anybody who does not pay the bill up to a certain level.  It is true also that water is life and a place like Mulago is very sensitive.

Madam Chairperson and hon. Members, I was equally alarmed when I heard the news on radio, I was on the way to go and find out what exactly happened, when I learnt water had been restored at Mulago, but this goes on to explain that when you are in a sensitive place, you cannot divert funds voted for paying for water bills or electricity bills to do something else, because you know you are in a very sensitive place.  This is wrong.  The operatives were screwing Mulago so that they collect their dues, they should not have done it if the Board was informed; there would be another way of going around the issue.  But this is a misunderstanding and on behalf of the Board of National Water and Sewerage Corporation, I apologise for what happened, but it had not been intended to punish the patients, it was something to draw the attention of the authority to the importance of paying bills and how else would one do it, but to cut off supply.  This is what happened because of the reluctance of the authorities to attend to their responsibility for services rendered.  I thank you very much.

MR ABUBAKER MAYANJA: Madam Chairperson, that only goes to re - first of all, I thank all hon. Members, especially hon. Oryang for this information, but if information only goes to show that there is really, that may be the executive branch of Government has ceased or given out its functions, because, Mulago hospital does not generate funds to pay as a private - it gets money from the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Finance ought to have given money to Mulago hospital to pay the bill for water.

MR EKEMU:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, in view of the fact that the hon. Chairman responsible for Water Corporation, but in view of the fact that hon. Chairman has apologised not only to this House, but to the nation, is it in order really, for hon. Mayanja to continue castigating Government on this matter?

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON:  No, it is not in order and I would advise to revert to the Bill, please.  

MR ABU BAKER MAYANJA:  Madam Chairperson, -(Interruption) 

DR MAGEZI:  Point of information.  Madam Chairperson, I thank you very much, for allowing me to inform hon. Abu Mayanja;

(i) That Mulago hospital is a self-accounting unit/centre or institution.  National Water and Sewerage Corporation is also a self-accounting institution.  When these two institutions bring their books of accounts here and we see how poorly they are performing, it is hon. Mayanja who will start criticising these institutions.  If failure to pay is the responsibility of the people who are managing these institutions to make their priorities right, if water is life, the first bills Mulago should pay, should be for water or electricity.  

MR ABUBAKER MAYANJA:  I would have had words to answer to hon. Magezi, but I respect your ruling and I shall abide.  The number of things which I find rather difficult, first of all, of course, if one does not know, what happens, supposing we pass this Bill and before it is printed and made ready, the elections have taken place, would it be correct for a President who will be elected on Thursday to assent to a Bill made at this time, there a number of difficulties there.

Secondly, the Section 4 or Clause 4 says that pending the appointment of the Uganda Human Rights Commission will say that the Human Rights Commission appointed under Clause 51, my learned hon. Friends have been trying to explain to me. It is not clear; at the moment there is no human rights Commission in existence.  So, there is one which will be appointed.  I do not understand why we do not either wait until the Parliament is elected in two months time, so that we appoint the Human Rights Commission properly as provided for under Article 51 of the Constitution;I do not understand. The same again, goes for the Judicial Service Commission in the previous Clause.  The Judicial Service Commission in Article 146 provides very elaborate machinery for appointing the Judicial Service Commission.  I have just been checking up with the Attorney; it appoints various categories of people on and on, would it be unlawful if we carried over the existing Judicial Service Commission until a new one is properly appointed; because if we talk this one which is envisaged under that machinery and we call it interim, why do we not, if we are capable of appointing it, why do we not appoint a substantive one?  But if we have difficulty, because Parliament is not executive and other organs are not there, then, why do we not carry over with this one until after the elections and so on and so forth.  

Again, Article 7, Madam Chairperson, this is the one dealing in interim District Land Board; this one, I will put down the book and talk at length with your permission.  

Land is a matter of greatest importance; even in the Constituent Assembly, which some of us had the privilege to be.  It was a very, very difficult issue.  Now, Article 240 of the Constitution provides, that the District Land Board shall constituted in accordance with what Parliament had provided and Madam Chairperson, this House, we were not told is not Parliament envisaged by the Constitution, that this one is existing only to put into existence certain organs to enable the Constitution to be implemented.  Now, we have been  - we had put this land thing into abeyance or cold storage.  Why can we not wait for another two months for a Parliament to be elected and then for that Parliament to provide for the correct composition of the District Land Boards?  Madam Chairperson, we are now using the Executive Committee of these Councils; these Councils, I do not even know, because, these are Resistance Councils, somebody is talking of the existing Committee of the District Council. I did not have time to go and check up all the laws to find out, some say, they are no longer Resistance Councils, they are Local Councils, they are Local Government, they are what, the executive Committees have not been elected, the Councils themselves have been elected in a very rough and ready manner by a few people standing behind other people.  I understand that there is a law being prepared for the election of members of District Councils.

DR MAGEZI: Point of information.  Madam Chairperson, I thank hon. Mayanja for giving way for this information, because to reinforce the argument, hon. Mayanja is making, it is clearly stated in the Constitution, the functions of the District Land Boards and unless and until Parliament does what it is supposed to do, the District Land Board will be a lame duck; because in 241 for instance, they talk of the functions to facilitate the registration and transfer of interests in land, but that provision can only be done by Parliament as it is stated in Article 2379, that Parliament shall enact a law providing for the acquisition of registrable interests in the land by the occupant. Now, 241 (i) (c), says that, the functions of the District Land Board will be to deal with all other matter connected in land with district in accordance with laws made by Parliament.  Until these laws are put in place by Parliament, there is hardly any function which the District Land Board will be able to do.  So, I think that there is very good reason to first deal with what the Parliament is supposed to do, then we appoint the District Land Boards to be able to function properly.

MR RWAKAKOOKO: Point of clarification.  I sometimes find difficulty in untying some of the arguments here, recalling that a number of contributors to this debate are the same people who contributed to the provisions in the Constitution.  Now, can I get it from somebody who knows, who can go beyond the veil probably of the Constitutional provisions as made here, to let us know, what they anticipated would happen in making this provisions, because, now, he is putting his position reaffirming the Minister for the Constitution, Justice and Attorney General is the proposer of this Bill.  May I understand it, because, there are so many complications arising out of this law. At the end of these contributions, I will pick the impression that this Bill should not have come here.

MR ABUBAKER MAYANJA: Madam Chairperson, instead of clarifying the matter, hon. Rwakakooko has made it even more complicated.

DR LUYOMBYA:  Point of clarification.  Madam Chairperson, in conformity with hon. Rwakakooko, I would like also to be clarified as it is the same Constitution and the representatives who made it, that knew that there would be a vacuum between promulgation and actual implementation of various Clauses of that Constitution and as of to avoid that vacuum, they put in a provision in the Constitution, letting the present NRC under its organs to continue and do what Parliament would do in order to facilitate the smooth implementation of the Clauses of the Constitution. I would like to be clarified.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Mayanja if you could wind up.

MR ABUBAKER MAYANJA:  Madam Chairperson, the hon. Minister for Justice and Attorney General, who is the only member of the Front Bench, will be perhaps be in a position to explain these matters. But if I may just say, as I understand it, as a former member of Constituent Assembly, the purpose of the new Constitution is to bring about further democratisation of the country, that is one of the main purposes and we now have bodies which were set up in an emergency, because this Government was brought in by force, and so on, democratising.  The Constitution envisages that there will be democratically elected District Councils and other Councils and it says the Land Board should be responsible to those Councils.  It also envisages that there will be a more democratically elected Parliament and that, that, Parliament should make the laws under which Land Boards shall be constituted.  

All that I am saying is that the constitution of Land Boards now, is not a matter of emergency, it is not a matter urgency, it remain as it has remained for the last seven months, whatever they are, since the passing of the Constitution.  It can wait until the process of democratisation has taken place, until a democratically or a more democratically elected Government has been instituted, until democratically elected Councils have been constituted and then, we shall create these institutions which are so vital to manage an asset which is terribly vital to the lives of this country.  So, I would with great respect, advise the House to reject Clause 7 relating to the Constitution of the Land Boards until after we have gone through these processes.

You told me to wind up, but I did want to talk about citizenship but nevertheless, it appears that - may I talk about it; because you said I should wind up and being especially being a lady, we have to submit very graciously to her ruling.  

So, I think with those observations, I would like to support the sound provisions of the Bill, but in really my bold submission is that for things which are not really intended to bring the Constitution into force or things like Interim Electoral Commission, that is important, that must be done, otherwise, there cannot be elections.   But Human Rights Commission, we have lived without it and we can continue to live without it for two or three more months and I think as a person who has been detained, who has suffered a great deal from violations of human rights, so, I think that is something which we should not now attempt to do in a hurry; there is going to be terrible - I do not know how this can be done, because, from now to Thursday, if we pass this Bill today or on Tuesday, since we are - if we pass it on Tuesday, then it will have to be printed, then somebody should be assented to either by the present President or by the new President who will be elected on Thursday after he has installed.  Then he will have to look for a Parliament if those appointments, say the Human Rights Commission are going to be made in accordance with Article 51, we are going to go a Parliament, we will have a democratically elected President submitting his nomination to an indirectly elected national Resistance Council.  Madam Chairman, I think it would be wisdom and prudence - dictates, that these matters, we should wait until after the elections.  Thank you very much.

MR EKEMU:  Thank you Madam Chairperson.  Before I go into perhaps looking at the contribution of each Member, I would first of all, like to pay tribute to hon. Members for all the remarks you have made and the contributions, both for and against, this Bill.

The spirit of this Bill, it is important, Madam Chairperson, to understand the spirit of this Bill. The spirit of this Bill is to make provision for the interim period; so that the country and all these other matters related to the Bill do not come to a stand still and this Bill, even if it is passed, even if you, hon. Members passed this Bill now and you make provisions for what is provided here, when the Parliament which will be elected comes into being, it will have the liberty to change whatever is made, but of course, that is not to say, that the Parliament will change everything.  I am sure it will confirm certain things, and it may reject certain things.  

So, first and foremost, we must really understand what is the spirit of this, because, Madam Chairperson, an impression should not be created that really there is any hidden agenda in the matters mentioned about this Bill.  This Bill simply should show us hon. Members, that as a Parliament, we continue to work and we must continue to do our work diligently up to the end of a time that we are supposed to be here and this happens to be the time when this Bill could be brought before you, hon. Members, we could not have brought it any earlier.  If there is delay in some of the matters, I do accept, I agree, I regret, but delay should not make it impossible really, to consider the matters which are raised here.  

Now, the bodies which are supposed to be created are very clearly desired bodies and organs.  The Judicial Service Commission; I have been listening very, very hard, it is only hon. Abu Mayanja, my predecessor, who seems to see that really, it is not even necessary for us to set this body and yet at this hour, we cannot appoint even a magistrate because of this, I do not know what hon. Mayanja’s interpretation is, but as far as we are concerned, that is the interpretation  and the supreme court cannot -(Interruption)

MR ABUBAKER MAYANJA: My interpretation would be that we should have put a Clause saying that until the appointment of the Judicial Service Commission under Article 146 of the Constitution, the Judicial Service Commission existing before or at the time of the coming into the Constitution shall continue just as we have for other laws.

MR EKEMU:  Madam Chairperson, that is not really an interpretation, I think it is more of an opinion than an interpretation, because, we have gone through and we have given due interpretation to the Constitution already.  What is left, is only to set up the Constitutional court which this honourable House, sat here, to pass the Bill on a few days ago.  So, I think it will only be fair with due respect to hon. Mayanja’s views to keep those views, but really, the purpose of this Bill is to seek to establish an Interim Judicial Service Commission, a Human Rights Commission, a Leadership Code and a District Land Board.  Perhaps if I may - because various members commented on this differently, but without over emphasising the position of the Judicial Service Commission, but I think this is really obvious, may be I would also wish to inform the Members, that as we talk now, the Supreme Court cannot transact some of the businesses it is supposed to transact, because, we do not have Judicial Service Commission.  So, we cannot constitute the Supreme Court in terms of the provisions of the new Constitution.  So, I do not know -(Interruption)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Point of order.  Madam Chairperson, is the hon. Minister and Attorney General in order to continue debating that particular Clause, when actually, the House is unanimous that it should be and the only controversy has been on Clause 4 and 7, where they think these are not necessary.  Is he in order to continue explaining one where the House is agreed and not deal with Clause 4 and 7 where I see - that is where there has been controversy?  

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON:  The hon. Minister is explaining a position which has been vehemently opposed by two Members of this House.  I think he is in order to explain it.

MR EKEMU:  Thank you Madam Chairperson for protecting me.  In fact, Madam Chairperson, it is because I knew that it was important for hon. Members to understand this matter by way of example which now exists with respect to the supreme court, that is why I brought, and I think hon. Members have benefited from that.  But as I said earlier, Madam Chairperson, I do not want to labour Members on the necessity of establishing an Interim Judicial Service Commission; I think this is an obvious matter.  

Now, hon. Members have made comments about the Human Rights Commission; some hon. Members do not see why Human Rights Commission at this time. I humbly submit, Madam Chairperson, that it will be important for Uganda at this particular time perhaps more than ever before, to have a Human Rights Commission; even if it is only for an interim period.  Why?  Because, at this time, Madam Chairperson, we now have the electioneering going on in this country and it is usually, even at this time, that is more difficult to look after the rights of people and organs like the Human Rights Commission, even if it is Interim, is going to re-enforce our struggle to look after those fights.

MR D. LUBEGA: Point of order.  Thank you Madam Chairperson.  Is it in order for the hon. Minister, when he understands very well the spirit of the Constituent Assembly, in laying down provisions relating to transitional provisions to the effect that Constituent Assembly never intended these National Resistance Council to assume the role of Parliament and its confines were only restricted to those transitional provisions as they appear in the Constitution which exclude the work we are trying now to labour to debate and legislate on.  Is it in order that hon. Minister, should continue, labouring with the Bill which should be withdrawn in its entirety and when we had a lot of time, in any case, to discuss the Nurses Bill and what have you, when this very important matters were slighted, but more important, the spirit of the Constituent Assembly never was for the National Resistance Council to embark on such legislation which is so fundamental and which should be a confine of Parliament.  Is it in order, Madam Chairperson?

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Members, I have had a look at Clause 50 and 51 of the new Constitution; I see nothing that prevents this NRC from conducting this business, he is quite in order.

MR EKEMU:  Madam Chairperson, really as I said earlier, this august House cannot run away from responsibility which were vested in it right from the beginning.  I think we are duty bound to continue to do the necessary for the country.  So, I had emphasised briefly the significance of establishing a Human Rights Commission.  This is merely to boss up even the democratisation process which we are talking about and at this particular time, especially, as I said earlier. But there is the question of the Leadership Code, and I must say, Madam Chairperson, that I am grateful to the attitude of hon. Members, who really were saying that instead of bringing this Bill, I should have brought a list and of course, the impression was given that, I should probably give why the names were not given.  But I think hon. Members remember that names for the Leadership Code Committee were submitted before this House, I think once or twice, once by my predecessor, second time was by myself, but then, it was discovered that I think, we needed to do more work to substantiate the position of the people we were suggesting to bring before the House. 

So, those names were withdrawn and we were trying to verify and confirm whether they would be committee members before we bring those names before this House, Madam Chairperson and that is a job I have had to do myself; I did not want to get myself in a position where I would bring a list of names here, and then members would throw them out, almost all of I did not want and I was doing the best I could, to try to present something worth presenting and that exercise, 

Madam Chairperson, I had not finished, but I think we were just about to finish and we were now thinking about the possibility of doing that list before this House, but Madam Chairperson, with this Bill, we need to have the law in a strong position. I know that the Leadership Code is provided for in this Constitution, but we have to have this legislation to back up the position of the Constitution.  Now, why should we say, that we should now pass over the issue of the Leadership Code to the next Parliament?  Why?  We are still a competent legislative body, we nearly did what we are doing now, except because of the reasons I have explained, that is why we delayed, but we still have, as a House, the capacity to do exactly that and nobody would question that. Madam Chairperson, no impression should be given now, that we are a less capable Parliament than we have been all these other years; I do not see why that impression is being created at this time.  

So, Madam Chairperson, that is the position really of the need for the Leadership Code, of course, to make it much stronger, even the Constitution suggested that it should for the time being be under the Inspectorate of Government, this is a constitutional provision, it is not in the Bill merely reflected it.  So, when you question it in the Bill, you know that is a constitutional provision. That is what we are doing and I would urge hon. Members that we have been processing, we were the authors of the philosophy of the Leadership Code of Conduct, I think we should try to carry on, if we can establish it, before the next Parliament, the better.   If we get cut short somewhere, but we shall have done our best.  That is all we are seeking in this Bill.  Of course, the most controversial body this Bill is creating has been the District Land Board.  Well, but Madam Chairperson, really, again, I cannot over emphasise this.  The position of land transactions in the districts and everywhere else has come to a standstill.  The Minister of Lands produced a document here which hon. Member from Arua was trying to read before the House, but that document of course, is not law.  So, many transactions on land matters have been held; land is very dear, true, to all of us, but that is the reason why we should really open up, so that people start transacting on land.  

How can we justify as hon. Magezi, how can we justify a further delay on the issue of land?  Some of the land matters have been pending for so long, that some Ugandans had put money on land, but because of that halt in the operations, they have lost money.  Now, this Bill, simply seeks to study the Land Boars, once again, as Interim measure to see that this Government cannot simply sit and wait, because elections are going on.  So, we do nothing and we postpone everything to the next Parliament; we would not do that.  

So, really, I would like hon. Members to look at the question of land; once again, not with suspicion.  Hon. Members should not think that there is any hidden agenda, we are all Ugandans and we are all very interested in this matter; all that the Bill seeks to do, is to open it up, so that while other arrangements are being made, while the next Parliament is being brought into place, Ugandans who have land problems should be able to transact business and carry on with the land matters, that is the spirit of the Bill.

Madam Chairperson, I do not want to hold the House for very long, many people raised many, many issue, some of the issue which were raised were not very specific to the Bill and I would not like to waste the time of the House, I think the issues are very clear; many hon. Members objected to Clause 12, that it should be Parliament to initiate legislation not the President, that they be two, but this is not a new thing.  What the Clause is saying is that, the President will take such a measure to bring such a law into conformity with the new Constitution and there is also a provision in the Constitution made to that effect, I think it is Article 234 of the Constitution which says more less the same thing, that the President - so whatever we do really, this is a kind of standard provision in this kind of situation and there is nothing very, very strange about it.

DR LUYOMBYA: Point of clarification.  Madam Chairperson, before the Minister concludes, winding up, I would like him to clarify for me on the memorandum of this Bill.  The worry seems that before the elections of the next President and Parliament, the time left is very short, it is just a matter of a month or a week for the President and possibly a month for the Parliamentary elections and in view of that, I wonder whether you would like to revise the wording of that memorandum.

MR EKEMU:  Madam Chairperson, if the hon. Member wants to suggest Amendment to this wording, I think there will be time for that, but we can consider that and I would invite you to propose suggestions, but only if hon. Members are only saying, well, it is one week only left for us to get may be a new President elected, then I do not know how many weeks more are left to get a new Parliament elected and the hon. Members should know that there is no guarantee really, that, at the end of the day, on the 9th, you will have elected a new President, Ugandans will have tried, but I either they will succeeded or they will have failed, because, there could arise a dispute and that is why the other day, you honestly passed a Bill here, which has now given us a task to urgently set up a court of appeal which may have to handle the disputed elections or even the Presidency.  

So, this Bill therefore, is contingency, is to cater for and cover for all that kind of emergency; with regard to Members of Parliament, I do not know because, Madam Chairperson, I have not even been told when the elections for the new Members of Parliament is, I think these matters for the Electoral Commission to deal with, but what the spirit of the Bill remains, to make provision for contingencies and I think this is the main thing.

Madam Chairperson, with really, those few remarks, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON:  I now put the question that the Bill entitled the Constitution Consequential Provisions Bill, 1996, be read the Second Time.

MR NEKYON:  Point of order.  Madam Chairperson, is it really in order to this House to proceed to vote on a Bill which is related to the Constitution without a quorum?

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON:  Hon, Members, on Tuesday, I reminded Members here, that we had very, very important business to conclude and instead of wasting time, interrupting the Electoral process, let us proceed with this matter.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Point of order.  I am concerned as Member may be, Madam Chairperson, is hon. Adoko Nekyon in order, when you have ruled that we proceed, to say no.  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON:  No, he is not.  I now put the question that the Bill entitled the Constitution Consequential Provisions Bill, 1996 be read for the Second Time.
          
(Question put and agreed to).

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CONSEQUENTIAL PROVISIONS BILL, 1996

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4

DR MAGEZI:  Thank you Madam Chairperson.  I beg to move an Amendment due to lack of time, I only circulated a copy to you and to the hon. Minister for Justice and Attorney General, that we delete Clause 4.  Madam Chairperson, we are dealing with a matter which has actually, adequately been provided for in the Constitution and the words ‘ within six months’ after the new Government comes in, the Uganda Human Rights Commission will be established.  In accordance with Clause 272, there is no limit, if there is violation of human rights today, I can go to court after two years.  

So, there is no question, that because you are not going, there is no Human Rights Commission now; there is no complainant about human rights being denied now, but what we are talking about, is to appear to be doing double work for no reason. What is worrying, in fact, even in the CA, there was no provision for the Interim Uganda Human Rights; the only interim organisation was the Interim Electoral Commission, because, we know that this required really the properly constituted Parliament and the term of office given is something like seven years, unless you are trying to give some people jobs now, I fail to see any really strong reason, the urgency which will make Government not operate.  

So, I beg you, hon. Members, let us not raise wrong signals for no reason at all; yes, we must appear to be doing something, but even if we appoint this Human Rights Commission, is the Attorney General assuring us that before we adjourn this House, he would have brought the names here for approval, would the President have been elected, sworn in, then they consult, they get the names and the names are brought to this legislature, before we adjourn sine die?   If we cannot, we might as well leave the whole exercise and it will be done in accordance with this Constitution.  So, I beg that we amend by deleting Clause 4.

MR EKEMU:  Madam Chairperson, I have greatest respect for hon. Magezi’s views.  It is a pity if I failed to convince him, but I made very clear submissions before this House about the significance of having Human Rights Commission even if it is Interim at this moment.  Well, Madam Chairperson, this august House, is at liberty to consider, but you hon. Members, imagine what messages, you are sending, you are going to send to other Ugandans.  I will have done my best; Government will have its best to bring a Bill of this type, talking about Human Rights Commission before the House.  Now, if other Ugandans hear that the House has rejected it, I do not know, hon. Members, you are free to take the interpretation, but I think I still stand by the position I put before you.  I failed to convince hon. Magezi, I still do not believe, I have failed to convince other hon. Members; I think the point is very clear.

DR LUYOMBYA:  Point of information.  Madam Chairman, Article 52 (i) (a),of the Constitution,  while talking about the functions of that Commission, it states that, on its own accord, the Commission can initiate investigations, where the Commission feels that somebody’s human rights have been violated.  For example, any body today, somebody like we have read in the Press, that Nsambu was picked up.  It could be the Commission, if it was there in place, could take interest into this sort of case and come to the plight of Nsambu or any other person; where they feel they need to investigate or initiate investigations and come to the plight of those whose rights are being violated.

For example, anybody today, somebody like we have read into the Press that Nsambu was picked up, it could be the Commission was there in place could take interest into this sort of case, and come to the plight of Nsambu or any other person where they feel they need to investigate or initiate investigation.  

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that Clause 4 be deleted as proposed by hon. Dr Magezi.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 4 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that Clause 5 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6

MR MAGEZI: Madam Chairman, I wish to make an amendment on Clause 6 unless the Minister can assure me that he will bring the names for the leadership Committee to be approved by this House before we adjourn sign die.  There is no justification again to have this leadership code provision in this Document.  Can I seek, Madam Chairperson a definite proposal from the hon. Minister that he is going to bring the names?  Once he brings the names, this particular provision can be taken care of under 273 and 274.  

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of information.  Madam Chairperson, I would like to inform hon. Magezi now on the Floor that this Clause does actually confirm to the now Provisional Constitution.  Because of the Constitutional provision, the names of the list have become redundant because the Constitution says that until Parliament makes other Provisions, it will the Inspector General of Government who will enforce the code and that is what the Provision is saying here.  

DR MAGEZI: Madam Chairperson, I can read English.  Article 2 - 3 (4) says, ‘The leadership code of conduct shall be enforced by the Inspector General of Government or such other authority as Parliament may by Law prescribe’.   So, what I am saying this would be a consequential amendment so long as we know we are going to have the names here.  The burden of assurance is from the Minister to tell us that he is going to bring the names, and then this amendment can go through.  But if we are not going to get the names, what is the purpose of telling us to amend this thing when it will remain a lame dark until the next Parliament?

MR EKEMU: Madam Chairperson, I would like to beg hon. Magezi to be calm in submissions.  He seems to be losing his temper and yet these are fundamental matters and we need to keep our tempers cool.  But Madam Chairperson, when I was making submissions to this House in respect of this matter, I explained what happened.  I explained how I was still busy trying to handle the processing of membership.  Surely, Madam Chairperson, if this House summons me to bring the list of names in due course and it is necessary, how would I refuse?  So, I oppose the amendment of hon. Magezi.  

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that Clause 6 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7

DR MAGEZI: Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that Clause 7 be deleted.  Madam Chairperson, we are trying to provide for the Interim District Land Boards.  Now the Land Boards have specified functions in the Constitution as set out in Article 2, 4(1).  These functions have to be prescribed by Parliament and Parliament has not yet done that.  So, we are creating District Land Boards which will just again be unable to operate because there is nothing that they can do which Parliament has not passed over to them.  I have cleared that because the functions, for instance, is to hold and allocate land in the District which is not owned by any person or authority. 

The second one is to facilitate the registration and transfer of interests in land.  So, there is nothing the Boards will do until the Minister responsible for land brings over the new conditions and provisions.  -(Interruption)

MR KASAJJA KABUBI: Point of clarification.  Madam Chairperson, I am seeking clarification hon. Magezi.  It would appear all his amendments are saying, no.  Why can he not come up and say that this Bill should be deleted or should not even be debated, because he is just going around saying that this Parliament is unable to do it; we wait for the next Parliament.  He started with the land thing, now he has opposed it.  When we went to Human Rights he opposed it.  Now, why can he not say that the whole Bill cannot be implemented at this material time and then we wait?  I seek clarification.

MR BAKASHABARUHANGA: Point of information.  Madam Chairperson, I wanted to oppose the last but one Speaker, on the grounds that there is no controlling authority for land at the moment.  I do not think we can afford to have Law controlling the authority for a whole year.  It means that people who are keen to develop are stuck; they cannot get titles.  Surely, that is important if we are serious with development of this country.  So, with that I think it should be a must that we should have some controlling authorities of land throughout the whole country so that some development can be placed.  I thank you.

DR MAGEZI: The first position, Madam Chairperson, I did explain that except those particular amendments which were relevant to the election problems we anticipate to have, we should leave most of these things to this Parliament.  But we passed here - we have just pronounced ourselves.  The best thing I can do is to propose the amendments.  Now, this business of thinking that by creating the District Land Boards, the issuance of certificates and titles is erroneous because 237 (4) says, ‘All Uganda citizens owning land under customary tenure may acquire certificates of ownership in a manner prescribed by Parliament’. We have not done that yet.  How do you convert, for instance, from customary to free hold?  How do you get the stamp?  Which title do you get?  There is no Uganda Land Commission any more to issue titles.  So the whole business of land is so fundamentally changed that just creating this District Land Board will not be able to deliver and this business is within two years.  So, if the matter is so urgent, the next Parliament can do it within the one month because position does not say that it must be two years or one year.  Article 237 (9) says, ‘Within two years,’ not that it must be after a specified time.  So, this matter is so crucial.  It can be done within one or two months.  But there is necessary pre-legislation before you come to the creation of managers of the land by creating the District Land Boards.  That is why I am saying, we are putting the cart before the horse.  

MR LUTALO: Point of clarification.  Madam Chairperson, I wish to seek clarification from hon. Magezi, whether or not the spirit of the Constitution is to paralyse all businesses.  Because you are aware that even when the new Parliament has been elected, the pre-occupation will be financing in form of the Budget, that will take maybe four or five months.  Subsequently, the legislations as of the new Constitution, literary everything will be done by Parliament and will have to be prescribed by Parliament.  So, that may mean another two or three years.  Was that meant by the Constitution that no business should be conducted?  Can I know about that?

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON: I think I will have to ask the Minister to respond to that.

MR EKEMU: Madam Chairperson, hon. Magezi has not raised any point which is constitutionally fundamental.  If did, I would have definitely submitted to that with great respect.  But hon. Magezi’s fears are the fears of cooperation, implementation.  He is saying that really if we pass this section of this Bill, we are creating the Land Boards which are going to be non-functional.  But really with great respect, why does hon. Magezi not allow this hon. House to pass this provision and allow the boards to operate.  If the Boards fail, this is an administrative matter.  It is not a matter for legislation.  So, I oppose that amendment.  

MR IMAGA: Point of clarification.  Madam Chairperson, I am seeking clarification from the hon. Minister, under which does the District Land operate.  Because the Land Commission has not authority.  How is it going to relate the District Land Board and Land Commission?  According to the Minister’s pamphlet here, it is clear, the Constitution provides for the Uganda Land Commission.  That is in this Constitution.  In view of Article 237 (1), 239 and 241, the Uganda Land Commission chose to be a controlling authority of Land with effect from 8th October, 1995, and cannot therefore, continue to allocate land.  Now you are creating the District Land Board, which usually works in relation with Land Commission, which is non-functional.

MR BAKASHABARUHANGA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  First of all, we have created a freehold, according to the Constitution, and the freehold does not have any other condition attached.  I have never heard of a freehold being with a condition.  Otherwise, it is not a freehold.  So, it means when you create a controlling authority which is a Land Board, and it allocates Mr A. land, it allocates a free-hold, because a free-hold has already been created by the Constitution.  So, there is no question of saying that conditions attached or what, no.  It is just a freehold.  Therefore, they would be controlling authorities and allocating land, because the mode of allocation is freehold.  

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that Clause 7 be deleted as proposed by hon. Dr Magezi.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 7

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that Clause 7 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that Clause 8 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that Clause 9 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that Clause 10 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that Clause 11 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12

CAPT. GASATURA: Madam Chairperson, Clause 12, when I read together with the Constitution, I believe it is 274.  274 reads, ‘the First President elected under this Constitution may, within 12 months, after assuming office as President, by Statutory Instrument, make such provisions as may appear necessary for repelling, modifying, adding, adopting any Law for bringing it into conformity with this Constitution, or otherwise giving effect to this Constitution.’ The hon. Minister said, Clause 12 was really standard.  If you are going to make it standard, in the spirit of the Constitution, under Constituent Assembly, there need not be approval of the legislature.  Obviously this was the intended spirit of the Constituent Assembly.  Moreover, it has most unlikely -(Interruption)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of clarification.  Madam Chairperson, I think that the hon. Member holding the Floor, may have misunderstood the Clause.  The Clause referred not to the First President, but the President before the first one is sworn in.  Therefore, it is not standard; it is a new Provision not related to what is in the Constitution.  

CAPT. GASATURA: Dr Magezi said, ‘I too, can read English’, Madam Chairperson.

I was coming to - it most unlikely.  But in the next five days, the President, before the first President under this Constitution, is going to do anything drastic, apart from what 274 suggests.  In other words, the more likely mode is the first President under this Constitution is going to use this very Article.  So, I propose that we leave it.  The President may, by Statutory Instrument, and delete maybe with the approval of the legislature and leave it amend.  In any case, Madam Chairperson, even if my Colleagues objected, within the next five days, they will be overridden by the very Constitution.  

MR EKEMU: Madam Chairperson, the House obviously opposes that amendment, so do I.  

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that Clause 12 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON:  I now put the question that the Title do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr J. Ekemu): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.  I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the Council do resume and the Committee do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Ekemu J): Madam Chairperson, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled: The Constitution/Consequential Provisions Bill, 1996, and passed it without amendments.  I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM 
THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr J. Ekemu): Madam Chairman, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE CONSTITUTION/CONSEQUENTIAL PROVISIONS BILL, 1996

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Ekemu J.): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: ‘The Constitution/Consequential Provisions Bill, 1996,’ be read the Third Time and do pass.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the Bill entitled, ‘The Constitution/Consequential Provisions Bill, 1996,’ be read the Third Time and do pass.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR A STATUTE ENTITLED:
THE CONSTITUTION/CONSEQUENTIAL PROVISIONS STATUTE, 1996

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON: Title settled and Bill passes. (Applause)
Now, hon. Members, for purposes of the record, by 4.30 p.m. 105 Members had registered as present in this House.  So, we had more than 90 Members required to attend to business today.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Steven Kavuma): I stand before you, Madam Chairperson and hon. Members to move that this House by resolution approves a Form which has been circulated, Form DDR Before I move that Madam Chairperson, I beg to make some small explanation.

Madam Chairperson I realise that this business on our Order Paper today.  But at the same time, Madam Chairperson, the matter is extremely important and urgent because it is directly related to the elections we are going to have next week.  Madam Chairperson, I therefore move that we proceed under Rule 85 of our Rules of Procedure and suspend the requirements of Rule 10 so that we can discuss this matter even though it does not appear on the Order Paper.

Madam Chairperson, I will also move that we consider the approval of this Form as a matter of necessity and urgency.  Infact, a matter which is almost an emergency.  Madam Chairperson, as I did say, elections are next, we did approve some Forms but it was not until this afternoon, as I was sitting here that I received urgent information from the Commission that they have found - that before the results that are intended to come out of the election can be properly gathered and declared within the stipulated 48 hours, there is absolute necessity that we provide for this Form which is intended to implement the provisions of section 81 of the Statute we passed here.  For the benefit of the Members, I will read the Section with your permission, Madam Chairperson. 

Section 81 (1) reads, ‘A Returning Officer may appoint one or more persons for the purpose of collecting the results of the poll from a given number of results collecting centres, prescribed by him or her and each person shall, on delivering the results to the Returning Officer, sign the prescribed declaration of delivery of results Form’.  Now, that is the Form before you, Madam Chairperson and hon. Members.  

Now, Madam Chairperson, as Members will recall from the Provisions of Section 123, which I will again read for the benefit of the Members memory.  It reads, ‘The Minister may, with the approval of the legislature and on the recommendation of the Commission by Statutory Instrument make regulations prescribing any matter which by this Statute is required or authorised to be prescribed or which is in his or her opinion are necessity or convenient to be prescribed for carrying out or giving effect to the Provisions of this Statute, other than matters to be prescribed by Rules of Court.’  Madam Chairperson, the Form before you and the hon. House is a very simple straightforward but important Form.  As Members must have realised, it is intended to be executed by the person who will be nominated to collect these results from the results centres.

MR SIBO: Point of order.  Madam Chairperson, the Minister has moved a Motion to suspend certain Rules of Procedure.  We have not yet passed that Resolution.  Now, he is debating a Motion.  Should we not pass the Resolution first to suspend a Rule?

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRPERSON: The Motion was seconded.

MR KAVUMA: Madam Chairperson, I thank you very much for the very wise and practical ruling because I am really explaining and justifying the Motion. So, Madam Chairperson, it is intended to be completed by the persons and these persons are necessarily to be appointed because as you remember, especially for the Presidential elections, results must be declared within 48 hours.  You cannot expect the returning officer or the Commission to receive these results unless they have a number of staff who can quickly move and collect these results and since it is a requirement of the Law we made here, that they must sign a Form which must be prescribed and since 123 requires that any Form prescribed must be approved by this House, it is imperative that we proceed and suspend the Rules and approve this Form so that it can go for final printing so that these results can be eventually be collected and declared within the constitutionally set period of time.  Madam Chairperson, the body is very clear; the matters are very routine.  In fact they would not have come here, but for the requirement of the Law that whatever goes on in this area, must be approved by this House.  I beg to move Madam Chairperson.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  I stand to support the hon. Minister that this august House give support and pass this Resolution. 

Madam Chairperson, I assume there is not controversy and suspension of the order of the Rules.  Just picking to the Resolution, Madam Chairperson, had this Resolution appeared in Statute No.4 of 1996, as it was a Bill then, we would have had no difficult in passing it.  Indeed many of us would not even have looked at it since it is usually in the back Pages.  Therefore, Madam Chairperson, there is nothing controversial about this Resolution.  It absolutely necessary that it is passed before the elections next week and therefore, without wasting any more time, Madam Chairperson, I strongly support that we pass the Resolution.  Thank you.

MR NSUBUGA ZASIRI: Madam Chairperson, I stand to support the Motion.  But I just want to propose an improvement that we add there the time, dates of delivery of the results.  The time; rather date, time and place of the results.  I think the reasons are a bit obvious. 

MR NTIMBA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  I would like to support the Minister’s Motion for the Resolution and I hope all of us will be patriotic enough to support it.  We understand the circumstances under which the Minister had to bring it to answer this during this material time.  
I have a couple of amendments I am going to propose and since time does not permit for us to circulate them, I hope, Madam Chairperson, you will wave the Rules in this regard.  The amendment I want to propose concerns nomenclature to take care of urban Constituencies where we have wards instead of parishes.  So, I would like to propose that in Paragraph 1, we insert after the word, ‘parishes’ a stroke and wards.  Further more, at the bottom there is provisions for the person conducting the elections to give reasons for failure to deliver the results.  Now in order to protect the person from wondering about and beating about the bush, to say, I failed to do this because this and that, I propose that we put after the words, ‘give reasons for failure to deliver the results ... ‘ figures - 1, 2, 3, 4. so that .....



(Incomplete)
