Thursday, 5 May 2005

Parliament met at 2.19 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, I welcome you. I want to inform you that the Budget Committee will meet tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. The committee chairpersons and other members of this committee are encouraged to attend this meeting.  

Honorable members, I am happy to inform you that at 3.30 p.m. this afternoon the Queen’s Baton is scheduled to arrive here at Parliament. We are fortunate that we will be witnessing this part of the rally whose destination shall be Melbourne 2006 for the Commonwealth Games, in Australia. I, therefore, will take the opportunity to adjourn the proceedings of today earlier than expected. 

Because of the above, honorable members, you realize that the Order Paper should have the Second Reading for the Constitution (Amendment) Bill No.2 but because this is very serious business, I did not want to interrupt it on the day it is introduced. Therefore, I have decided that we should have a new day when it is introduced, and this will be Tuesday. 

From next week I intend to include Mondays and Fridays as sitting days so that we can expedite the work. In fact we should begin next Monday so that we can clear whatever business we shall not be able to complete today. Honorable members, you will bear with me on that.  

We have guests here and I understand they are connected to another function. These are our voters from Mbarara Municipality. There is a function to which they are connected, and I want to welcome you to Parliament. (Applause)

2.23
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Two days ago we were discussing a very important subject of thermal energy. We did not exhaust the matter and it was sent to the Natural Resources Committee. That very committee is sitting on a petition report on electricity. What assurance do we have that the report we are expecting is forthcoming? I am worried and I seek guidance from you.

THE SPEAKER: Honorable member, you should never bring domestic matters out in public. You are a member of that committee and if there are weaknesses here and there in your home, you first solve them in your home before you bring them out in public. I advise that you take this matter up in your committee and find out why the committee is not working as expected. Should you fail then you can come to me and see how to handle the situation, but do not embarrass your home in the way you are doing. Okay, let us hear the chairperson.

2.26
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am the chairman of that committee to which hon. Lukyamuzi is a member. The report he is referring to was concluded and it is out of the hands of the committee so it is not right that the committee is sitting on some report.

As regards to the thermal power and another related matters, which were referred to the committee this week, we will start considering them next week.  

2.29
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (Woman Representative, Wakiso): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am glad that yesterday we passed a resolution on the referendum issue. My people in Wakiso District, especially those who did not have the opportunity to check the registers, and the students that were still in school that did not register, are wondering what is going to happen. Are they not going to have an opportunity to vote? 

Therefore, at this material moment I would like to request the minister responsible that at an appropriate time he should explain to us and give us a clarification on what is going to happen to our people that did not register. I am afraid many of our people may not vote for the referendum. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, this issue was debated here after the exercise had been concluded and we indicated our dissatisfaction with the exercise. I had the occasion to meet the members of the Electoral Commission and they explained to me the problems. They are taking up this matter in readiness for the programmes that are coming ahead. The minister is answerable for them but I can report that what we debated here on that issue was captured and I think we should give them the benefit of doubt and see what they are going to do.  

As I told you yesterday, it is not for us to determine the date when the referendum should be held. It is wrong for us to say, “Let the Electoral Commission hold the referendum on this day”, when they are not ready. They will determine the date depending on the readiness they will have acquired. So, let us see what happens when we send the resolution, because it has not been sent yet. They are not supposed to know what we have passed until we have officially communicated to them and then they will start the arrangements. 

2.31
MR AVITUS TIBARIMBASA (Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you very, Mr Speaker. I have two issues to raise, one arising out of your communication. You said we should start meeting from Monday to Friday but for the coming Monday we had already been invited by the Committee on HIV/AIDS, which is a Parliamentary committee, and I think honorable members will be at Munyonyo on Monday for the whole day. So, maybe it can start after that.

Secondly, there was a report from the Committee of National Economy concerning Apex IV. It was debated on the Floor of this House and it was not concluded. I remember the ruling was that the committee should liaise with the officials of the Ministry of Finance and get information, which the committee was lacking, and then report back. It has taken a long time. May I know when this House is expecting this to come back because people want to use this money?  

THE SPEAKER: I quite appreciate that this is a very important report of the Committee on National Economy. I have discussed this with the Chairperson, hon. Nandala Mafabi, and Vice-Chairperson, hon. Guma Gumisiriza. This is a report, which also requires a fresh day. It is not a report, which you will discuss in a matter of an hour; it is quite involving and it is important. I am conscious of this. I will find suitable time when we can deal with it.

DR MATOVU: Mr Speaker, my point was about what hon. Timbarimbasa has said about the Munyonyo function.

THE SPEAKER: Right.

2.33
MR DANIEL OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Mr Speaker, I should have come to your chambers but this motion is on the peace and security situation in the North and Northeast. The members who are very interested in this matter have asked me to inform you that they have gone to Lira at the invitation of the Minister of Health, I think for the launch of the national immunization days. In fact even me in about two hours’ time I will be trying to go and join this programme, which is starting at 8:30 p.m. They are saying if you do not mind, can you –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: I am happy that you are able to be here and formally inform me about that.

MR ATUBO: I am a bit late; I should have seen you in your chambers.

THE SPEAKER: I am quite impressed.

MR ATUBO: Thank you.

2.34
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I need your guidance because I am a bit worried. From what I heard from hon. D’ujanga, the Chairperson of the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources, what happens if the committee has submitted a report and it does not surface and yet we have already taken another inquiry to that committee? I am a bit jittery about this because the chairperson is saying the report was finished and yet it has not come before the hon. Members of Parliament. What should we do now? Already another one has gone and I am one of the petitioners for that.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba, there are so many reports and business, which we have on Table, but then we give priority to some. The Business Committee is due to sit and when we sit we are given business, which is ready for presentation to Parliament. The Business Committee then determines the priority in which each business should come up. If the report is with the Clerk, definitely when we see it as the Business Committee we shall determine when we shall consider it.

2.36
ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to:

Mr John Arimpa Kigyagyi

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kigyagyi, it is my pleasure on behalf of the entire Parliament, to welcome you to Parliament as a fully-fledged Member of the Seventh Parliament. (Applause) I congratulate you upon the victory you achieved during the by-elections, but you are here as a Member of Parliament for Mbarara Municipality -(Applause)

I know before you became so there were many who wanted to become the representatives of Mbarara Municipality. The elections have ended; you are now the member representing the entire electorate of Mbarara Municipality -(Applause)- including those you competed with for this seat. Your differences should end. You should even meet them and discuss how best to develop Mbarara Municipality, to develop the region, and to develop the entire country.  (Applause). 

You are going to sit near hon. Kazoora John, a neighbor, so you will be discussing how to improve the region and the country. I have no doubt you will be able to do so, especially with your past experience. This place is not new to you, you have been in it and you have other experiences in other fields where you have been. So, you are most welcome and we wish you well. (Applause). You will be advised on the number of committees we have so that you can make a choice as to which committee you will belong. So, feel comfortable.  

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Local Governments Act (Amendment) Bill, 2005, be read for the first time.

Accompanying this Bill is the Certificate of Financial Implications from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as required by section 10 of the Budget Act, 2001, which I wish to lay on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Now the Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament to consider and report promptly.

Honorable members, I understand on the Order Paper it is indicated that we are to have a ministerial statement next, but I understand the minister is answering a question, which was raised here by the hon. Member for Kooki, Capt. Matovu. The minister was requested to give an answer and she is going to give it now. So, adjust Order Paper to read question for oral answer rather than a ministerial statement.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION TO THE MINISTER 
OF STATE FOR WATER

2.44
CAPT. DAVID MATOVU (Kooki County, Rakai): “What is government doing to provide water for such drought-prone areas like my county, Kooki, and other areas in the country, which have water coverage of less than 20 percent, and where boreholes are not suitable because of the iron deposits? 

Is the ministry ready to forego the policy of clean safe drinking water for the sake of hard hit areas and allow digging of simple valley tanks in order to save women and children who walk for five to ten kilometers to collect water?

Can water be purified before we look into purifying it?” I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE, WATER (Mrs Mary Mutagamba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honorable members, a question was put by hon. Capt. Matovu David, which he has just read out. On top of that I got a directive, which has been aired this morning over various media, that I should explain particularly to Capt. Matovu David what steps are being taken by government to rectify the situation in Kooki. To that effect I want to make this response.

The Government is planning a strategy for bulk water transfer from large water bodies like River Nile, River Kagera, Lake Victoria and Lake Kyoga, to serve areas that are in critical need of water for both domestic use and for production. Four zones have been identified and these are: 

1. Zone one: River Kagera and Lake Victoria, Bukanga, Kabula and Rakai corridor.

2. Zone two is Lake Kyoga, which is the Nakasongola-Ngoma corridor.

3. Zone three is the Elgon-Karamoja corridor;
4. And Zone four is Lake Bisinia, Teso-Karamoja corridor, and this will begin soon.

These are the areas, which we intend to start with. Of course we realize that this requires heavy investment, it is not something that is going to be done immediately but I want to assure the House that we have already put the strategy in place. The ministry is preparing to start the feasibility studies in the coming financial year. A concept paper has been prepared and to this end the political leadership of the ministry have been involved in the resource mobilization globally. And as I speak now we have been able to raise US $76 million, which is ready for use for the next three years provided the Ministry of Finance can stretch our budget ceiling to accommodate it. 

To that respect I will seek the support of my colleagues, ministers and Members of Parliament, to find a way of accommodating this in order to substantially solve the problem of water. 

I also further seek the support of Parliament to make sure that the Ministry of Finance accommodates an extra US $15 million earmarked by the ADB for the financial year 2005/2006.  

In the short run, government’s solution is to implement rain water harvesting, a programme which has already started, and my ministry has already experimented with it in Kabale where it has proved successful and sustainable. We have already gone ahead to train engineers in this technology, including engineers from Rakai. And I want to say that in Kooki County, where hon. Matovu David comes from, we have already installed two huge tanks in the sub-county of Kyalulangira as an experiment. 

I want to add that the women of Kooki last year won a prize for having embraced the technology of rain water harvesting. They actually won US $10,000 to that effect, in appreciation of their effort to embrace this technology. I want to inform honorable members that even internationally Uganda has been recognized in this effort, and the Minister of State for Water is the patron of the Global Water Harvesting Movement. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, last financial year 50 valley tanks were constructed. In the district of Mbarara we put up eight; we put up nine in Luweero; eight in Masindi; in Nakasongola we constructed eight and in Rakai we constructed nine of which three, namely, Nkonyo, Dyango and Kansengye are in Kooki. All of them were at an average cost of about Shs 200 million, so efforts are being taken. 

In Sembabule we had allocated nine, unfortunately the construction was not completed because the contractors somehow failed. But we are pursuing it. We have been able to recover the money we had advanced and now we are sourcing for another contractor to complete the Sembabule valley tanks. These have been completed and are waiting for commissioning. However, we have hit a snag here because the technology we used was a bit new to the communities and communities never had proper training on how to use them. So, we have gone back to the consultants to design a training programme to make sure that people know how to use these peddle pumps so that the valley tanks can be sustainable. 

This financial year we had planned to construct 100 valley tanks and we had completed the designs. Unfortunately, we were not able to implement what we had planned because of shortage of funding. But we have been assured by the Ministry of Finance that the coming financial year, 2005/2006, the 100 valley tanks will be implemented and they are are distributed as follows: 
Kiboga - 17; Mubende - 22; Kibaale - 15; Kyenjojo - 8; Kamwenge - 10; and Mbarara - 8. 
 
The allocation is normally done by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the locations themselves within the districts are done by the local authorities, verified by our technical people. So, we hope come next financial year, we should be able to implement this to respond to the major crisis, especially in the cattle corridor.

Mr Speaker, the honourable member put another question, which I classified as 1(2), whether the ministry is ready to forego the policy of ‘clean, safe drinking water’ for the sake of hard-hit areas and allow digging of simple valley tanks in order to save women and children who walk five to ten kilometres to collect water. To this effect, I have this response: 

The National Water Policy stresses accessibility to safe, clean water for all and our target is to make sure by the year 2015, every Ugandan has got clean, safe water.

In areas where valley tanks have been found as the only immediate suitable option, the tanks are developed to supply water for animal watering but also for human consumption. In case of domestic consumption, the water from the valley tanks is first treated through filtration galleries and hand pumps installed to draw clean water from collection sumps. We are planning to do that to all valley tanks that we have put in place, including those in Kooki, and there is one called Nyanjategera Johnson Valley Dam at Lwanda in Kooki, which was constructed 40 years ago, which again also will be treated like all the others in response to the others in the area.

Mr Speaker, there was a final question; “Can water be supplied first before we look into purifying it?” 

Yes, Mr Speaker, we have said that with the change of policy that we have introduced of bulk supply, we intend to supply water from the main water sources and then put reservoirs from where we shall treat the water for consumption and the rest will go for production. Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  

2.55
CAPT. DAVID MATOVU (Kooki County, Rakai): Mr Speaker, I thank you. I also thank the Minister for the report, and indeed I thank Government for whatever they are doing to provide water for our people. As you can see, colleagues, I do not know whether my people are going to get water in the immediate future because we are having a decentralized policy. In Rakai, for example, we get about Shs 700 million to Shs 800 million a year. We are grateful to Government, but this money comes with a lot of conditionalities. 

This is a conditional grant; I think that is where problem number one comes from. If, for example, the leaders in Rakai, the politicians and other stakeholders, were allowed to have a meeting with the ministry, then we look at the pains, because leadership demands flexibility. My biggest problem is that Government has not appreciated the problem of these drought-prone areas. 

Talking about rainwater harvesting, I do not seem to appreciate it yet, because when it is raining, everybody sees this rain, everybody sees this water. Why does Government put a lot of energy in rainwater harvesting?  Actually I had got a lot of hope when the Minister said that they intend to transfer water from some of these water bodies to where the people are.  This is where solution number one is.

Solution number two would be small valley tanks; I am not talking about valley tanks of Shs 100 million. That is a lot of money –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, this item was corrected to be a question for an oral answer. We expect you to put a supplementary question.

CAPT. MATOVU: Question number 1, why do you put a lot of energy in providing water during the rainy season when it is an obvious thing, everybody sees it?

Two, are you going to allow us as a district with our equipment to dig more valley tanks at a lesser cost? I thank you.

2.58
DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am raising a question on page 3, the last paragraph, where the Minister is admitting that Government failed to anticipate problems of the communities in using this new technology. My question is; why should Government fail to anticipate these problems so that you have to call on consultancy again and they will consume money?  Why don’t we use the method of communities participating in the discussions right from the word go, so that we do not have these problems.

The second question, Madam Minister, I would like to know why these valley tanks are being built in some districts and not others. Can there be a small justification so that Parliament knows why you are doing this?

3.00
DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have three questions for the Minister and I thank her for this statement. I would like to congratulate her on being appointed Patron of the rainwater harvesting. A lot of people outside Uganda know about this; it is surprising that we did not know much about it in Uganda because so many people sent me messages from World Economic Forum, where she was awarded.  So, I think this is an honour for Uganda, not only for the honourable minister.  

Madam Minister, you talked of the bulk water transfer from River Kagera, Lake Victoria, and River Nile. I would like to inform you that in the 1960s - even the pipes are still there, you can go and they show them to you, they are still there in Isingiro, Bukanga and in Nyabushozi, they are rusting. Now you are talking of the same thing.  Can you complete one? When are you going to complete one of them so that we know you have the capacity to complete one at least?

Secondly, the valley tanks, the work - I am glad to say the Buganda Government constructed a dam 40 years ago, and by the way, they were using human labour; they were not using machines or anything like that; they were using hoes. The government of the Omugabe in Ankole also constructed many others, and they are still working. How come the new ones do not work? What is the matter with the ones constructed with modern technology?  

Madam Minister, when are your scientists going to practice a bit of their science? I read in their magazine from the National Water and Sewerage Corporation that they can remove iron, fluoride and chlorine from water, but a lot of our water in Kooki, Isingiro and the Nyabushozi area are full of heavy metals and the animals - well, animals might take the water, but humans cannot use that water. So, when are you going to start removing the heavy metals?  

Finally, I was embarrassed when I found Canadians working on a water project in my constituency. A student had invited his village, including his father and mother, and they were filtering the water after seeing that the water we were using in the valley tanks was dirty. They dug a channel connecting it to that dirty water. They first put big stones, then small stones, sand and charcoal so that the water could go slowly through that filter, and at the end they dug a big hole and cemented it and there was very clean water. 

Surely if one Canadian family can do that in Uganda, how many scientists do we have here? Surely that kind of technology is available, and there are many other technologist. When are we going to do this so that we can employ a lot of these unemployed youths for this simple technology so that we kill two birds with one stone? Madam Minister, when are we going to do this? I thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have to limit the questions because we are going to adjourn, and I would prefer that the Minister is able to answer them.  

3.03
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the Minister for bringing this report to this House. My question is, the communities in Pallisa County contributed Shs 186,000 in order to be allocated boreholes by RUWASA. Now that RUWASA is no longer in existence, are my people going to get the boreholes? Then over Shs 10 million was allocated for this purpose, but the information available in Pallisa is that this money is no longer in existence; the bank account was closed, and where the money was taken we cannot know. What information can I take to my people in Pallisa?  They were even planning to have a peaceful demonstration about this problem.  

Then in 2001, His Excellency, the President promised us overhead irrigation scheme along the lake region. What plans do you have to implement the President’s promise to the people of Pallisa, because for us we have water everywhere but we are not utilizing water for irrigation? What message can I take to my people? Thank you very much.

3.05
MR BASALIZA ARAALI (Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am concerned about water supply in towns. In some cities like Kampala and towns like Fort Portal there are some spring wells and it has been found that, that water is contaminated. What is the ministry doing to educate the people about not drinking contaminated water, and what is it doing to purify that water?  

Secondly, Mr Speaker, in some towns we have got boreholes; in Fort Portal we have got about four boreholes, but in most cases they are out of order.  Is there any policy of repairing these boreholes because some of them are constantly out order for a long time?  

Lastly, is there a policy by which the Ministry of Water controls the prices of water, especially at the standpipes? It seems the people who manage these standpipes charge any amount they want, sometimes they charge Uganda Shs 50, other times Shs 100 per jerrican, and that is too much for the peasants for whom this water is meant.  I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.07
MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingior County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The people of Isingiro and Bukanga are buying water at Uganda Shs 500 per jerrican. It is lucrative business to own a water tank in Mbarara and ferry water to these areas. Mr Speaker, I want clarification from the Minister. I have seen on the third page, although not numbered, where she is talking of 50 valley tanks constructed. She has only named three places; the rest is in figures. Could she be kind and tell us that, eight dams at point X, at point Y, at point Z?  

Lastly, Mr Speaker, we sat in a meeting organized by the Minister and other stakeholders, and we agreed that contrary to the dams – because a dam was estimated to cost Shs 500 million –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, would you like to ask a supplementary question?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: It is a question, Sir. We opted for valley tanks because one dam was estimated at Shs 500 million. If you took Shs 30 million, which is necessary for a valley tank, you would have a lot of valley tanks. Now, if you look at the eight valley tanks in Mbarara, they are not equivalent to the cost of one tank. Unfortunately the two that I visited are not complete. May we know who is supervising this work that is not completed?

3.09
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. On page two, the Minister is talking about having secured US$76 million from African Development Bank (ADB), but they have only earmarked US$10 million. It is envisaged that US$10 million will be used in this financial year, and yet the US$76 million is for three years. At this rate dictated by the ceilings in the Ministry of Finance, I bet that we shall not even be able to utilize the US$76 million.  

Mr Speaker, Kumi town had been promised water connections from Agu through Ngora to Nyero and to Kumi town. Up to now the people of Kumi are grappling with water scarcity, and yet we were told JICA Project actually had secured money but the Ministry of Finance again has blocked it for the same argument of the ceilings. I would like to know from the Minister what the actual position of the connection of water to Kumi town is. 

I also wish to inform her that in our recent tour as a Committee on Agriculture, there is a farm called Nsanga Ranch in Nyabushozi with 7500 pipes, which were delivered in 1974 for connecting water from Lake Kacera, and they are just there. I do not know whether the ministry is aware and what plans are going on.  

Otherwise, honourable members, I would like to urge you that the cry of the Minister in as far as the strict budget ceilings given by the Ministry will not take us any far. I would like to beg the Leader of Government Business to prevail on the Ministry of Finance and see that something is done.  Otherwise, our people will remain to suffer. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.11
MR HILLARY ONEK (Lamwo County, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have one or two questions for the Minister. Now that dam constructions have been moved from Ministry of Agriculture to the Ministry of Water, I wish to advise the ministry to use professional dam builders, not to enforce people like Basangira, pay them a hell of money for dams that have no water in them.

Two; priorities in water supply should be given to where the need is more urgent. This morning, for example, there is an LRA report here that nine LRA rebels were killed in Lokung. Lokung is the same place in Ngomoromo where eight women’s lips were cut and then one woman was killed, a child was cut to pieces by the LRA, simply because they went to look for water at River Nyimur, which is about two miles away from the camp. Up to today the ministry has done nothing to drill a borehole at least for these IDP people at Lokung. 

I wish to tell the ministry to be humane enough to care for these fellows who really need water more urgently in their confinement in the camps. I would like an answer for that, and I will take the message home, whether you are going to give us water or not, then our people will know what your ministry thinks of them.  Thank you.

3.14
MRS JUSTINE LUMUMBA (Woman Representative, Bugiri):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There are people having small complaints near me here, but I want them to know that I am a teacher, who is even trained to catch the Speaker’s eye. (Laughter)  Mr Speaker, the supplementary question is –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: There is no problem.  (Laughter)

MRS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, the supplementary question is; when they tell us about Luwero Triangle, they have now told us about the cattle corridor, Kasese is left out. Actually when you look at this country, Kasese is a more drought-prone area than any other part in this country. So, honourable minister, where do you place Kasese in your programme?

MRS ALISEMERA BABIHA: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. I just wanted to give her information that when they talk of cattle corridor, Bundibugyo is one of them because Ntoroko, Rwebisengo is where the livestock, which feed that area come from.  Now, where is it? So my colleague, I want to inform you that also that area is very dry, they lack water; sometimes cattle die during the drought.  Thank you.

MR MBALIBULHA: Information, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not think there is need for information because these are supplementary questions directed to the Minister.

MRS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, I think my colleagues are coming up to give me information simply because they have seen they have been left out in the Minister’s response. I think instead of informing me, you better inform the Minister so that the she includes you in the ministry programme.  

Mr Speaker, I want to inform the Minister that since 1996 the President has been promising the people of Bugiri, Bukooli South, water from Lake Victoria on the Siyabona hill in Banda Sub-county.  He pledged it in 1996 and in 2001, but nothing has been done up to today. And that is an area, which is next to the Lake. They hardly receive rainfall and they cannot even drill boreholes. Honourable minister, can I know when you are catering for the people of Bukooli South since the President has always promised, because we do not want the same promise in 2006, we want different things. Thank you.

3.17
MR SULAIMAN MADADA (Bbale County, Kayunga): Mr Speaker, I wanted to be informed about the fate of the people of Bbale, particularly the area of Galilaya and Bbale sub-county. These are part of the cattle corridor, and for long now, we have been promised water in that place and there is nothing at all. The situation there is so appalling that there is a fight between the people and the animals for the same water source. There is lack of water for the human beings, but also water for the animals; and as already mentioned, that place is surrounded by waters; Lake Kyoga on the other side, River Nile and also Sezibwa. But it is quite appalling that when you look at the Minister’s response on the second last page, nothing has been mentioned about Bbale in regard to water for cattle.

3.18
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. One of the many reasons why I voted against the referendum resolution yesterday is because my people do not have clean water to drink.  (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, it is out of order to re-open a debate of a matter that is closed.

MR ARUMADRI: I had thought that part of this referendum money would be used to give clean water to my people to drink. But be that as it may, Mr Speaker, you may remember that my maiden speech in this House talked about water for my people. We walk many miles looking for water, and we happen not to be very far from River Nile and River Ora.  Is the Minister going to include us in this planning strategy for pulling water from big water sources nearer to the people and to cattle? Thank you.

3.20
MR STEVEN BAMWANGA (Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have just seen the Minister’s statement –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: It is out of order but – okay continue.

3.20
MR STEVEN BAMWANGA (Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like to thank the Minister for her statement.  But when I looked at the areas that have been covered by the valley tanks and the valley dams, it would appear as if the Ministry’s policy is to provide water in the low lying areas especially in the cattle corridors and for some areas where they are using it for consumption.  

My question, Mr Speaker, is that while we have got special areas which are alpine, the mountain areas of Uganda. Since I came to this Parliament I have never heard of any programme for the water supply for mountain areas of Kisoro, Kabale, Mbale and Kapchorwa.  When we had a problem in Kasese in the Rwenzori Mountains with insecurity, hon. Amama Mbabazi then formed an alpine brigade to fight insecurity.  

So, does the Minister have a special programme for the water consumption and for production in those mountain areas of Mbale, Kigezi, Kisoro and Bundibugyo? It appears, Mr Speaker, people walk six miles to go and pick water from the low-lying valleys in those respective places.  I thank you.

3.21
MR FRED OMACH (Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like some clarification from the Minister responsible for water.  On page 1 of her report, she mentions that there will be bulk water transfer from large water bodies, and the Nile is one of the rivers or the big bodies that she has mentioned.  

Mr Speaker, the Minister knows very well that the Jonam people, tribe number 38 in the Constitution, derive their name ‘Nam’ from the Nile.  Now, there are four zones that this bulk water transfer is supposed to be taken, and Jonam is not one of them.  Can she explain why she wants to be so religious, to quote the Bible, that those who have will be given more and those who do not have even the little will be taken away. It is like she is trying to take away the Nile from the Nam people?

The second clarification that I am seeking from the Minister is contained on page four of her report, where she is saying that this financial year 100 valley tanks have been designed for implementation, and again Jonam does not feature there. We have animals and we need those valley tanks.  Can the Minister explain also?

Finally, I would also like to thank her, Mr Speaker, she was in my constituency and saw the boreholes. Most of the boreholes there have become boring holes because they are no longer functional.  Can she explain whether we are going to have more and those, which have become boring again be reverted to boreholes?  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.23
MR BENEDICT ETONU (Amuria County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the chance.  While I thank the honourable Minister for Water for enabling our Katakwi District to get piped water, I would like to ask her also to honour the promise she gave to the people of Amuria when we were inaugurating that water in Katakwi. She promised to move to Amuria to enable people there to get piped water.  

The fear was that because of Kony’s presence in Amuria, the engineers were unwilling to move to Amuria immediately from Katakwi.  But I would like to inform her that Kony is long gone from Amuria and the place is very peaceful.  Can she tell me when the engineers will now arrive to put the engines on the already drilled boreholes around Amuria?  Thank you very much.

3.24
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA(Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Mine is on page 2, where the Minister is telling us that she is expected or she has secured about US$10 million and she is seeking for Parliament’s support for the Minister to maybe raise that ceiling.  

I would like to ask the Minister what support do you want from Parliament?  Is it the Ministry of Finance who is denying you the funds? At this point, Mr Speaker, I would like to urge the Leader of Government Business that economists in Ministry of Finance should stop theorizing in as far as water is concerned. I find the problem now, the Minister has the money, but the Minister of Finance is saying she must use little money.  

Mr Speaker, as I speak now, I am from a very marginalized district where we have the lowest served with water at 26 per cent, whereas the national level is around 56 or 60 per cent.  So, the Ministry of Finance is saying you should have US$10 million instead of US$176 million.  

So, I would like to urge the Ministry of Finance to stop theorizing, let us have realities in as far as water is concerned. We should look at priorities rather than saying for sake of the macroeconomic instability.

Two, I would also like to seek clarification from the Minister, are you going to apply the windmills because some of us are from lake areas where there is plenty of water in the lake, and maybe some power using windmills is concerned - you can have harvested water distributed because boreholes do not actually yield in these lake basins.  Thank you.

3.27
DR KAPKWOMU KAPKOMU (Kongasis County, Kapchorwa): I thank you, Mr Speaker.  If I can supplement on what hon. Bamwanga had said about the mountainous areas. These are water catchment areas, which supply water to the plains, but they are certain areas which are never served at all with any harvesting of water.  I do not know what plans the Minister has for such areas.

On page 1, you told us of four water zones, where zone three is Elgon-Karamoja region and Karamoja zone. I hope Government has changed its mind that Karamoja has been served by a graft water scheme from Mount Elgon instead of fetching it from Lake Kyoga as it had been said earlier on.  By so doing this, Mount Elgon is permanently and constantly flowing, and this may be good for the human beings and for the Karimajong animals, which are always a scapegoat when they come to raid that they are looking for water.

On page 4, you tell us that the valley tanks –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, that is why I insist that if it is question time, let it be question time.

DR KAPKWOMU: On valley tanks, it is the Ministry of Agriculture which allocates.  Is it possible to have these valley tanks constructed by the Ministry of Agriculture as they used to do the other time when they had a heavy machinery department because there is a lot of shoddy work going on?  What plans do you have about irrigation?

3.28
MR FRED KIDEGA (Youth, Northern Region): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.  Mr Speaker, most people who have been speaking have been speaking about the cattle corridor. I am going to speak about the gun corridor or the illegal gun corridor.  

I would like to thank the Minister so much, in Gulu district the water coverage is about 56 per cent, and this coverage is mainly centred in the internally displaced people’s camps. Currently there is a policy of decongesting the camps, and that therefore means that the people are going to be spread out of the camps and therefore the water sources are going to be left in the camps.  

Can the Minister tell us whether she is planning together with the de-congestion programme to make sure that water is reached to the other places where currently people are not living?

Secondly, the long-term programme to make sure when our people go back home they will find safe water.  Thank you so much.

3.29
MR AHMED AWONGO (Koboko county, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  In 1974 Government took about 1,000 pipes for establishing water in Koboko town council.  In 1979, all these 1,000 pipes were looted and transferred to Kampala by people who do not wish well the people of Koboko.

Mr Speaker, in 2003, a group of surveyors from Ministry of Water and Lands was sent to Koboko to do some survey. As I speak now the people of Koboko would like to know as to how far Government has gone with the plans of establishing water, especially in Koboko town council and other rural areas.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, I suggest that we end here because we have to go for the other ceremony.  We will come back for an hour for the Minister to respond to the supplementary questions.

(The proceedings were suspended at 3.3 1_)

(On resumption at 3.39_)

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, as you have witnessed the ceremony that we have just performed, it has indicated that we have some people who are able to participate in this sport. The Prime Minister ran and I did, and I will be doing this maybe on a regular basis. 

Honorable members, in the distinguished visitors gallery is the North Western Province Legislative Standing Committee on the Status of Women and the Quality of Life from the Republic of South Africa.  Please join me in welcoming them to the Parliament of Uganda. (Applause) You are most welcome and we wish you a good stay in Uganda.

So now, I do not know what to do, because those who asked the questions the ministers are not here. Does it mean suspending the proceedings for five minutes?  So, we suspend the proceedings for five minutes to enable others who have been participating in this event to come back so that we can resume where we stopped.  

(The Proceedings were suspended at 3.51)

(On resumption at 3.57_)

THE SPEAKER: I hope I covered those who wanted supplementary questions. Now the Minister can –(Interruption)

3.58
MR MUTITI NYENDWOHA (Buliisa county, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  When I read through here, I do not see where Buliisa is covered. Buliisa is a terrible place; we do not have water completely.  There is not any river in that rift valley, and I thought the Minister some time had promised that we should be catered for this financial year.  But when I read through, Buliisa is not catered for.  May I know what plans the Minister has for Buliisa County?  Thank you.

3.58
CAPT. (RTD) MULINDWA BIRIMUMAASO (Bukoto County West, Masaka): Thank you Mr Speaker.  Mr Speaker, though Bukoto West administratively is found in Masaka, geographically it falls in the dry corridor of Masaka, Mbalala; actually it falls more of the other side.  But water plans to address such areas always leave out Bukoto West.  Can I know from the honorable Minister whether in her planning Bukoto West is considered? It is the drought-hit area in the whole of Uganda.  So, I want to find out from the Minister whether Bukoto West is also covered?

3.59
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Mine are straightforward questions.  I would like to know why the ministry concentrates more on boreholes even in some areas, which have got small and medium streams, which can be tapped and extended to the people. They know very well these boreholes last for a short time and gravity flow schemes last longer.  

An example, in the study which we carried out in Buhweju, Ibanda ridge, 17 rivers, can supply water up to Nyabushozi and it can produce electricity. The ministry was informed because I gave them this report.  But still you can see that they are concentrating more on dams and what have you when this water can be done cheaply and extended there.

Two, is the Minister aware that even people who are endowed with clean water do not drink that water?  An example, in my constituency I have got a sub-county called Kicuzi infested with river blindness, that is Onko.  Onko survives on fast running water, but if you tap water at the source and you supply it to the lower lands, people can drink safe water.  Instead the Government decided to put them on a monthly doze of tablets, as if they are infested with HIV.

Last question, I have a water scheme which was started 20 years ago in one of my Sub-counties, Kicence. This water scheme was supplying water at Kazo, which is a cattle corridor in a place called Kanoni.  We have requested for Ugshs 120 million only to tap one at the sources to put it in the huge tank so that this water can be even extended beyond Kanoni, but for the last five years nothing has come out.  Why, Madam Minister?

4.02
MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I appreciate there were eight dams in Masindi this financial year, but is the Minister in charge of water aware that there was a fault in the design of these dams, and as late as March only three had water the others were dry; and only two had water pumps, yet these dams were supposed to supply water for animals and for human beings?  

Two, is the Minister aware that there are some areas in Masindi District, which are part of the dry corridor, including Ntooma Parish in Bwijanga sub-county, which are so dry and they have no water at all for animal and for human consumption.  

I was there last week and they gave me water the colour of that table and they said, “Honourable member, this is the water we are using for cooking, drinking and everything.” They did ask me to lobby you that you construct for them either a dam, which would serve animals and human beings if they have pumps, or you give them boreholes.  

Are you aware, because if you look at the allocation – may I be informed why Masindi is conspicuously absent for this financial year yet we were promised that the other areas would be catered for in the next financial year?  Thank you very much.

4.04
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (Mityana County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I have two or three supplementary questions to the Minister.  Is the Minister aware that about 90 to 95 per cent of the boreholes, the shallow wells, which were being dug by the districts, are not operational?  A lot of money is being spent on this, about Ugshs three million each, but 90 to 95 of them are not working.  

Two, 80 per cent of the boreholes in Mityana are not working.  What is the Government strategy to change this?  We spend over Ugshs 15 to 20 million to have a borehole in place, but 80 per cent of them are not working.  

Mr Speaker, is the Minister aware of a system the President normally talks about, mostly in areas where we do not have large water bodies, that we shall be having waters from small valleys being pumped to the areas of residence for the people?  What about that programme, what is coming because we normally hear the President talking about it, but there is nothing - it has never taken place.  

So, I would urge that if such a programme is coming, Mityana north be used as a pilot project.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.06
DR PATRICK APUUN (Bokora County, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I have some specific questions to ask the Minister.  Karamoja was one time number eight of the 10-point programme in the NRM Government. One of the priority programmes, which were to be undertaken, was water, that is dams in Karamoja.  I would like to inquire from the Minister whether that programme has succeeded or there are some other issues in place. 

At the moment, Mr Speaker, there are no dams in Karamoja.  Some people who were contracted for dams in Karamoja just siphoned all the money back to Kampala.  One of them was by the names, Zzimwe, who we blacklisted here, and now I understand he has a problem with Kenya. I do not know what happened in Kenya.  May we know as people of Karamoja whether this Government has failed to provide water for livestock in Karamoja?  

4.07
MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (Buhweju County, Bushenyi): I thank you, Mr Speaker.  Mine may differ from what is being presented.  I am wondering whether the Minister is aware that among the resources this country has is fresh water and that, that fresh water can be commercialised to fetch this country a lot of money.  

I have been given to understand that globally only two per cent of the water used is fresh water, which we are endowed with, particularly in a county like Buhweju. You will never see me crying about water, but that is a very vital resource.  

Recently when I was in United States of America, I noted in Washington State at the Pacific Ocean they have water which they import all the way from France, and they value is so much because it is fresh water and a litre costs US$5.  

Now my submission is, are you aware that we have such a vital resource that can be commercialised to earn this country, to be marketed in form of fresh water, which fresh water - because I know Mainland Europe they lack mainly fresh water - is such a vital resource that can fetch this money.  Are you aware of that?

4.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER (Mrs Mutagamba Mary): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Honourable members, I want to thank you for the interest you have shown in the water sector. It is really befitting because water is life. 

 So, I want to start with a number of questions, they are quite many, but let me try.  The mover of the question is not here, but he had wanted to know whether we can allow the districts to use the funds available to construct valley tanks.  

Indeed we do because we give the planning of water in the district to the district authorities, and as such they know exactly what is best for them.  They just have to come to us with their plan, if they cannot use boreholes then they divert that money either to valley tanks or rainwater harvesting or whatever is suitable.  

So, I want to assure the honourable member that the district only has to notify the centre that we want to use the conditional grant to do this type of technology.

There was also a question from hon. Nabwiso, who is also not here, why not consult the communities in the first place before you hit a snag?  

Like I told you, this is not because we did not consult the communities, but you know we notify that we will be going to the district, to the local authorities, and they are the people who prepare which people for us to meet. So when we go there and meet councillors and we talk to them, we are not sure who is going to be implementing. In fact in turn they should be able to sensitise the communities where we are going.  But unfortunately that has not translated. 

So we are now going back to make sure that wherever we have put an asset of water facility, we go and talk to the communities there and teach them exactly what we need out of them, and show them how to replace parts, where to get the spare parts and all of that.  So, I think that one is a process of transition.  

Then you also put a question, why a few districts and not the others in terms of allocation of valley tanks. Definitely we cannot do all of them at the same time considering the constraints of finance and even other matters, sensitisation, awareness and all that.  But to be frank, our ministry does not do this allocation. The Ministry of Agriculture does the allocation because we work together. We are stakeholders in this one, so they indicate where we are going to work and then we do the verification with the local authorities.

MRS MUGYENYI: Thank you for giving way, honourable minister. Mr Speaker, the allocation of water by the Ministry of Agriculture is guided by the principle of scarcity. Where water is most scarce and where the numbers of livestock are high, we take that as the priority. We look at the numbers of livestock vis-à-vis the availability of water and we take that area as a priority area. Of course, all the areas that we submit to the Ministry in charge of Water are not done at the same time. So, indeed the question of scarcity of resources comes in, in that we submit a list of areas that need water, but they are not all covered at the same time. I thank you, honourable minister.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you very much, honourable minister. We move on the next question. This came from Dr Nkuuhe, about pipes rusting in different areas of the country. I want to state that I have, in my travels across the country, come across these pipes and other assets that seem to be abandoned.  

Last week I had a meeting of the sector working group, which comprises of all stakeholders in the ministry, and we discussed this as one of the issues, and we have directed our engineers to go and take stock of all the pipes and see whether they are still usable. Some of them may have rusted and are no longer usable, but we shall try as much as possible to use those that can be put to use. I am aware of this one, and I have taken step towards that.

You also put a question, how come the new valley dams do not work? That is a problem I think the honourable member again pointed out. We have had problems both in construction and technology, and worse still the environmental degradation. Those old dams were sited when land was still prime and they were choosing the prime areas; now we are going into the marginal areas. So, you find that it would require a lot more capital input and new technology to be able to access that. 

Unfortunately, our tendering process requires the least cost because you are trying to spread as much as possible within the little budget that we have. However, I think we have learnt that we have got to do more, and a new technology is being introduced to us, which we have passed on to our consultants, of carpeting the dams that we construct. We are asking the consultant to advise us, but of course that will increase the cost of a dam that we may put in place.

The question of iron being removed from water; yes, it is a hindrance to us especially in Kooki where I come from, but we have tried. In fact, in Kooki we are trying in two villages to remove iron; so far one borehole has succeeded, another one we are still trying. We have also tried in Rukungiri in a village called Ishaka, and also we are trying in Hoima. We are trying within our limit. If we had better means, I think we would be spreading out much faster.

The filtration process of dirty water, that is something that all of us have got to embrace; it is not only the engineers or the ministry, but all of us can do it. I think that is where applied training is required, even ourselves, in your own homes, in your home village, you can actually teach people how to do this one. Although we are doing it at the various dams we are constructing, but honourable members can equally embrace this one.

The honourable member from Pallisa was talking about boreholes that were initiated but never completed, or not even constructed in RUWASA. Yes, I am aware of this, I even have the list and the amount of money that was contributed towards this by the communities and because the RUWASA programme concluded, we have told the districts concerned, it is not only Pallisa, to incorporate these boreholes within the programmes of the districts so that when we give conditional grants, these boreholes should be constructed. But of course depending on the conditional grants released, most times you find the district has about 10 or 15 boreholes, whereas in Pallisa alone I think there were about 80 boreholes that had to be constructed. So, it requires the phasing out.

Then hon. Basaliza talked about community mobilization, he also talked about dirty water. Of course it requires community mobilization, and at the district level in our district water offices we have got community mobilisers. But, unfortunately, in the coming local government process, they seem to be left out, so we shall have to negotiate further to make sure that these people stay and teach people how to purify the water. 

On top of that, we have also introduced new technology where we are using circuit boiling water and all that.  We are actually introducing another technology through the university of using sunrays to purify water; that is in its infancy but we are trying our level best.

Honourable member from Isingiro talked about the dams in Mbarara and he wanted to know - unfortunately he is not here. I have them by list here and I think I will pass it on to them if you do not mind because I would have to read this whole list here. 

Who is supervising them? A consultancy company called Saba Engineering is the one supervising the construction of dams in Rakai, Mbarara all the eight dams that I have mentioned here. We also have another consultant, that is, KAGA and Company. There were two firms that contracted that one. But the ones in Mbarara are supervised by Saba Engineering.

Hon. Kazoora talked about the old dams - he did not talk, but he sent me a note asking what we are doing about the old dams. I have inspected most of the old dams in this country, some of them are repairable and others are beyond repair. They have been silted too much that if we endeavour to re-do them, we would as well construct new ones. But we are trying to work with the districts in those areas that we have been able to identify, to see whether we can de-silt them.

Then the honourable member from Kumi talked about JICA financing. JICA is Japanese support; that is the Japanese Government supporting us especially in rural water supply and in a number of small towns. I think seven have been identified to be funded under the JICA programme, but we are still to negotiate and make sure that they enter the budget framework.  

Then, about the pipes at Sanga, it is the same case like those in Mukanga; we are studying them to see whether they can still work.

Hon. Onek talked about the co-professional contractors. Indeed, we have had problems because we find ourselves advertising openly, and each time we have to source a contractor we have got to go back and advertise. And the process is that we should quote cheap and in the process you find that we do not have consistency; today we recruit one person, next time we recruit another one so people do not gain experience. So, we are actually looking at the policy of contracting. Can we identify a few professional companies so that we rotate with them other than each time going back to contract and then get new people who are trying their luck on this?

Then you talked about IDPs. Yes, I have a full report about IDPs and I think I came here sometime and talked about IDPs. But I have a report here, Mr Speaker, which I can pass on to Members showing our achievement in 2004 and 2005, and the planned activities for 2005 and 2006, and what we think we are going to incur. So far an amount of about Ugshs4.0 billion has been put in the budget for the next financial year to respond to this cause and of course each time a new IDP comes in the pressure mounts, but we are trying our best. I will pass on this to the Members.  

Is Bugiri in the cattle corridor? Bugiri, unfortunately, is not in the cattle corridor. The cattle corridor has about 21 districts, and they are defined between us and the Ministry of Agriculture. Unfortunately Bugiri does not seem to appear there, but I have a special programme for Bugiri, this is under the United Nations Habitat.  So, we have a special programme for them because the United Nations Habitat has taken on all the neighbouring towns and rural areas around Lake Victoria and Bugiri fits into that one. 

At the moment they have made an offer of US$13.6 million to respond to that one. Because it cannot fit into the budget, we are thinking of negotiating with the districts to receive the money directly because the money is there, they are willing to work with us.  They are actually coming in to establish an office and the designs, but we cannot fit in this money.  So, we are going to negotiate with the districts to see whether they can take this money outside the budget. 

Then Bundibugyo-Kasese; Bundibugyo definitely is not in the cattle corridor but part of Kasese is. So, Kasese will definitely be coming in. But people were asking, why the few that we have chosen?  Definitely we are moving on. 

The Honourable member from Ibanda talked about the boreholes with short life, and then the sub-county clean water. Yes, boreholes have a short life, and as we have heard from hon. Kiwanda, a good number of them I must say, especially shallow wells, have dried up during the dry spell and we are reviewing that one. 

For about two years now we have been identifying those boreholes that have got insufficient yield so that we can power them and pump instead of puncturing here and there for the small shallow wells. That is still under policy consideration and our water policy is still looking at it. When it comes out, I will definitely come back here for your approval.  

Kanoni required Ugshs120 million to do some work, yes, but I can only ask the people of that area to make sure the local authority make it a priority.  Once it comes as a priority, and if the local authority cannot handle it, then we pick it. But if they do not make it a priority, definitely it becomes difficult for us to budget for it. 

Hon. Kabakumba of Masindi said only three boreholes are working, whether I am aware of the crisis in the sub-county and all that. Yes, I have traversed this country, I have seen how women suffer, at times I come back with a big heart and my engineers suffer with me because I always put pressure but they all come back to me,  “Madam, we do not have money.” I hope with the money available - in fact, that is why we had to go out of our way to do resource mobilisation because we cannot sit there and wait and say there is no money. We have mobilised the funds, we hope they will be utilised. 

The honourable member from Bokora talked about the failed dams. Yes, I have said that one we are now looking at the carpeting process. 

The windmills: I am sorry, we have put windmills in Karamoja, but people in Karamoja I think are not amused by the windmills. So, a good number of them have been brought down for ornamental purposes –(Laughter)- but we are going back, we have not given up. So, we shall go back and reinstate these windmills, and we are now trying because –(Interruption)

MR AACHILLA: Mr Speaker, I really do not like to disagree with my sister because in the field I have been moving with her and we have visited some of these areas. But the fact, which we saw and she witnessed, is that the kind of windmills, which were put there most of them were sub-standard.  They were really sub standard and the winds that we have in Karamoja are very strong. So, if some of these things fell down –(Laughter)- and the people really misunderstood and misused them, it is not that the Karimojong are not interested in these things, but there has been a problem that these machines are very weak, and the contractors are not helping. I thank you.

MRS MUGYENYI: Mr Speaker, we have been on a tour of Karamoja where we have visited valley dams and windmills, and I would like to bear witness to what the minister has said that the people of Karamoja have not yet appreciated the use of windmills.  They were very expensive windmills _[Mr Aachilla: “Point of Order”]- and it is not a matter of blaming, all I am saying –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, as far as I see, this will be a question of an opinion. So, I will not rule her out of order because she thinks that way. Let her say what she wants to say, please.  You see, when somebody is expressing an opinion that you do not agree with, that does not justify you to say she is out of order. 

MRS MUGYENYI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What I wanted to say is that we need to sensitise the people of Karamoja or the people of Uganda before we put these very expensive equipment. What I object to is what the honourable member said that these windmills were sub-standard. These windmills were imported from Australia, done by a worldwide known company that manufactures windmills, the Thousand Cross; they are of very good standard. But because people had not used windmills before, many of them actually were dismantled into making jewellery and doing spears and things like that. 

And it is not the fault of the people! What we need to do, as leaders both in government and in Parliament, is to sensitise the people of Uganda towards the use of certain technologies that get introduced in these areas. But the windmills are very good. I thank you.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you very much for emphasis.  Now, talking about the area of Karamoja, I know there is hon. Abura Pirir just itching to hear me say something. Mr Speaker, I know there are a number of dams that have failed us, we have Kayilongo, which fell in 2001 after heavy downpour and yet it had a guarantee of 50 years. But of course, that was the problem of the consultant and the contractor. It happened to have been a Turnkey project, but we have managed to recover the money from them and now we are tendering again. But we are also looking at different options, whether we should go back to the same site or not. 

We also have dams in Matheniko where hon. Abura Pirir comes from. These were totally washed away because of bad designs; not really for construction but I think the designs were bad, and we have managed to recover the money. Now we have decided that in the short-run, we power with windmills two boreholes where those valley tanks were so that the people and animals can access water, and then we have designed a big valley tank, which will cater for the people of Matheniko. 

Mr Speaker, hon. Abura Pirir is aware of that and I have gone further even to ask for a supplementary just to cover Matheniko because there it is a special case.

Before I come to the last question from hon. - I had other questions here, which I had skipped. I think hon. Madada asked about Galiraya. Galiraya is a cattle corridor and I know I have received directives to handle this. So, this is one of the areas that have a special concern; the good thing it has got a source of water. So, that is one area that has got to be looked into, and it is good my engineers are also here so it is something that they should look at. We have been there quite a number of times.

Now, honourable member from Madi-Okolo; I have been to Madi-Okolo. I visited the area, I visited the camps, this is a dry area but has got a potential for irrigation and agriculture. So, we are actually working on that. One thing, it will be covered within the cattle corridor because of its unique specialty, and also it is being covered under the IDPs because there are a number of IDPs that have been established there. So, honourable member for Madi-Okolo take heart, we are with you, we are thinking about that.

Hon. Bamwanga, you talked about the mountain areas.  Kabale as a town, we have taken care of, we have actually put there a big project under National Water and Sewerage Corporation, which has got a potential for expansion. The rest is to look for money to expand. We are pumping from Lake Bunyonyi and from there, because it is at a high mountain, we can traverse the mountain area.  

As for Mbale, I have one specific area which is really disturbing me, that is Manjiya. Manjiya is a total sub-county without water and I have been there, I have climbed the mountain, I have assured the people of Manjiya and we are looking for money and my team is under pressure. We have already designed to make sure that we do something for Manjiya, and with Manjiya we should be able to provide all other areas surrounding because Manjiya is higher up in the mountain. So, if we get water there, then we should be able to supply around.

Bundibugyo and Kasese: I got the directive and our team is actually looking at how to improve water in Bundibugyo. They have water but it is a matter of putting pipes. The question is, when do we put the pipes in the budget?  

Kapchorwa, we have a project, which is almost ready but has been in that same state for quite sometime because of disagreement within the district. But now I think we are moving towards solving the problem. We have sent our team there, and my senior minister was there last week on Monday, so I think Kapchorwa will soon have its problem solved. 

Hon. Omach, Jonam not included in the Nile zone. Jonam is near the river, definitely you should be able to utilize the river and I would request you to ask the local authorities to prioritise that way. The boreholes are there but they are not very useful. And as for the cattle corridor, we shall describe it with my sister, the Minister for Animal Husbandry.

Hon. Etonu Ben, Amuria is already designed. We already have the designs, we were to implement it last year but we could not because of the disturbances there. So, we only need the assurances that the place has settled and we shall move in, and I believe next financial year covers Amuria.

Then the honourable member from Bunya was supporting me on the request for an expanded budget. Of course, being in government I understand the need to keep the macroeconomics of this country, but at the same time I also want to feel that I can solve the water problem as soon as possible, if only I could. So, let us see how to balance with the Ministry of Finance, we shall look at it but of course I have done my part.

Then somebody from Gulu, should we provide water where the IDPs are not? Yes, we are doing that under the conditional grants. We have the IDPs as a special programme, but the districts continue to receive the conditional grants, and that is what they should use to plan for the outskirts of the IDPs and the villages.

Yes, I have been to Koboko, I saw the project, it was a wonderful project but it was vandalized so we have gone back to designing it. The designs in fact are complete; we are now trying to see whether it will fit within the next budget if not the next budget but one. But at least the designs are there.

Buliisa: Buliisa was in my office this morning and I promised him a reply. We have done designing in Buliisa, we have drilled the productive wells, but we had not tendered out because we did not have funds. But now Buliisa has entered the main stream of budgeting, so we hope the next financial year will take care of Buliisa.

Finally, Mr Speaker, Buhweju. The honourable member asked me whether I understand that two per cent of water globally is fresh water and that we can make money out of it. Yes, this is at the heart of every trans-boundary water and between ourselves here as riparians, I must confess that right now negotiations are going on at Entebbe between the ten riparian countries to see how to utilize the fresh waters at Lake Victoria. (Interruption).

MR ARAALI: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I asked a question and I have been listening attentively, and I have not got the answer. I asked a question about water for the urban poor, which is expensive. The standpipes are not usable; people are not using that water because it is expensive. Now, do you have a policy of fixing water rates because some charge Ugshs50, others charge Ugshs100. When will you make water free for the urban poor? Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: But you see, she was going to explain the question of water for sale. Now when you intervened, then she just came to you, having left the others. I rather think you allow the minister to make her response, if there is something left out then that is when you can come in. But I see now a problem on answering the member for Buhweju.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In some urban areas people had springs in suburbs; it is the equivalent of the place like Wandegeya in Mbale. They were using springs and then piped water came in, they abandoned their springs. But now they have found out they cannot afford to buy water and they have gone back to the springs, which are now dilapidated. How are you going to deal with that problem? I know you know areas where that has happened. Thank you very much.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you very much. I was talking about trans-boundary. So, we have negotiating teams and we think we should be able to use water and I must say that under that arrangement, there are requests of people, countries in Africa, who want to use the water from here. But that is something that has not come, we have not received mandate yet to discuss it, but maybe in future as the water becomes more and more scarce, that will be tabled at the appropriate level. But right now we are negotiating between ourselves how to utilize the fresh water that runs between us.

Now, about urban water and the tariffs, of course tariffs in those towns where National Water and Sewerage Corporation works are controlled by National Water and Sewerage Corporation and most times especially say, in Kampala, Masindi where National Water and Sewerage Corporation operates, we provide water at the standpipes at Ugshs 12 per jerrican, and we give the operator a leeway to sell the water between Shs15 and Shs20. That is our regulation. So, that is the profit we leave for the standpipe operator; anything beyond that is unlawful.

Now, for other areas where we do not have National Water and Sewerage Corporation, we have a problem of cost recovery from the project that has funded this, and as such we try as much as possible to sensitise the communities. But however, it has come so unbearable because it means in some areas people have reverted to where they were getting water.  So, my senior minister has already given a directive to the directorate to study this phenomenon, and I understand a consultant has already been hired to come up with the recommendation on this one. We shall brief you on what comes out. 

So, Mr Speaker, I think I have tried as much as possible to answer the questions that came out and I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, and for exhibiting your knowledge of several parts of the country.  

4.41
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for having made an excellent statement and answered questions very well. Those who were doubting the capacity of our government to make clear plans for dealing with the water question must now know that we have clear plans. I thank you.  

May I also make two other points? I think we must also acquire the culture of harvesting water. One day, I visited a friend of mine and he was well off, it rained and after it had ceased raining the children went to fetch water. So, I taught him the simple system of harvesting water. So, it is important to acquire the culture of harvesting water or even the technology, but we need also to use water frugally. One day, a careless person left a tap running and other people just shrugged their shoulders saying, “This is not my business to turn the tap off.” So, all these attitudes have a cumulative effect of disenabling us to have adequate water.

May I finally say that many times I have been here, the Ministry of Finance is blamed. This is wrong because the Ministry of Finance makes a policy, implements a policy, which is agreed on by Government. So, it is important to blame the government not the Ministry of Finance, it is not fair and it is wrong! And if there is any colleague who blames Ministry of Finance for not giving, say, that ministry enough money, that is wrong, because we have Cabinet meetings, we allocate the scarce resources. Whenever I meet my sessional committee I will obviously mention that the resources are not enough, but we agreed on the allocation of this money in Cabinet. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. This brings us to the end of our business and as I indicated to you, on Tuesday we shall start dealing with the Constitution (Amendment) Bill No.2. So, you go and read your papers so that we start straight away with the debate on that issue, and I wish you a good weekend. I thank you very much.

(The House rose at 4.41 p.m. and adjourned to Tuesday, 10 May 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)


