Wednesday, 3 May 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. at Parliamentary Buildings, Kampala


(The Vice Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair)


PRAYERS

(The Council was called to order.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE INTERIM ELECTORAL COMMISSION BILL, 1994 

(Debate Continued.)

MR WILLIAM WANENDEYA:  Mr Chairman, thank you for giving me an opportunity to contribute to this very important Bill.  It is this Bill that could determine whether or not our country could have peace and therefore, to get the leadership properly elected.  I support the Bill but with amendments which I would like to see in place.

Some other contributors have said that Section 4 should be amended.  I agree with them and I would want to wholly heartedly see that I support that amendment.  Not only that, I would like that amendment, if you want peace in this country, so that there are no accusations and counter accusations.  I would like political parties to nominate their people and after nominating their people, let our President nominate those who have been nominated by political parties.  

The point over here is that, so that there are counter accusations later on the Electoral Commission because if DP is not represented, they say, ‘look it is because DP was not represented.’  In the same spirit, you will find that when we pass the Constituent Assembly we invited the political parties to bring in their own people two of them to be in the Constituent Assembly.  It is in that light that I would personally like political parties to nominate those people so that there would be no counter accusations that those people would be involved in manipulations, and I want the Minister to seriously take this matter as a matter of national interest.

When it comes to Section 5, you find that they talk of people who are of high integrity with morals.  I witnessed in the last Constituent Assembly.  We all agreed that there would be no gifts.  But when we went actually in the field, you find that people were given presents and nobody, including those who are District Executive Officers as Returning Officers.  I personally reported what presents were being given, but nobody did anything.  So, instead of saying that this should be moral, but nobody did anything.  So, instead of saying that this should be moral, who are going to judge who?  Unless we are going to bring judgement to be on the Electoral Commission because if we take the Chief Judge of Uganda, the Arch-Bishop of Uganda and others like religious leaders maybe that is when we can have a good Electoral Commission if that is the case.  

The point over here is that we should have people who should be on the Electoral Commission.  When it comes to Section 17 of Law, I would like the Minister to note that if somebody comes from Mbale District, he should not be a Returning Officer in Mbale but rather in another place.  Not only that, but if somebody is an officer or Returning Officer in a given area, they should not know that the Returning Officer or rather some of the officers, they should know the day when the elections are going to be carried out.  The reason over here is that I have heard some people in my own electoral area during the last CA elections and these people have their own supporters and therefore, they were telling people -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  I would like to say that I support the hon. Member holding the Floor.  I would even go further and suggest that polling assistants should not be in their own areas because many times it proved that polling assistants were relatives for some candidates who manipulated the last ones in favour of their own brothers.  I would even support the idea that they should move to different areas.

MR WANENDEYA:  Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for his information given.  I had that in mind because in my own county, they had some of the people who stood with me, had their relatives as polling assistants or as presiding officers and these people were telling voters where to place their votes and therefore, the only way of rectifying this kind of thing is that, since we are neighbours with Kumi, they can be trained without the presiding officers.  They could be trained as presiding officers.  When it comes to handling complaints, and I do not see anything in this, the complaint should be handled expeditiously.  The reason is that some of the returning officers when matters were reported to them, they did practically nothing.  So, Government should be aware of this and in future they should make sure that complaints are handled expeditiously.  

When it comes to what I would call the idea of candidates talking on the same platform, I would rather see this part of section in the law.  So that everybody goes whatever party, whatever beliefs he is on the same platform.  This is the only way of preventing some of the lies.  You find that we say we are religious people in this country, but the amount of lies we tell is no wonder that our country has not quite got yet stable because we still tell lies even up to this day.  

Lastly, when it comes to these materials used in voting, those should be strictly guarded, because just towards the end of December, some boxes were found in my constituency.  Three of them were found and the case is with police and they have not done anything.  So, I want the Minister responsible to tell the Constituent Commission that this is wrong and we cannot say that we would have a good country if people are not properly elected, and some boxes go missing and nobody does anything.  I thank you, Mr Chairman and hope that the Minister will do something on that.

MR OBWANGOR:  Mr Chairman, I thank you for giving me this opportunity to be on the Floor.  The Electoral Law is very important.  Why?  Because it is the essence of enjoying political freedom.  Secondly, it gives the country a very important instrument of self government.  If the ‘NO’ is public ‘NO’, as indeed this House is in a process, to me, I see that this Bill will show the making of the representation of the People’s Law; which Public Law.  What we are doing or attempting to do, is merely to pledge the mechanism with which to elect our representatives in Parliament or Local Authority.  

Now, this to me, I know more and more and understand correctly the truth the substance of Parliamentary Law known as Chapter 131, the Laws of Uganda of 1964.  That Law should be used as an Electoral Law governing elections to Parliament.  The Bill before the House?  Are we running away?  Who is running away?  Why?  

When you read Clause 7(2) of the famous Legal Notice No.1 of 1986 as amended, particularly by Statute, we all have to know when this was drafted.  Mr Chairman, we all know the law.  So, therefore, correctly we ought to make representations of the People’s Law.  The qualifications for those who should be elected by voters to bring to this hon. House and it will be nationalistic, political freedom, self-government.  Now we are moving at the current process of making the national Uganda Constitution.  We are moving into a Government.  For what?  I am not satisfied at all.  The responsibility of this hon. House to make a good law for the Government of Uganda should be through a proper electoral law.  

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor, former Attorney General and Minister of Justice in the 1960s, that the point he is addressing a Comprehensive Electoral Law is a valid point.  He says, if he was the one, he would have brought that comprehensive law, it may be a matter of approach and choice.  My way of work is to have this Body which the law before us is dealing with setting up an Electoral Commission.  But I can promise to him and the House that sooner than later, this House will be asked to debate Electoral Law which will be addressing the setting as will have been agreed in the Constitution that we are drafting.  I thank you, Sir.  

MR OBWANGOR:  Mr Chairman, what I had in mind, I am the co-author of the Constitution proposed here.  When I was mentioning Chapter 6 and 8, I was definitely of the knowledge knowing what I was trying to consciously for the good of this country, Uganda.  But I now thank the Minister for what he has mentioned.  But I cannot trust.  You never know what might happen tomorrow.  So, I remain neutral; I do not side with the Bill.

MR LUBEGA WAGGWA SWAIBU (Butambala County, Mpigi):  Mr Chairman, I thank you.  I would like to start with a comment on Clause 4(b) and (d).  I wish to request the hon. Minister to look at those sub-Clauses because to me those two may lead to rigging.  I do not want a Clause or sub-Clause that will discredit this NRM Government.  When we include this sub-Clause (b), it says that, ‘it may include in the Register the names of any person who is not 18 years of age, but will be of voting age before the date appointed by the Minister under paragraph (a).’  I want to request the Minister to remove that because when we leave it like that, the people will say that we intend to rig the coming elections.  So, if we include it like that, the people who are against this Government may say that we intend to rig under this one.  Another one which also may lead to rigging is that sub-section (b) which says, ‘may transfer any registered voter from one Constituency to another or from one polling station to another.’  Here I request the Minister also to consider the removal of that Clause.  

Another point which I want to raise is about the Civic Education.  I agree with the Civic Education must be started as soon as possible.  But the Minister should note that we had in the previous CA elections some NGOs that wanted to come and carry out the Civic Education.  But some NGOs especially the local ones came with an intention of decampaigning some people because they were biased on the political grounds.  In some areas particularly in my own area, they came to campaign for a particular party and they were very open.  The records are there.  So, when the Minister is considering these NGOs, intending to carry out the Civic Education, they must be screened.  Otherwise, we are going to have a problem when time comes to campaigning.  Mr Chairman, -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. speaker that, not only NGOs who dis-campaigned the candidates.  The Cadres, DAs and the rest.  In my own case, the Gombolola where I come from, when I was coming to Parliament, the RC and Women Councils were not fit because they knew they liked me.  In the Gombolola where I was born, the RCs and Women Councils were not fit at all.  On some Gombololas, take Mujumba and Mugoye, the DA went there personally and he picked up some; he gave the names that so and so do not vote.  So, it was not only the NGOs.  The Government itself was also concerned.  Thank you.  

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, after the elections the Leader of NRM; the President of Uganda, also stood up and announced publically that NRM had won, which meant that NRM had a side and they were the people who were regarded as NRM candidates.  Thank you.

THE MINISTER (............):  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the House that even the Leaders, Chief Scouts in the whole of Uganda were going around wearing Scouts Uniform campaigning under the pretext of winning the elections. (Laughter)

MR LUBEGA WAGGWA:  Mr Chairman, I would like to thank those people who have given me the information and I would like to say that such elements should be screened when we go for the campaigns.  

I would like to raise another point and this is about the candidates’ agents.  During the CA campaigns or elections, we were asked to have agents but the agents were not recognised by the Returning Officers or Polling Assistants.  Now, under this Bill, they should be recognised and given somewhere to observe how the elections are taking place.  In some places they were not even allowed to go near the ballot boxes.  So, they were just left far from where they were supposed to be.  So, in this case, they should be allowed to monitor because they are representatives of the candidates.  

Another point is about the Registers.  Registers are being displayed at the Gombolola and some people are to move long distances.  This time, I would like to request the Minister, if we want to have free and fair elections, we should have the registers nearer to the people instead of having registers in the far away places.  So, in this case the registers should be displayed in good time and they should be put nearer to the people.  

Yesterday I was going to oppose this idea of voting by proxy, but I was persuaded by hon. Rwabiita.  But we must be very careful when we introduce this voting by proxy because it many lead to rigging.  Therefore, I would like to ask the Minister to explain further how he is going to be sure that this voting by proxy will not lead to rigging of the votes. When time comes for having the electoral law, the Presidential candidate, it seems only rich people can manage these campaigns and that may lead to losing good leaders to be voted for.

MR MARWAS:  Mr Chairman, the argument that was raised by the hon. Member from Butambala, that voting by proxy may create some regularities.  I am saying ‘no’ because even if we are going to vote by proxy, you must already be in the register.  

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member and the House, that since a lot of arguments have been arising since we started on the debate on this question of proxy and the rest of it, we have been considering the situation and appropriate measures have been taken.  We are introducing some cure at the Amendment Stage of the Bill.

MR LUBEGA WAGGWA:  I thank the Minister for having clarified that point.  Mr Chairman, lastly, I am going to talk about these Constituencies.  Considering the accommodation we have here, and the number according to this Bill, I am afraid that may be very, very difficult to accommodate all of us here.  I do not know whether the Minister is trying to have other arrangements where he can over 240 Members of Parliament.  You remember when we were here on Budget Day; some people who come late have nowhere to sit.  They are going to use the same House and transact our business.  Now, when we consider the number of constituencies we are going to have, I am really worried that we may have so many Members coming in the next Parliament we will have nowhere to be accommodated.  I request the Minister also to consider this and suggest other means of accommodation.  Thank you.

MR BESIGYE:  Mr Chairman, I thank you.  I have listened to Members concerns about the impropriety of the Bill and the basis of the Constitutional provisions and this prompted me to look closely at the Provisions.

I ought to say that I am fully satisfied myself that the Bill is properly based as far as the Provisions especially of Legal Notice No. 1 of 1986 as amended in 1987 in Section 7 to empower this House to make the laws for the good governance of this country.  I of course recognise the concern relating to earlier suspension of the Electoral Provisions of the 1957 Constitution.  But certainly that is not in itself an encumbrance from House to stop it debating and enacting laws related to the Constitution subsequently.  I think all learned Friends as they call themselves and all persons of common sense will agree with me.  We also ought to recognise that in the Provisions of the Draft Constitution, there is a clear Provision for the creation of an Interim Electoral Commission.  Even if we waited and the Constitution was promulgated, what would be enacted by this House in fulfillment of that Constitution initially is the Interim Electoral Commission, not the Electoral Commission that would be permanent as envisaged by hon. Obwangor.  Because people who will pass those laws will still be in this House which is an Interim House itself.  This ought to be appreciated that the only way a permanent Electoral Commission can be established, is after the elections when we have an elected Government according to that Constitution and that elected Government establishing the permanent Electoral Commission.  

Otherwise, for purposes of transition from the Interim NRM Administration as provided for by the Constitution, we have to be through the Interim Electoral Commission and that Interim Electoral Commission will have to be established by this House now or after the promulgation of the Constitution.  I think what hon. Minister for Constitutional Affairs is seeking to do is to buy time, to have the law in place and to have the action begin well ahead of the promulgation of the Constitution.  Otherwise, there is no other substantive change.  After the promulgation of the Constitution, we are the very same people that would have had to enact this particular Statute.  I think this ought to be made very clear.

Of course, I must hasten that there maybe, however, remote it is, there may be need depending on what is ultimately promulgated in the Constitution.  There may be need to make an amendment.  This must be very, very remote consideration indeed.  But that consideration may be there and that I can only view that as the only disadvantage of an earlier debate.  But certainly that counter paused numerous disadvantages as we all know can only be considered to be very, very minor and indeed remote as I said.  

I am very, very happy to debate the Provisions of this proposed Bill and hopefully the hon. Members will join me in improving it so that we enact the Statute that will give us a Commission that will start work now.

We should realise that politically Ugandans are very anxious to see a change to permanence. They do not like to have long transactions.  The tradition which started with the creation of the Electoral Commission - Constitutional Commission, then Constituent Assembly, then Transition provisions.  All these are for a very long time and I must say that the population is certainly getting very anxious.  We would like the work to be done so that there is a permanent Government properly mandated to do the business of this country.  Therefore, I think we will politically be doing ourselves no justice by delaying this with the pretext that we are for the promulgation of the Constitution.  

Having said that, let me make a few comments on the Bill itself.  First of all, I would like to echo the words of hon. Butagira on the question of enhancing by independence of this Commission.  This is a Commission which is going to be doing a lot of delegate work which needless to say will be taking decisions that may affect people who have political authority today or at the time they are taking those decisions.  Therefore, it is fundamentally important that this commission be given the maximum independence.  To that extent I go along definitely with what hon. Butagira proposed that the Commission should not be appointed by the President with the advice of the Cabinet.  Cabinet and the President are one at the same thing.  This is part of - the Executive of the country is the Presidency and all others.  So, we cannot say that this Commission shall be approved or appointed by the President or the Executive period.  So, I think we must say that the Commission - in order to make that kind of check and balance, we say that the Commission be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament. (Applause)  

I also recognise in Section 4(2) saying, ‘and thereafter this Statute shall apply to the new Commission with such modifications as may be necessary to give effect to the Constitution.’  I think this is not necessary at all.  In any case, how the Statute will apply after the promulgation of a new Constitution will only be dictated by the Constitution itself in the transition or provisions.  Therefore, I think this is not necessary and ought to be left out.   I would also be happier if the Commission or Secretary to the Commission who shall be a public officer, appointed by the President is also appointed by the President on the advice of Public Service Commission rather than on the advice of Cabinet again.  Because, if he is a Public Officer, I think the person properly based to recommend this person to the President are the people who are in charge of his carriers performance and that is the Public Service Commission rather than to leave it to the politicians again at the Cabinet level to fight for people coming from their places or people who support them politically or whatever.

Finally, on this point of independence, I would like to invite the hon. Minister to also consider making an express provision in a form of a -(Inaudible)- to indeed spell out that independence of the Commission that it will not be under the control of any person or authority.  

I also support the observation by hon. Butagira on Section 9(5).  I think, by the way when does the Electoral process begin?  It begins when registration of voters is closed.  Once you close the registration of voters, then elections have begun. If a person has not attained the mature age of voting at the closure of registration, then he should wait for the next election rather than creating this confusion of saying, by the time you vote, I will actually have attained the age.  This is indeed an avenue that may lead us to unnecessary complications and I hope that the hon. Minister will take that into account.  I would also comment on the provisions of Section 13 which talks about Constituencies.  I think I am also rather uncomfortable about the details given therein on the demarcation of these Constituencies.  If it is felt that there is a compelling reason for giving this kind of detail, I think that it may be a better thing to Clause 3(a) say, that subject tithe other Provisions of this sub-Section or may be to start it on, it says, ‘notwithstanding anything in this Section, when designating Constituencies under this Section, the Commission shall (a) subject to the other Provisions of this sub-Section designate each county as a Constituency.’  It may be better to simply add on each county or Municipality and leave out these questions of there shall be two in Jinja; so that at the end of the day, it should be left to the Commission or to the laws subsequently, ultimately I think there will be other laws and regulations relating to this election which shall spell out which Municipality will become a Constituency and which one will not.  Because I think these urban centres from my own experience are clearly distinct from the rural people.  They actually cause distortions.  So, I would like to see that the municipalities becoming Constituencies.  If we are to spell it out, I think it is the one that we should spell out.  With those few remarks, I support the Bill entirely.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KANYOMOZI (Kajara County, Ntungamo):  Mr Chairman, I just want to make some observations on the Bill.  I do recognise the importance of this Bill and I have looked at the Provisions of the Laws we have now and looked at the Draft Constitution, the chapter and representation and Interim arrangement especially Article 293 of the Draft.  I have also looked at the previous Constitution of the suspended.  After looking at the two, I can see the anxiety of the Minister wanting to implement chapter 20 of the Draft Constitution.  It is in that light that I am going to make my comments.

Of course, I have preferred a different approach.  I would have wanted the Constituent Assembly to finish its work so that the chapter in this Draft is implemented and the arrangements go nearer the Provisions of what our Colleagues in the Constituent Assembly are going to pass.  I can see the Minister’s problem if he is under pressure although he will not say he is under pressure.  Everybody is interested in what is happening.  I do therefore, say that may be we may have as well have accommodate some of the Provisions in the law.  

I am going to go straight on the Bill, and provide some amendments which I have already sent to the Clerk and the Minister.  I am not happy about the composition or how the Commission is going to be composed.  In Section 4(1) there are interested groups in this country who are political and who have an interest in what happens to the Commission or what type of Interim Electoral Commission we are going to have.  I would be of opinion that this should submit the names - the list of names from whom the President can choose and then those names which the President chooses can be submitted to this House or to the Parliament to be approval and in agreement with my Colleague who has just - Dr Besigye that it is not proper for the Cabinet to the ones to choose, the Cabinet is chosen by the President.  They cannot go against their boss otherwise they would have to resign.  They can only give advice and that advice is what we hate he can choose.  But I think to make the Commission independent, let it be subject to approval of this House.  

The other thing is about the people who should be the Chairmen or the Chairman of the Electoral Commission.  I am taking a leaf from the Draft Constitution, and I think myself, I would rather have a judge of the High Court or the Supreme Court as the Chairman.  The President will choose on the advice may be of the Judiciary, a capable man or a man who is of that position who would fill the bench and he would be the Chairman of this Electoral Commission.  Lawyers and Judges are tested people, we respect them, they are learned through their expression, they are learned men.  They know the Constitution inside out better than some of the pedestrians and they are the ones who would guide this Commission to make it a bit better.  

Secondly, Judges are independent people, they consider both sides, they will look at possibilities and take a right decision.  So, I would rather have an amendment to say that the Chairman of the Interim Electoral Commission should be a Judge of the Supreme Court or High Court or a person who would have gone to the bench and who becomes a Chairman.  Also, it reduces the chances of patronage and of partisanship because these are approved people whom you all know.  

Section 8, I would like to amend a Section dealing with salaries and emolument of the people working on this Commission.  I look at these people as to be like designated officers the ones we have just discussed recently.  And therefore their emolument should be debated in this House and passed by resolutions.  In the same way, to give that degree of independence talked about, to give that degree of independence in the same way as we consider the Auditor General, the Judges and the Inspector General of Police.  Let them come and I am sure this is acceptable to the hon. Minister also.  

I would like now to go to Section 9(1).  Section (f) about proxies.  This country is very small we are attracting all these people who are outside to come back here, we are not an empire, yet we do not have vested interest elsewhere.  Our predecessors the colonial governments had people scattered and they needed to provide for them, they were many.  We have very few here and the situation improves even the Nkuba Kyeyos’ are going to come back he is doing very well.  

Those economic refugees are going to come back.  We do not need really to tress this, and I am fearing, you know, the problem we have had with definition of a citizen of a person of African origin, it becomes very difficult and proxies given that with all due respect to my Minister of Internal Affairs here, given that our pass ports do get lost several times, you have heard them in Namibia, Kenyans are having them and if you are going to give a proxy vote, you may end up giving it to the wrong person, and to decide our destiny here, temporarily, let us suspend this proxy businesses.  When our interest expands and we have economic interest outside and there are so many people carrying out business, then we can have proxies because we have companies in South Africa, companies elsewhere and we want those people to participate.  I hope also the Minister will modify that.

Now, let me come to Section 9 sub-Section(6).  We do not know what the Constituent Assembly is going to approve but, in anticipation of what is likely to happen or will not happen, but to avoid any degrees of conflicts and given that my little limited experience, from what I am speaking about, given the role some of us have seen of Resistance Committee and LDUs, especially when they incorporate LDUs and militia, it becomes very difficult whether we would like them to be involved in this exercise.  I would rather have the normal civil servants administrators to carry out this job.  So, I am providing an amendment that Commission will be assisted by local authorities of that area.  Local authorities would be that just in case things do change and CA stands out with a different composition of things and the Resistance Councils tend to be identified with certain organisation, then it would make life of impartiality very difficult.  I am saying this given what I have seen in the field in our local places.  

I would like to turn to Chapter 10, Section 10 about settling disputes.  The provision here says, any court I am not happy with it.  I would rather say a court not below a certain level, a Magistrate Court and I have provided for an amendment to that effect.  The reason being any court, could any court constituted even tomorrow without legal provision as long as it is called a court, it becomes a problem.  And once again given that there are now RCs court which some of us have said and the lawyers have said so, the law society have said so that rather than have people who are involved in administration and politics in settling cases, we should rather have a panel of citizens who would settle cases to avoid areas of conflicts of any court, let us define the courts as we know them in this law and in fact, in Section 14 they do so.  So, I am suggesting a Magistrate Court to be the court - the lowest court that we refer to in these cases.  I hope the Minister will also accept that amendment.  

Let me go to Section 13, sub-Section 2.  This is the representation and demarcation.  I have difficulties and I want statistics to prove what the difficulties are.  The population of Uganda even after these years since the last census of 1990/91.  The only Municipal or urban area we have is actually Kampala, all the others are less than a county in most cases.  In fact, is nearly 14 times the second largest town which is Jinja which has a population of 60,000, that is a smaller area, and we are saying that, if you have the demarcation should look at the communication geographical features density of population.  A place like Jinja to be given and with all respect to people coming from Jinja to be compared with Koboko or Ruhaama which a big huge of Kampala really is not fair.  First this area can be -(Interruption)

MR ELYAU:  Point of information.  I do not think these are compared with Koboko because Koboko has one representative while Jinja has two.  In fact, it doubles Koboko.

MR KANYOMOZI:  If the honourable came up in - he is supporting what I am saying very well.  You look at small Jinja 60,000 and look at Koboko with all the population diversity no roads, no telephone, no nothing, in Jinja you could walk and finish the Constituent.  And, representatives represent people, they do not represent mountains and valleys and hills, they represent people.  So the population is the most important aspect.  Because it is the views of the people that you are bringing to the House. I am saying that in looking at the representation, we should consider population and I have suggested that each Constituency, if they have to demarcate should have inhabitants from range of Ushs 70 to 100,000 for rural areas and 100 to 125,000 for urban areas in which case it is only Kampala which will qualify.  We do not need to say anything.  Further, I have heard people saying Kalangala, I have made a provision also under Section 13 (2) that in case we want to ensure representation. The districts now being defined as the most economic units, the planning unit in Uganda is the sub-county that is where we collect the taxes, and the other units is the district.  So, I am suggesting that in demarcating the constituencies, the Commission will ensure that each district has at least, one member which covers Kalangala very well.  Giving the population quarter, the others become useless and also I have provided since the Gombolola is the district planning in this country but demarcation should be such that no Gombolola is sub-divided.  No Gombolola should be sub-divided because that is the planning in it.  The rest then goes by the population. I hope the Minister will give due consideration that the representation of people. 

I would now like to turn to Section 13 c, d, and f.  I am suggesting after those modifications which I have outlined below, the c, d and f should now be deleted, they are irrelevant.  Let us not tie the hands of the Commission, the Commission should now give the population quarters, given the definition of the sub-county, given the district to take care of Kalangala and some others, it should not be free to operate freely and give us demarcations, constituencies which have a minimum of 70,000 people for rural areas and 100 to 125 people and we will all be very happy.

I now want to move to Section 16.  I asked lawyers who know these things.  In law, I would rather, they do not use sides, they use parties to the case parties to this.  Let us not fear the word party if it is party with a small (p) -(Laughter)- I think my - the problem my hon. Minister and the Cabinet must have had is to think that words if they parties - it will mean the other ones.  No, we are now talking parties with a small (p) instead of sides, what do you mean by sides?  In deciding the side, side no, let us use the words you normally use and as hon. Kavuma is a learned person, he knows what they use in court.  Let us use the word parties with a small (p) instead of parties with a big (P), that one we do not want these days, that one can wait for future.  So, I would like to modify that, so that as to have exactly what the lawyers use.  Section 19, given that I have said the proxies there, I would like to stop Section 19(1).  I would like to stop on the word referenda and exclude that including provisions of voting by proxy.  The reasons I have already given, and I do not - and if that modification is catered for, we will move further.

On the general issues.  Definitely I for one would have wanted this Bill to come after the Constituent Assembly until July may be.  Given that, let us try and put in this law provisions which will at least seek the provisions some of our Colleagues who are here are going to incorporate in the Constitution.  It will help us so that we do not have question at a later stage.  Mr Chairman, with those few remarks, I beg to support.  Thank you.

DR AMUZA OWINY ALLIS (Moroto County, Lira):  First of all, I support the Bill.  In supporting, I would like to have a few modifications and through you, allow me to convey the modifications to the Minister who has presented it.  One is concerned with peace and fairness or freedom in the elections.  Here I mean, if we are to have and also to have a fair and free election, we should allow parties to nominate their people during this election.  Because what can happen is that, somebody’s superstitutions is scattered here and they are trying to destruct the mind of the people and then later they instigate absenteeism, they will withdraw from voting.  Two; system of companies, somebody might have said it yesterday also, the system we have of going in a group during CA campaigns, would I say was very childish, sorry to say so.  I condemn it because of the following reasons:  

(i) It is very shameful to have your friend because to have your friend with a curry tongue to say something against you, then you feel very shameful before the rest.  It is not good at all.  

(ii) Some times it is difficult when you are campaigning to gather people but now because the majority would like to see somebody talk or to hear somebody talk, they will go and then who is not liked will also join the company.  This one here should be noted.  

(iii) Although you may be a good developer, a good spokesman, but you are not very vocal when it comes to that day and people are talking five or ten of us standing here, you the good one likely may not go through because you are not very vocal.  So these ones, this one is also very important, it is not good to go together.  

(iv) There is no freedom actually if you are asked why do you - you have allowed me to go to whichever area or parishes or constituencies within the area, I will not, I should be directed that please, tomorrow you are going to Apara for instance, or you are going to Ntungamo or something like that.  

It should not be that I should be left free because I may not want to go there because the support there is very poor, I will be wasting my time, I would just go ahead and avoid such areas.  So, I would say that system was not very good, this time it should be modified, there should be total freedom where one is free according to the schedule, only few of you will be given time.  So, if you cannot finish within that period, it is your own shauri the failure of course.  The third point now is on the boundaries.

MR MAYENGO:  Point of information.  Let me by way of information add a fifth point which the hon. Member could have added to list of four.  When you are on a campaign in the crowd, this candidate makes a speech and sits down, the next one makes a speech and you go on.  The only genuine speech is the very first one, at the end, they all would like each one had copied the other and the whole matter becomes ridiculous. (Laughter)

MR KALULE SSENGO:  Additional information.  I also notice that at times, one of the candidates may loose a very close relative and those people cannot afford to wait and the rate at which people are dying these days, what if in course of these campaigns you loose about five relatives?  That means you are going to lose five joint rallies and that is also a disadvantage of the joint campaigns.  Thank you.

DR OWINY ALLIS:  So, Mr Chairman, these points are very many, we are against it.  Now, let me go to my third point about marking constituencies.  I want to give you one example, I come from Moroto.  Moroto by 89 was a disturbed place most of my voters had run away into town and they were not counted.  Now because slight peace has come back, they have tried to go back, the number is very high.  So, if we use the counting or the census of that time, the representation will not be good.  I would like they be recounted.  I think with these few words although I support the Motion, it is partially supported.

MRS KULANY (Women Representative, Kapchorwa):  I thank you for giving me this opportunity to contribute very briefly though on this very important Bill.  I am going to make my remarks mainly on two Clauses, I want to say on Clause 4(I).  I also would like to add my voice had already left that it is not right or rather it is better now as we are working towards complete democracy for the President to choose or to nominate the Commissioner for elections and instead Cabinet approving, Parliament should approve.  This is being done in most Articles in the Constitution.  But I would also like to buy hon. Kanyomozi’s idea of the President sending his names here for - and Parliament to pick out those names and approve the best man or the best woman.  

My second comment is on Clause 9(I)(b), the functions of the Commission.  I consider that the functions of the Commission are very, very crucial in this Bill.  If the Commission’s functions are not well done, the elections will be bogus.  9(b) where it says, the functions of the Commission are, this is very important because I believe that elections depend on the voters.  We have had government here and elsewhere, a government can there and move on for 8 years without voters.  We have had Presidents who have not been voted in.  

But the importance of this Bill and importance of the forth-coming elections is that government has promised the people of this country a democratically elected President, a democratically elected Parliament and therefore a democratically elected government.  So, people are looking forward to taking part in elections that are due to come.  

It is, therefore, important that the voters’ register be well done.  The compilation of register, we have already seen it involves up dating those who are not 18 yet.  But I would like to see those who will be 18, they might be 18 by the time the up dating is done.  Nor those who will be 18 in December.  As hon. neighbour has said, rigging is sure if that is the case.  One might be 18 at the time of the census.  

Secondly, it is important that Commission makes it absolutely clear that his staff must assist the people who want to vote.  I want to inform this House that in the citizenship chapter, in Constituent Assembly it is a duty and responsible that in the former Constitution as well, but in this particular one, it is going to be a duty for every person above 18 to register.  The Constitution is insilent about whether he can be forced to vote.  But he must - it is a duty, it does not say force, but it is a duty for everyone who is above 18 to register as a voter.  If it is a duty and say, it is also - in the representation chapter, the state is going to see to it that every eligible voter is given the opportunity to register as a voter.  

Now the experience which a lot of Members are still mentioning and we debate it a lot here immediately after the CA elections, and it has come back again, the experience most people have even those who went through to the CA, we appreciate that there was a lot of negligence with the job of making people to register.  So must be properly done.  It says here in 4 that, this man must be - the Commissioner must be a man of high or Members must be Members of high moral character and integrity.  I would like to urge that, that Commission must also see to it that these people who are going to be giving the crucial job of recruiting the officers also be people of high moral character and the proven integrity if possible.  

Then I would like to talk about civic education which is also 9 (I) sub-Clause (e).  The civic education is very important and it is a big problem.  We have massive illiteracy which is clear to all of us.  A lot of people are illiterate, the majority of our people are illiterate.  Now, I am worried the NGOs manipulated our people a lot last as well those people who were entrusted with a job of civic education, and moreover even those who were Ugandans and were asked to the civic educative were given few days, two days only.  

So, I would like to appeal in this House when we are debating this important Bill that, the civic education should not be done by NGOs unless those NGOs are indigenous.  I will not entertain NGOs which are not indigenous to civic educate our people.  A lot of our people were misled last time and I would rather see that they are educated by our own people.  Taking into account that the majority of our people cannot read or write.  I think our people - the staff who are to be recruited to do this work will be more sympathetic when they are Ugandans than when they are NGOs.  And with all due respect to the NGOs, I would like to see them in some other sectors rather than in the sector of civic education.  This civic education in relationship with politics.  This is a political exercise, it is not an academic exercise.  So because of that, we have to take care regarding that matter.  

Finally, I would like to appeal to Members here to see that we pass this Bill and to see that without it, the new Parliament will not be there, it will be this Parliament to pass it.  The sooner it can pass it, the better for the Commission which is going to handle this exercise to start its work.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MRS KIRYAPAWO (Women Representative, Soroti):  Mr Chairman, before I make my contribution, allow me to congratulate the new Members who have joined us and to warmly welcome them in this august House to wind up. (Laughter)  I stand to support the Bill.  In supporting this Bill, I want to make my few observations.  I go to Clause 9 sub-Section (I) (e), about the civic education.  Here, I remember in our CA elections, RCs were left out in this role and yet they are the people who can mobilise the people to go for this civic education.  I know here in the same Clause Section 6, the Minister talked about RCs in Section 6 alone, but I will request him that even during the civic education, RCs are important to carry out this exercise.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you very much hon. Member for giving way.  By way of information, it was found during registration that RCs were very important, in fact, they were used for registration after realising that registration exercise was not going well, and it came to civic education or even monitoring where there were some RCs left out and yet they are the nearest to the population.  So, I really agree with the hon. Member that the RCs should be brought on - should be involved in the civic education.

MRS KIRYAPAWO:  I thank the hon. Member for that you could find them contradicting themselves.  So, in this coming general elections, the Minister must see that the civic educators themselves are well informed.

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that in some parts of the world, they have institutes where mass mobilisation especially, connected with voting is carried out.  Whereas in Uganda, even if somebody would want to get our RCs involved, they too are human beings but they get prejudiced.  Therefore, government and the Minister especially should find a way of getting people to be mobilized and know what voting is.  I thank the hon. Member for that information.  It is important that especially, when it comes to the people who cannot write and read, and we are voting by secret ballot, you find that if a voter is not properly educated is bound to mislead and that is where rigging begins.  I hope the Minister will take note of that.  

The other Clause I want to turn to is Clause 13, Section 3(b).  I quote, ‘where a county has a population of 140,000 or more inhabitants designate out of that county two or more constituencies, for that each constituency has approximately 70,000 inhabitants, very good.’  What about the districts?  If we are talking in terms of population, if a county which is within the district is being divided into many constituencies, what about the district, what about that person who is going to represent a whole district which takes all these counties?  

So, later on, I am moving an amendment to consider the district representatives also.  And even when we talk about - because here we are considering two things, the population -(Interruption)

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, first of all to consider how many people should be represented in the district which I suspect it the women delegate should be a Constitutional matter which should not be part of this law.  

Secondly, I think if we are going to look at these nations effectively, we must also mix politics with economics.  If we are going to look at counties and sub-counties and look at as many representatives as possible, we should also consider the burden that it imposes on the tax payer, the burden that it imposes on the other facilities, because in the long run, we have got to maintain such big houses and such a big house can be actually a problem in terms of cash and other maintenance and indeed, in terms of how many people can even have a chance to contribute.  We should therefore, look at a way that counties can be superceded and look at districts and look at what districts are and, have representatives rather than counties.

MR KAJUBI:  Additional information.  Of what he has just said, 70,000 is a very small number for an MP.  It was okay for few ADs because they did not have enough time anyway, to round the place.  But for an MP who is going to be in charge of an area for five years, two sub-counties is a very small area.  Therefore, I think the minimum number should be 100,000, Mr Chairman.

MRS KIRYAPAWO:  I was saying that, we are considering two things, population and the size of the area.  Here you find that some districts are very large though not densely populated and that is why I was saying that, even a representative of the district have to be considered.  I am informed I do not know whether we should take that a district is not a constituency.  But I thought a district is also a constituency.  I am here I am representing a district and I am sure even those in the CA, districts are being represented.  If we say that we shall burden our finances, then we delete Clause 13(d), should be deleted so that we remain with the present Parliament here.  Where a county is represented by one Member and a district is also represented by one Member.  

Another point I have about Clause 16(3), where a candidate is entitled to be present in person or through his or her representative or polling agents at the polling station throughout the period of voting.  What we saw during CA elections it was bad.  Because these agents were not allowed to be near any voter and yet they were there to help those people who cannot read and write so that they vote for the candidate somebody wants.  But these were said to be many metres away so that the presiding and the polling assistants were the people who were close to this person and they that person where - which candidate to vote for against the will of the voter.  

So, this time we want these agents to be as close as possible so that a voter who comes and say, I want to vote for so and so, it shown the proper picture of that candidate.  Because if you say it is a secret the moment this presiding officer is helping this person, it is no longer a secret and yet that presiding officer has his or her own candidate which he would like to go through.  And also I thought that may be we should insert a section somewhere in the Bill about the election day.  

Okay, if it is in the Constitution but we should emphasise it that throughout Uganda elections must take place on one day.  Why am I saying this?  In Pallisa district, Budaka county has 6 sub-counties, 5 sub-counties elected on the 28th of March, 1994 and one sub-county was left out intentionally by the returning officer and it voted on 29th.  So, that is a high degree of rigging, yet it took place and it is on record.

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Point of information.  In addition to what she has just said, in 1980 Bushenyi East the day of election was supposed to be on 11th but we voted on the 12th.  That constituency did not carry out - did not have elections on that day, so that all the forces could be gathered there to do the needful. (Laughter)

MRS KIRYAPAWO:  Mr Chairman that is why I am saying we should avoid such a situation to happen again.  If it happens, then the elections of that constituency should be nullified, the results okay, the results should be nullified, because you find that even they had the guts of moving one ballot box which used a previous day to that sub-county on that day and these were even aware of the returning officer and his assistant and everybody at the district level, so that the Minister should account for it.  And also the method we used of the ink on the thumb.  People were washing it out, they could deep their fingers in the spirit and they go and vote a second and a third and a fifth time.  So, it is better to mark the registration card so that, that person cannot vote a second time or third time. (Applause)  With those few words, I thank you very much.    

MR ABU MAYANJA (Busujju County, Mubende):  Mr Chairman, I would like to make some observations.  Of course, I support the Bill very strongly to the important because it is yet one more step in the building of a democratic state and society in this country.  But in supporting this, I want to make some comments as I go along on some important - I think mile stones in the exercise.  One; on the question of impartial impartiality of the Commission or the Commissioners, the Chairman and Members of the Commission.  

We read in the past in the East when Princesses and Kings and Protestants used to have Harims, they used to have people to guard their women against people coming to play with them. (Laughter)  And those people, the guards were unacks; they were castrated in order to ensure that they would not have the capacity. (Laughter)  Really if we wanted somebody to be absolutely impartial, we would require a political unack, but I do not think it is possible to have one, because, members of the Commission and other people - members of the Commission their secretarial staff and their supporting staff are - all these other people presiding officers, returning officers and so on, they do not have their own political linings.  They are voters in their own rights.  

So, the best we can do is to provide that as far as circumstances permit.  They will try to proximate to the ideal and we call upon them from this House because we can always pick from this House that when the trust has been reposed in them in the men or women of the Commission, they should do their utmost to ensure that Ugandans do not regret that the trust was reposed in those people.  And that goes not only for the Commissioners -(Interruption)

MR MARWAS:  The hon. former Attorney General is raising the issue of impartiality.  The issue of power of the commission, because I remember very well during our last elections where the Commissioner for the Constituent Assembly was observing the elections for women delegates to the CA, where he himself witnessed an election being rigged.  The he comes to Kampala, went on TV, on radio lamenting that in Kotido district he saw elections being rigged.  But unfortunately, he seems to have had no powers to have taken an action or to stop but lamenting alone without any powers could not help.  

MR ABU MAYANJA:  I thank the hon. Member for that information.  Of course, the cure for that which I think we have provided for in this Bill by ensuring that in exercising their duties, the Commissioners have full powers and they are not subject to the control of other authorities.  And let that not be a formal expression, let the government at the time act in such a way that everybody will be satisfied that the government believes just as this House believes that the work of conducting the electoral exercise shall not be interfered with especially by the powers that be.  

The enacting of this Bill into law will need that we have to come to the end of the process we started in 1986.  When we were sitting there and the hon. Member for Rubanda hon. Kanyeihamba was moving the extension of the - this government or this Parliament he mentioned and this House debated a fairly substantial lift of uncompleted tasks which made it necessary because the NRM government had not completed its mandate and extended it in order for those tasks to be completed.  

I would like to believe that those tasks have not been completed.  But have they?  If there are tasks which have not been completed, it remains our duty all of us in this House in the country to ensure that those remained tasks or parts of them are indeed competed as quickly as possible, and in this connection, I want to say something about the evolution, the encouragement the inculcation, the development of a democratic spirit of a spirit that believe in the rule of law democracy, and the right of people participate fully in the government of their country.  

Democracy was described by President Lincoln as ‘a government of the people, by the people and for the people.’  But it was also described by Mussolini, the government of the people, by the politicians in the interest of whoever happens to be in power. (Laughter)  We are endeavouring to bring up to build up in this country the democracy of the first type, the Lincolian democracy.  Democracy according to Abraham Lincoln not democracy according to Mussolini.  

Until it was - it is in this connection that I would like to refer to a few things which have caused me a person who has been careful for a long time some concern and which I would like to comment to my Colleagues of the Front Bench so that they take appropriate action.  Democracy means for instance, that people have a right to choose their representatives.  Now, in order for the population to be about to choose their representatives, they must be able to fear their views.  

We are tired of reading in the News papers even - sorry people who have just been in government okay, I will but, we are tired of reading that the hon. CA delegate from Lira hon. Cecilia Ogwal has been prevented by police from meeting her constituency, hon. Cecilia Ogwal has been prevented by the CGR, has been prevented by whatever authorities in power. (Applause)  This is not good enough if hon. Cecilia Ogwal is the CA delegate for Lira Municipality, she has a right to consult with her constituency just as I, Abu Mayanja have to consult with the people of Busujju.  Mr Chairman, -(Interruption) 

REV. ONGOLA ATWAI:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, I hail from Lira Municipality, I know what goes on there as regards this particular case of hon. Cecilia Ogwal who has the right to consult and to invite her colleagues the CA delegates to her constituency.  It was nolonger consultations, it was a rally inviting -(Interjection)- it was a rally where delegates were invited.  Otuke sent there 10 including dancers; Kiga, Maruzi, all those and therefore, it was no longer Lira Municipality, it was now a delegate’s conference, a political delegate conference.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  I thank the hon. Ongola for that information.  But really that is political -(Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Point of information.  Is it in order for hon. Ongola Atwai, the CM for Lira Municipality who was thoroughly defeated by Cecilia Ogwal to stand in this House and mislead us that Otuke sent dancers and 10 people to the constituency of Cecilia Ogwal, when in fact, it was Ongola Atwai together with the CGR who stopped the meeting of Cecilia Ogwal?

MR ABU MAYANJA:  I think altercation is quite welcome but the point is this, everybody knows including the honourable and hon. gentleman sitting over there, everybody knows that people go and make rallies, I have myself had held rallies in my constituency.  Whether they may be fundraising, they may be consultations, I invite all sorts of people and this business of denying a few people - and a person who hold that office, a person who has got a very high profile by reason of her other capacities; the leader of a political party in this country.  We get concerned that if a person of the profile of Cecilia Ogwal cannot hold a meeting to meet her own constituency - her own voters in her constituency, how can somebody from Busujju?  So, I want to appeal to the government, especially, the hon. Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs that, this Bill presupposes that we have completed the task of building up the organs of government (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I have sat and listened to the information given about hon. Cecilia Ogwal; not long ago hon. Mayanja was an Attorney General who advised that political activities should take a low tone.  True, certain rallies tantamount to that; but I wish to inform him and the hon. House here, that certain people are empty tins.  Hon. Cecilia Ogwal cannot -(Interruption)

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is the hon. Member in order to stand in this House and use a language, which is un Parliamentary by calling other hon. Members empty tins?  Is he in order?

THE CHAIRMAN:  That is not what he meant.  Proceed please.

AN HON. MEMBER:  With due respect to my teacher, apparently he thought I was going to preach where he does not want me to preach; but I will go ahead.  My information to the hon. Member and the House is that, in some of our constituencies, our voters no longer wish to hear us talk; and in this case of the Municipality, the situation is such that if Cecilia was to collect people to hear her talk, her own voters would not come!  So she had to go and rally voters from other areas!  All I wish to say is, my further information is if you want peace - and hon. Wanendeya knows how many times he had been defeated, and how many times he had had problems with voters, you go to Lira and asses the situation.  I will give him accommodation.  Thank you very much.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  This should not be controversial.  If we take the attitude that people, Ugandans irrespective of their view, irrespective of the political views that they hold, that they cannot go around and air those views, and try to - they may be the minority today, but they can be the majority tomorrow.  So we must be democratic enough to say that, I do not agree with you, but I shall give my blood to fight for your right to air those views that I do not agree with.  So, it is not only Cecilia, there is Ken Lukyamuzi, there are other people like that.  

Another matter which has caused me concern is the fact that when this young man the Editor of the Citizen Newspaper was interviewed in the Monitor magazine; he said, and I have no reason - if it is not correct, I will sit and hon. Members of the Front bench can give me information.  He said that, when he was in the police station, over that unhappy long Easter weekend, which was prolonged by the fact that he was taken to court after 5.00 O’clock when everybody knew that the court had retired - but anyway, he said that when he was in the Police cells, he met with prisoners of people who had been there for six months or more.  

Now, that means that those people - because if you have been taken to a court of law, you cannot be taken to a court of law and then be taken back to the cells.  It means therefore, that there are people who have been arrested, detained in police cells without being taken before the court for six months!  And that is absolutely unacceptable.  

If we are going to - we are creating this Commission, we want to go for elections; we cannot make anything end of this process, which as I said at the beginning that we started it in 1986, and we think that we have now built up various organs of State, Judiciary, Police, Prisons, Army, Civil Service, all these organs of the economy; to make us possible to live comfortably in this country of ours as a democratic society.  But if we continue, in the face of our laws, to flout our laws, arrest people and go and keep them in prison for long period of time, then I am afraid that this thing will not bring in the democratic new era that we are hoping to have; this thing would not be worth the link with which it is written. (Interruption)   
                                             
MR KAVUMA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, the Learned hon. Member did cast doubt about the statement he had, in which case I understood him to say they may be true or they may not, is he in order to proceed and make statements as if what he told this House, and he was doubtful about it, correctness in itself, is a statement of fact.  Is he in order, Sir?  I would have imagined, he would have called for investigations and once it is established that that is the true set of facts, then that is he would make that kind of allegation.

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is quite in order and my interest is to hear for what -(Laughter)

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, if I may so, with great respect, about that ruling, I would say a Daniel come to judgement.  So, I say, let us examine ourselves; this is our country, and it is we Members of this House especially because many of us will come back.  In the new election, it is we people of Uganda who will make or mark the future of our country.  We must, therefore, examine our constituencies, examine even our motives, and say at the end of it all, are we still on the road, are we still going where we started in 1986?  

Having those points - the other details, I think, as a technician, there is very little problem with this Bill.  Maybe, since I have said it, I will not speak again even in Committee; I want to say that as a lawyer I am convinced that this House has got the power to pass this law because the laws which were given to Parliament in Section 63 of the 1967 Constitution which was suspended make all laws for the peace, order and good government of Uganda were transferred by Section 7 of Legal Notice No. 1 of 1986 to this House.  Therefore, this House has got the powers to make this law.  So, there is no problem about that; but let me just make one little - about the technicality.  One of the problems which was faced was that during the CA registration exercise, and I take full responsibility, I was a member of the government at that time.  There was no time - time has not been sufficient for CA Commission to display the provisional registers of voters for the public to study them and raise claims or make objections. Consequently registers were not as good as they should be.  Now, this was one thing which we have found out and which was I think, accepted by government.  

So, we are saying this time, let the registers be properly done and I will go with those - because when you go to make a law, you cannot say that we shall register those who will have attained the age.  You should be definite, we legislate for those who have attained age as the case may be.  We say 18, so shall be those who are 18 at the passing of date; a person comes and says, I am 18, and he is registered.  But I am appealing to the Minister to allow sufficient time to ensure that provisional registers are made and displayed at every muluka or every kyalo, every RCI, for the people to see and be satisfied that all the people who should be on the register have been put on the register, and people who should not be on the register, have been removed from the register.  That is very, very important if this exercise is to be very successful, otherwise, I would like to tell them again - I mean there are so many things I would like to say, but I do not want to my hon. and Learned Colleague there.  

As Attorney General, I was Minister responsible for speaking for the government on issues of human rights; and other matter whenever Amnesty International or State Department or anybody, whatever people read issues concerning alleged violations of human rights, my brief was this; the NRM government believes in the upholding and protection of fundamental human rights.  It is not our policy to violate human rights.  Therefore, if anybody violates human rights, he does so on his own.  We do not instruct Army Officers, Police Officers, or other security officers to harass people.  If they do so, they do so on their own, and when we get to hear about it, we punish and we have punished the individuals affected.  That has been the NRM government’s stand, during the time when I was there.  

Therefore, I have just mentioned I was therefore unhappy when the issue on the harassment of Itongwa’s mother was raised in this House, and then the Minister concerned stood up and defended the policemen, without everybody - thought that he had not made the investigations in that matter; because the newspapers, the New Vision, the Monitor, all these papers which came out that day, had reported that Itongwa’s mother has been arrested and taken to Kawempe Police Station.  Now, the reason for this one is that I see a departure from our line which was that people -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order, with that we have come to the end of today’s session.  We adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.

(The Assembly rose at 4.15 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 4 May, 1995 at 2.30 p.m.)

