Tuesday, 6 May 2014

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the Vice-President and distinguished Members of the House, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. 

I would like to remind Members that on 16th May this year, this House will be prorogued. I am therefore concerned about reports I have received from the Committee on Budget that the sectoral committees have not met the timelines allotted to them for presentation of the MTEF report. Budget framework papers were presented to the House on 28th March in accordance with Section 4 of the Budget Act and the sectoral committees should have concluded their reports by 25th April as stipulated again in Section 7(2) of the same Act. Section 7(3) of the Budget Act requires the Budget committee to scrutinise estimates and reports of the sectoral committees and submit its recommendations to the Speaker for onward transmission to the President by 16th May. 

In view of the above, I direct the sectoral committees that have not yet reported to the Budget committee to adhere to the timelines for reporting as communicated by the committee. The Budget committee will reschedule appointments for the committees that failed to meet their deadlines before this announcement, in any case not later than 9 May 2014. So, you only have a few days to comply. 

I want to, however, thank you for the other work that has been going on - the petitions and other reports. However, I am bit concerned about the committees that have not presented their Bills; for instance, the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs has not presented a longstanding Bill in these three sessions. The Narcotics and Psychotropic Substances Bill has been with the committee and this is the Third Session and it is ending. I would like to also urge the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry to work quickly on the Trade Licensing (Amendment) Bill. The country is anxiously waiting because we are using very antiquated laws. 

I want to remind the Minister of State for Agriculture that six weeks ago, he came and requested for time before we could present the report on the Plant Variety Protection Bill. The committee report has been ready for six weeks. The two weeks which he asked for have expired but I do not see him coming back to us to tell us what to do with our report, because the House report is ready. 

Resulting from interactions with the population, this country and especially the women of this country would like to know what is really happening about the sex scandal in the high altitude training camp in Kapchorwa. This is where a young girl who complained of sexual harassment has instead been arrested and charged with some flimsy, and I believe concocted, case. This girl is just 17 years old; I do not know why the Police and other people involved are trying to intimidate her. The women of this country want an answer about that matter. The young children should be protected so that they can carry out their work. 

Honourable members, some time back I heard an announcement that boda boda operators were not permitted to carry more than two passengers but no one clarified whether carrying two children is also two passengers or carrying two adults is two passengers. I am saying this because we have no public transport in this country and many families transport their children to school on boda bodas. If a parent has three children, I do not know whether that parent is going to hire three boda bodas and take the children to school and another three to bring them back. No one is giving us clarification.

Equally, when I was in Kaliro with some of my colleagues, the boda boda operators there complained that it is no longer cost-effective to operate a boda boda and yet there is no other reliable transport. If they do not carry two people, they do not make any profit. So, we need clarification on what the instruction was and how it is going to be implemented. 

I also want to bring to the attention of Government that the residents living on the 100-kilometer stretch on the Kamuli-Bukungu Road were told three years ago that the road was going to be tarmacked and that they should stop agricultural activities on that land. As we speak, the road has not been constructed, they have not been compensated but they are not carrying out agricultural activities. So, they would like to know whether they should be impoverished as a result of those instructions that have not taken off.

I also want to report that the national ID project is not running as well as it was planned. In Namasagali County, which has four parishes, there is only one camera. So, I do not know how much time is going to be required to register people there. In the other parishes where there is one camera, there is a complaint that on a day, only 22 people are registered. So, I do not know whether the minister will extend the deadline or he will have to tell us how else he is going to implement this project because certainly, the timelines are off schedule already.

Honourable members, yesterday I received the 16th report of the Health Service Commission and they had some very grave concerns. One is that in certain medical specialities, we only have one consultant. I was really shocked that with our population, we can operate with a structure with only one consultant for the whole country. I was also concerned that there is now a definite shortage of midwives. Very few midwives are being trained and allegedly, because the Government decided to do comprehensive training where a nurse trains on different subjects but does not become an expert in any. 

The matter is so serious that I have decided to ask four members of our House to go and meet with the Health Service Commission urgently so that they can bring a report on Tuesday next week, so that we are able to discuss this crisis. I nominate hon. Omona who is the chairperson of the Committee on Health, hon. Baryomunsi, hon. Betty Amongi and hon. Sylvia Namabidde. This matter is very urgent and we need a report on Thursday next week.

Finally, honourable members, a few weeks ago I was invited to attend the official opening of the National Assembly of Benin together with the Speaker of the National Assembly of Senegal and the National Assembly of Togo. During our visit, one of the highlights was the green rural city called the Songhai Centre. It is a centre of excellence recognised by the United Nations as a model for millennium development villages. I will be asking the government to send some of our farmers and some of our experts there because that small centre has done wonders in integrating comprehensive development in a very environment friendly situation. It is something that we need to learn. The report of our visit will be laid on the Table and discussed. Thank you very much. 

2.57
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the fate of our soldiers deployed in southern Sudan – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, there are no soldiers in southern Sudan. If you are asking about southern Sudan, they are not there.

MR KASIBANTE: I beg your pardon; it is South Sudan, Madam Speaker. A South Sudanese newspaper called the Upper Nile Times has reported that four UPDF soldiers fighting alongside Egyptian troops in South Sudan against the rebels of the White Army Movement have been killed. The same paper also claims that two of our own soldiers in South Sudan, namely Akiiki Rutaro and Samuel Munyiga, are now prisoners of war after being captured by the rebels of the White Army Movement. The paper claims this took place in Ayod, which is in the Jonglei State of South Sudan, over the weekend. These two Ugandans were captured along with 12 Egyptians and a number of South Sudanese soldiers. The paper further claims that 10 of the South Sudanese soldiers have since been killed. 

Madam Speaker, I would wish Government to clarify on three key issues about this matter: one, the safety of our soldiers in South Sudan; two, whether the UPDF now fighting rebels has not overstepped its mandate; and three, when is the UPDF finally withdrawing from South Sudan now that there was even a resolution passed by IGAD? Thank you very much. 

3.00
MR STANLEY OMWONYA (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance and urgency. 

Last week on Tuesday, April 29th there was a clash between a clan called Paryama clan and the Muslim community of Warr Trading Centre in Juloka Parish because of land disputes. During the clash, two people were killed, many were injured and about 70 houses were torched to ashes. As I said, the clashes erupted over a land dispute and not because of religious differences as was reported in some newspapers and sections of the media. The Muslim community and the Paryama clan have been locked up in a dispute for over a decade with each side claiming the place. The people of Zombo respect each other’s religion and they live in unity and harmony. That is my clarification to the House.

At the same time, Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness to assist the people whose houses were burnt with food and also other emergency items. Right now, the people are desperate; children and women are living in the cold because they do not have anywhere to live. 

Lastly, I would like to thank the RDC, the DPC and all security personnel of Zombo District who swiftly came in and calmed the situation otherwise it would have been worse. I thank you. 

3.02
MR YAHAYA GUDOI (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I rise on a point of national importance, and it is good that the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs is in the House. 

In my constituency, there are two sub-counties - Bubyangu Sub County and Nakaloke Town Council – where we do not have chairpersons. We know that the LCIII chairpersons in a sub-county are almost the commanders in that territory. So, I call upon the ministers responsible for local government and constitutional affairs to help. When a sub-county has no chairperson, it is very bad and this is especially true for Bubyangu, which neighbours a national park and a national forest reserve. Such places need chairpersons. In Mbale, the chairperson of Lukhonge Sub County died long ago. It is now three years down the road and there has been no replacement. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, it is good that you have hinted on this issue – in Bungokho North, the national ID registration project is not going on well. In the whole of Bufumbo Sub-county, there is only one camera. When people go for registration, they think that the exercise is done. When will Government provide cameras so that these people are registered and at the same time photographed? I rest my case. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The people of Bufumbo Sub County in Bungokho North are so concerned that they are actually here in the gallery. They are represented by hon. Gudoi and hon. Nakayenze. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.06
MR SIMON ALEPER (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I also rise on a point of public importance. 

Since two years ago, Karamoja has never experienced rain and as a result of this long dry spell, a number of people have lost lives. As we talk, over 24 people have died due to hunger. The minister is aware and you cannot deny that fact. Because of drought, the situation is alarming and, Madam Speaker, in yesterday’s newspapers, when a report was given, the RDC of Napak said that the people died due to old age. I wonder how technical this RDC is. What post-mortem report did he use to show that the people did not die of hunger but of old age? 

As we talk, even the dams that Government put in place, for example Kobebe Dam which had caused the Turkana and the Karimojong to live amicably, have dried up. So, I am envisaging a bad situation because when the dry spell continues as it is now, because of the struggle for natural resources even the neighbouring districts that have coexisted with Karamoja peacefully may again create conflict.  

I have two prayers here, Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Karamoja that we wish to make. In the short-term, we call upon the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness to respond by giving relief food and other necessary items. In the long-term, we have water that even the Egyptians are dying for but it leaves and passes by Ugandans; I call upon Government to come up with a plan where we can have piped water for Karamoja. Karamoja is not far compared to Egypt and the Egyptians are enjoying the same water, which leaves Uganda. So, if you could consider that as Government, this would be a long lasting solution and would probably help Karamoja to also engage in an irrigation system. 

Food is a must for human beings and water is life. As we talk, there is even no water for animals and animals will soon begin going to the neighbouring districts. You know what it means when we actually have to move with animals to the neighbouring district. It again results into conflict, which we do not wish to see, Madam Speaker. Thank you. 

3.09
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I rise on matter of national importance concerning the 1979 liberation war. 

There is a series that we have been reading in the newspapers and over the weekend on Sunday. I was concerned and felt that this country was being belittled when a story about the war is being serialized by the Daily Monitor from a Tanzanian commander who was in charge of Kampala. My point of concern is that the commander claims that he was in charge of security in Kampala, and he put all the government ministers in the then Nile Mansion and gave them very strict instructions not to get out. The other interesting thing is that he claims that when he got out of his room and was walking in the corridors to check on these ministers, he went into the room of Minister Tarsis Kabwegyere and found that Minister Ateker Ejalu was in Kabwegyere’s room. He asked him why he had brought hon. Ejalu to his room when the instructions were for them to remain in their rooms. Hon. Kabwegyere could not give him a satisfactory explanation and he slapped him. 

Madam Speaker, I find this bad for the image of the nation - where a foreign commander comes and disrespects the integrity of the country to slap a minister. This is appearing for the first time; many of us never knew about it. If our ministers are being slapped and they keep quiet, then it is a shame to the nation. I thought that the Minister of Foreign Affairs would be here to send a diplomatic note of protest because that commander is still there. He was interviewed and he is very proud about how he humiliated a Ugandan minister. 

When they talk about a Ugandan minister, whether you were there or not, it is about the image of this country. I thought that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should send a protest note over this matter because we think it is not fair as a nation for our ministers to be belittled by junior commanders and more importantly, they keep quiet. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.11
MR MATHIUS BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Yesterday and today were nomination days for the Luweero Woman Member of Parliament. I am the Secretary-General of DP and yesterday my candidate, hon. Brenda Nabukenya, who has been a Member of Parliament in this House, was being nominated. Before even the nominations took place, the Police took over the entire nomination area and restricted people. 

It is true that only 20 people were supposed to accompany her but after nominations, as she was proceeding to go through Luweero town, the Police fired teargas to our supporters. I had many supporters including party leaders. The former DP party leader, Dr Paul Ssemwogrere, was in my car and the former DP leader, Dr Ssebaana Kizito, was in his car; he is not in a very healthy state but he had to be there because that is his home area. There were also many other political party leaders like Dr Besigye, Dr Muntu and others. 

Madam Speaker, the matter I am raising is that we are in a multiparty dispensation and yesterday, it was our duty and day for nomination. I want Government to explain why we were teargased and why our supporters were beaten when in fact it was our day. We booked with the Electoral Commission and they allowed us to be nominated yesterday. This is a very important matter and I am worried that as we go for campaigns, if what happened yesterday continues, the campaigns are going to be very bloody. Madam Speaker, I need an explanation. 

THE SPEAKER: I see the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs here. I do not know whether you can respond to the issue of hon. Gudoi about the absence of the two chairpersons in sub counties and also the issue of teargasing the DP people when they were attending nominations. 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. In the communication from the chair, so many issues came up and I thought Members could have been given an opportunity to say something to that effect. There were issues concerning members, issues concerning the committees and then those that concern the ministers like that of the boda bodas, and the issue of the national IDs because it is a nationwide issue. I thought they would have come in, one way or another, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, according to our rules, when a committee has not been able to work within the 45 days given to them, they are supposed to come to the Speaker and say, “I want to report to the House.” Nobody has reported; so, I am asking you. You cannot respond out of what I have said; you need to book time and come and report officially. 

3.15
THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have taken note of the absence of chairpersons in the named localities. I thought the law provided for interim arrangements for newly created sub-counties and the law similarly provides for succession in case of demise or abrupt departure or vacation of office. I will look into the matter, Madam Speaker, and we shall report back to the House, soonest. 

As to the question of teargas, the complaint by the DP Secretary-General is unfortunate. Well it concerns us and the Ministry of Internal Affairs. We would like to conduct as fair an election as possible because that is the command of the Constitution. My colleague, the Minister of Internal Affairs, must be investigating the circumstances under which the Police teargased them. It is not ordinary for the Police to just throw teargas when there is no cause. I beg the Minister of Internal Affairs to speak for himself. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Is the minister in position to speak to that issue?

3.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba):  Madam Speaker, I have taken note. I was not aware of that incident. I am going to find out and report back. I was upcountry; I came in only last night and I have a bad cold. So, please, allow me time to go and find out and I will report back. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the members of Cabinet are directed to respond to all the issues that were in my communication and also from the Members not later than Thursday, this week. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE HEALTH SERVICE COMMISSION REPORT 2012/2013

3.18
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Kenneth Omona): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Health Service Commission Annual Report for the financial year 2012/2013. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report is sent to the Committee on Health for expeditious perusal and report back. There are very many key issues that need to be handled.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we need your help. The ministers responsible for justice and for internal affairs have made some comments; for example, the Minister of Justice said that if there are no chairpersons, there are procedures to replace them. What about if it is an LCV councillor or LC III; if one dies, what are the procedures to cater for a temporary replacement because that area will not be represented?

That is a very serious matter because those are areas we need to deal with. For the chairperson, it could be easy but for the other members, there are no assistant councillors in the council. So, we need the ministers to help us on that.


THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are moving ahead; the minister is saying he is going to bring a statement but now, you are moving ahead of his statement. Why don’t you wait for him to bring it and then you can raise all those issues?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I thank you very much but the teargas in Luweero was beyond –(Laughter)– and for him to say I did not feel it, he should have –

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Internal Affairs will also bring a statement.

3.20
PROF. GILBERT BUKENYA (NRM, Busiro County North, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, this matter of spraying people with teargas in their constituencies when they have been nominated should not be taken lightly. You see, it is a beginning of a difficult time. When I am nominated in my constituency, I drive around the constituency for purposes of mobilising my people but also for consolidation and telling them, “I have been nominated.”

Really, the Minister for Internal Affairs needs to come up and explain. All of you today or tomorrow may be sprayed with teargas. So, the Minister for Internal Affairs must come and explain to Parliament why somebody who had just been nominated, who had spent her money hiring vehicles to carry the voters-to-be, was prevented and sprayed with teargas. (Interjections) Even bullets, I hear from these people, but I saw the teargas. So, where are we going? Should those who are being nominated follow suit by shooting or by teargasing? I really think this is a very serious matter for any group. We have to understand that if we continue this way, we are going into a police state and if you go to a police state, anything can happen, either side.

In my case, I was stopped from going to Gulu University to talk about career development, a subject matter I really know. I found people welding guns –(Laughter)– and another pickup came with people wearing certain plastic things and yet I was alone in my vehicle. So, I said, “You have closed the gate; I am driving away” and I drove back to Kampala. Today it is your meat; tomorrow it is your stone. (Laughter) (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I know that the Minister of Internal Affairs has heard and he will have to come back with a statement.
 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE INCREASE IN MARRIAGE REGISTRATION FEES BY THE UGANDA REGISTRATION SERVICES BUREAU

3.23
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to explain why the Uganda Registration Services Bureau raised fees for marriage registration.

The Uganda Registration Services Bureau is created by the –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I do not have your statement. I do not know whether the Members have it.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) KAHINDA OTAFIIRE: I thought it was on the iPads.

THE SPEAKER: Did you post it on the Parliamentary website?

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) KAHINDA OTAFIIRE: Sincerely, I have no idea whether it was sent. (Laughter) I must admit because, Madam Speaker, as you were a minister one time, you know that some of these things are not our jobs. (Laughter) I have it here and I presume the honourable members have copies. – (Interjections)– I check on my iPad? I am computer illiterate. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, I have never collected the iPad anyway.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, I would like to confirm the fears of the honourable minister that actually, on the iPad, the only thing we have is the Order Paper of today. There is nothing else. So, we need the copies of the statement.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) KAHINDA OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, I will make sure the copies are put on the iPad tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: So, either you produce copies or send it to the Clerk to load on the Parliamentary website.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) KAHINDA OTAFIIRE: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE HIV AND AIDS PREVENTION AND CONTROL BILL, 2010

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, after one or two clauses, two procedural issues were raised and one of them was quorum. The second one was that Members had not understood the HIV/AIDS Bill. Recently, I was reading an email inviting Members to go for a seminar about this Bill. 

The issue I am raising, Madam Speaker, is that given the numbers we see here, I do not think we can proceed, and given the sensitivity of this Bill. If you go through it, if you look at clause 43 -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, why are you jumping ahead of everybody? Let us go to Bills Committee Stage.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE HIV AND AIDS PREVENTION AND CONTROL BILL, 2010

Clause 4

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, the committee proposes to rephrase clause 4 to read as follows: “Counselling of any person under this Act shall only be conducted by a medical practitioner, qualified officer or counsellor.” The justification for this is: one, to make the provision broader by introducing qualified officer; two, it is not necessary to refer to a medical practitioner as “qualified medical practitioner” since the phrase “medical practitioner” is defined; and three, to avoid unnecessary repetition since the word “counsellor” is already defined in the Bill. 




MS OSEGGE: Madam Chair, rule 23 of our Rules of Procedure prohibits us from conducting business, especially as important as this, without quorum. Could we kindly verify?

DR OMONA: I beg your pardon, Madam Chair; in clause 4, we actually do not have any amendments. What I was reading was clause 5. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 4 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, agreed to.

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Wafula Oguttu): Madam Chair, we have passed laws here where quorum has been in question. The last time, we passed the anti–gay Bill and we were questioned and criticized, including by the Head of State, who said he would never sign that law because we passed it without quorum. In the Seventh Parliament, there was an issue of quorum –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, you are the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, where are your Members? It is your responsibility. 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Chairperson, I have 60 members and the opposite side of the House has 300 members but they are now less than 60 in the House; over 200 of them are away. 

MR KAMARA: Madam Chair, I rise on a point of order. We are here in this Parliament of Uganda to represent our people. The seats on the side of the Leader of the Opposition, my good brother, are empty. 

Two, it is really awkward, now that we are here and the Opposition is not even represented - they are very few – for the Leader of the Opposition to query the quorum. Madam Chair, is he in order to come here without his members and start saying that there is no quorum? Is he in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I do not think you should use rules to defeat the work of this House, especially when we gave you notice. The House should sit today and we are convened. Let us proceed.

Clause 5

DR OMONA: Thank you, Madam Chair. We wish to rephrase clause 5 to read as follows: “Counselling of any person under this Act shall only be conducted by a medical practitioner, qualified officer or counsellor.” The justification here is that: one, to make the provision broader by including “qualified officer”; two, it is not necessary to refer to a medical practitioner as a qualified medical practitioner since the phrase “medical practitioner” is already defined; and three, to avoid unnecessary repetition since the word “counsellor” is already defined in the Bill. I beg to move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, the committee is trying to define who should counsel an HIV positive person. I do not think it is right to define. You may be a doctor and yet you do not know how to counsel patients. What you want to say is that counselling should be provided by only professional counsellors. The justification for that is that a counsellor will read your mind in advance and decide how to do it or handle the case before, but not doctors.

DR OMONA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I thank hon. Nandala for the concern. However, what I want to say here is that every medical officer has in his profession a component of counselling. There are –(Interjections)– I am giving information based on what I know. There are those who qualify as counsellors but every medical officer or medical practitioner counsels patients.

Now, as we have said here in our amendments, the word “counsellor” is already defined in the Bill. What we are saying here in justification No.2 is that it is not necessary to refer to a medical practitioner as a qualified medical practitioner because every medical practitioner is already qualified. I think we take it in good faith that every medical practitioner is qualified, and when we talk about medical practitioners, we actually mean doctors of various cadres.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I raised this because I did education, where there is a component of psychology. The psychology we do in education is so minimal that I cannot come here and claim to be a psychologist. They give you a simple dose.

Maybe I could help my brother further. I am a professional accountant but in order to a professional accountant, after qualification I had to do more to be declared a professional accountant. So, if there are doctors who want to become counsellors, they should go further to upgrade in counselling. That is why we should make it clear that in order for you to counsel, you must be a professional counsellor. Let the doctors go and get certificates in counselling and then they come and practice. We cannot assume that because you were in Medical School and they taught you something about counselling somebody you are going to operate, so you know everything; No.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. There are two issues here; one, who is supposed to counsel? Counselling can be general; we have spiritual counselling, medical counselling etcetera. Even with medical counselling, we have those who are psychiatric doctors that will strictly deal with people who have mental issues. Here we are talking about HIV/AIDS counsellors. This, therefore, warrants the need that whoever must counsel in matters of HIV/AIDS should be a qualified HIV/AIDS counsellor. If we deviate from that, we may get into a situation where we end up generating more worries in HIV/AIDS patients because we think we are handling them like general patients.

Secondly, Madam Chair, my understanding is that every six months, there will be information on the change in the strain of the HIV/AIDS virus. Therefore, it will mean that for every change in the strain, there must be information of counselling relevant to the change in the strain. However, the doctors are not actually privy to that information. Sometimes the nurses are taken for three months’ training in HIV/AIDS counselling and then they are given information that there has been a change in the strain in Sub Saharan Africa in such a way that now, the virus is a, b, c, d. They may be told that this other test is not going to respond to it now, and when you are counselling somebody, this is how you proceed and so forth. So, if you say, “qualified medical practitioners”, or doctors, we are moving away from the point. It should be qualified counsellors so that even the doctors are forced to go and do the course. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But honourable members, I think it is not just general counselling or anything; it is HIV/AIDS counselling and testing. I do not think it is just –

DR OMONA: I thank hon. Anywarach for having that brief knowledge about counselling. Colleagues, I want to emphasise that doctors, as part of medical practice, do counselling. The counselling you talk about is not industrial counselling or educational counselling; it is medical counselling, which is part and parcel of practice of any doctor.

Secondly, about information, yes, the practice of medicine is very dynamic, but I want to assure you that all those who practice must be abreast with this. The question of having doctors who cannot counsel should not arise.

Finally, Madam Chair, if we are to talk about counselling just as a qualification or a specialty, we still have very few really specific HIV/AIDS counsellors in this country. In fact, with the number of people who would demand for these services in both public and private facilities, you may not have these super qualified HIV/AIDS counsellors to keep up.  But we have found out, and this is true, that medical counselling covers HIV/AIDS and others, because these are guided professionally; there are guides provided for any counsellor providing HID/AIDS counselling. So, honourable colleagues, if you say we look for only qualified counsellors, we may not be able to provide the service required in this country.

MS SANTA ALUM: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I come here to support the chair of the committee. When we talk of counselling, in this case it is a technical issue. If you read the information that will be needed in that counselling procedure, I do not think any other counsellor, for example a counsellor from the church, can provide this kind of information. In HIV/AIDS counselling, the information needed here is about drug adherences and things like that. So, I support that let this remain with the qualified medical practitioners as laid down in clause 6 and even in clause 7, Madam Chair.

MR KAFUDA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Mine is contrary to the proposal on these qualified officers. If you look at our current situation in the country, the Government has failed to even recruit –(Interjections)– Yes, we still lack teachers and doctors, we do not have nurses, health centres II are there with no nurses. When we talk about only qualified counsellors, we are going to kill our people.

I do not see any problem with clause 5 as it is. Counselling should be conducted by trained HIV/AIDS counsellors. I have seen a team called VHT and it is doing very well. That team is helping our people. So, if we insist on qualified counsellors, then it means we are going into another thing, Madam Chair.

MR SSASAGA: Madam Chair, it will not be good to confine counselling to only the medical personnel because if you visited parts of Uganda, they have done several trainings and awarded certificates in guiding and counselling on HIV/AIDS. When they are doing so, they take professionals from across the board - social scientists, teachers, economists - and all of them participate. They are given training for two weeks or six months in guidance and counselling on HIV/AIDS. 

Also, when you go to the hospital or a clinic, there is that component of counselling and then there is also the other component of testing. The testing part is clearly undertaken by the trained medical personnel. Counselling is not necessarily by the medical person but anybody who has the skills, who has been trained and has a certificate in the guiding and counselling.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chair, let me ask, what is the definition of a medical practitioner?

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, if you look at page 5 of the Bill, a medical practitioner is defined as a person registered under the Medical and Dental Practitioners Act to practice medicine, surgery or dentistry. This category falls under this. 

Just like I have said, maybe colleagues need to take advantage and learn a bit about this. I just want to inform you that one of the things this category of medical cadres do in their medical practice is actually counselling, and this is specifically medical counselling. I do not mean industrial counselling, moral counselling, cultural counselling; I mean medical counselling. This is carried out by this group. That is why when we rephrase this, we want it to encompass all these who are qualified to counsel, meaning counsellors like you are talking about - those who have attained training in counselling and they can counsel. 

Doctors who are qualified can provide counselling and surgeons, whatever level of training. All these can provide counselling in addition to those who have trained as counsellors. Our amendment here covers all those but we are not including counsellors who provide counselling in churches and mosques and so forth. This is because it should also be counsellors who have done a course with a syllabus as indicated in the Bill here. So, our amendment covers all those qualified to provide counselling. I am only worried about why colleagues think doctors cannot counsel and yet, actually, counselling is one of the prescriptions that doctors carry out.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson of the committee, do you want to remove the requirements for the minister to approve the programme under clause 5? In the original Bill it is stated that it was a person who has completed an HIV counselling training programme approved by the Minister. Are you removing that?

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, when you read the definition of a counsellor, it is stated that, “a counsellor means a person who has undergone an HIV and AIDS counselling course approved by the Minister.” That is the category that has had training in counselling as a profession. What we are doing is to amend this provision to include the medical practitioners who are doctors in their different categories.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I raised this issue for one reason: the clause talks about qualified medical practitioners or persons who have completed an HIV and AIDS counselling training course, but also what hon. Sasaga said is true - doctors can do anything. They can test the person and find out if the person had HIV but the person who announces the news must be professional in that area. If the doctor handling it is a professional person, there will be no problem. You see, training does not require someone to get a PhD. Someone can go for special training for one month or so, and their papers will say that they have completed a course in counselling. This means they are now professional counsellors.

Madam Chair, a colleague has raised some issues.  In the villages – by the way, this HIV is rampant in the villages because there are no doctors there. People in those villages should be trained in HIV counselling. One does not need to know how to speak English in order to train as a counsellor. One can be a fluent speaker of Lugisu and because they are going to counsel fellow Bugisu, they will get the message clearly. I am sure this will contribute to job creation; it is another way to provide employment.

Madam Chair, I still do not understand the reason why the chairperson of the committee is insisting that doctors should qualify yet they do not have certificates or professional training in counselling. I am happy you asked him to read the definition and when he read it, it was about a person who does surgery - (Interruptions)

MS ADONGO: Thank you, Madam Chair. The information I want to give to the House is that not all doctors can actually be counsellors. There was a situation in Gulu Regional Referral Hospital where a 50-year-old patient went looking for medicine for pressure. When he met the doctor, he asked him his age to which the patient said, “50 years”. The doctor told the patient he was very lucky to be still living at 50 years because many people were dying before the age of 50 and he even wondered why that patient was there to pick medicine. So, can such a doctor be a counsellor? (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, what is your objection? Please re-state it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to agree with the amendment proposed by hon. Anywarach that the clause reads as follows: “A counsellor shall be a person who is a professional counsellor in HIV/AIDS and related matters.” The justification is that the person who is going to counsel people down in the villages must know that if they perform an error, for example by telling the patient that they have over delayed at 60 years and that they should have died by now, that person might die. However, if that patient is to be handled by a professional counsellor, the situation can be different. What I am saying is that counselling can only be done by professional counsellors in that area of HIV/AIDS and related diseases.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But I believe it is still the same thing that the chairperson of the committee was proposing. That it should be a medical practitioner, qualified officer or a counsellor. All those three are included.

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, I just want to emphasise that all these are captured in there. Anybody called a practitioner, a doctor, surgeon or whatever level of training, we assume that by the time you do specialized training you have qualified –(Interjections)– This is in the law. There is no doctor who practices without being licensed. If anybody does that, they face the law.

What we are calling practitioners here are those who are licensed or registered to practice, those who are all professionals. The isolated cases should not be taken as professional practice. The emphasis is that all these are covered. Are we only emphasising professional practice? It is very clearly covered in our amendment here if you read it carefully.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, all the categories have been covered – the medical practitioners, the qualified officers and the counsellors who you are talking about. Okay, I now put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed by the chairperson of the committee.
              
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6 

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, we propose to rephrase clause 6, which is about nature of pre-testing counselling, to read as follows: “A counsellor shall provide pre-test counselling to a person who has consented to be tested for HIV which shall include…” The justification is that the word “provide” is a more suitable verb than “give”. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 6 as proposed do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, clause 7 is about the nature of post-testing counselling. In clause 7 (1), we wish to substitute the word “give” with the word “provide”. The justification is: for consistency with the amendment we just made in clause 6 above.

In clause 7(2), we wish to propose the deletion of the word “immediately” and substitute the word “give” appearing in line one with the word “provide”. We also propose to delete the indefinite article “a” appearing between the words “getting” and “positive.”

The justification for this is that the use of the word “immediately” is not necessary since the provision makes it mandatory for the counsellor to provide counselling services to a person getting positive HIV results. Two, the word “provide” is more suitable and is also consistent with the amendments already made in clause 6 above. Thirdly, we proposed the deletion of the indefinite article “a” for appropriate grammatical usage. I beg to move.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Chair. I would like to request the chairperson of the committee to explain why we need to delete the word “immediately”? I ask this because the use of this word in the Bill is to ensure counselling is done alongside the testing. When you delete it, you will create a scenario where counselling can be provided much later. Can we get clarification on this?

DR OMONA: Thank you. Madam Chair, I would like to inform hon. Raphael Magyezi that it is at the discretion and the judgment of the counsellor as to when and how to deliver the results of the test. If in their wisdom they find that the subject or the client is not yet ready to receive the results, they will defer it to an appropriate time when the client can receive the results positively. That is how it is done in counselling. 

Counsellors do not give results immediately. They have to determine when, what time and in which manner to deliver the results so that they are taken positively. Otherwise, we would be having issues of people collapsing and others hanging themselves because of the results given to them. That is why we proposed the deletion of the word “immediately.” Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you mean they give you the results and just leave? Does a counsellor give the results to the patient and they just let them go?

DR OMONA: No, Madam Chair, we are referring to a situation where according to the counsellor, the patient is not ready to receive results if they have tested positive. Even those that test negative; somebody may be surprised at their results. So, the counsellor has to determine the mental readiness of the client. They can, for example, ask them to come back for the results another day in case they see that they are not ready to receive them. This is to allow for preparation to receive these results.

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Chair. I trained in counselling at the AIDS Information Centre and I know that before testing a person, they are counselled and those results are supposed to be given to the person immediately. That is the information I want to give to the House. Thank you.

MR KAFUDA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Yes, we know that it is mandatory that a counsellor must provide results to the client. However, I notice a very big loophole; for example, if the counsellor wants to destroy someone. It is very clear that when a person goes for a test, our kits are very genuine and so they can get their results within 15 minutes. When we start to give room to a counsellor to take their time and produce the results the following day, that is malicious; the results can be altered and the client can end up losing their lives.

MR KANGWAGYE: Madam Chair, I would like to inform the honourable member who has just left the Floor that once you go for a blood test, for example an HIV test, a counsellor must receive and counsel you. The intention is for you to get prepared for the results. When the results come, it is that same counsellor who will give them to you, no matter whether they are positive or negative. The counsellor will do post-test counselling. If the results are negative, the counsellor will still tell you, “even though these results are negative, continue protecting your life. Be strong as you protect yourself”. You will then leave as a responsible person with clear information on how to protect yourself and others as well. Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is counsellor Kangwagye. (Laughter)

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, in counselling, one of the very difficult moments is announcing test results. Let me give you this information as somebody who has had experience. By putting it in the law that as soon as a client is tested the results should be given, we will not have helped the fight against HIV. What I know is that although it is already mandated that counsellors should provide results, legislating for it here that they should be provided immediately would give the counsellors the mandate to give the results immediately after the test is done. What we are saying is that, let us leave out this word “immediately” so that it is –(Interruptions)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Chair, I would like to buy the position of the committee as articulated by its chairperson. I am saying this because we have already passed a clause that says that it shall be done by professional and well-trained counsellors. As professionals, they know how to go about that situation. For us to be so specific and legislate that this be done immediately means we are just straitjacketing the law. Therefore, since we have already used the word “provide” and we are going to deal with a professional person, they will know how to go about that. That is why I buy the position of the chairperson of the committee.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. It is known that it does not take long for someone to get their results after an HIV test. When somebody has been tested and they are told to come for their results the following day, in a way the counsellor will be telling this person that they are HIV positive – (Interjections)– Yes! This is because they know that the results are ready but that they are being withheld. I think this would amount to mental torture for that person, to the extent that they might even decline to come back for those results. 

My proposal is that we can use the words, “as soon as possible”. We cannot leave it to the discretion of the counsellor; that would be torturous to the persons who would need to know their test results immediately.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. One thing that we need to appreciate about counselling is the principle of client self-determination. The purpose for which a counsellor engages a client into a counselling session is to prepare that client for whatever results come thereafter. For you to come up with a yardstick within which to release the results is to undermine that principle and the essence of counselling. You will be undermining the professionalism in that counsellor.

We also need to appreciate the fact that the moment a client agrees to be subjected to a blood test for HIV/AIDS, that person undergoes counselling so that immediately the results come out, the professional counsellor cannot just throw the results to that client; they have to engage that client into yet another counselling session. That is what we, counsellors, have been trained to do. In which case, therefore, you build confidence in that client regardless of the outcome of the testing. So, you do not have to postpone; at the end of the day you must disclose them. You use your professional expertise to release the results to the client. For you to come up and say you are including a timeframe, I am afraid that we will be watering down the professionalism in counselling.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is your proposal? You do not want us to use the word, “immediately”?  What do you want us to do? Shall we say, “as soon as practicable” or what?

MR WADRI: Madam Chair, we are dealing with a profession. By the way, some of the clients even break down before the results are released; so, will the counsellor just come and release the results to such a client? They cannot do that. That is why I would support that proposal to use the phrase “as soon as practicable” so that we leave the release to the wisdom of the professional counsellor. If we just say they should release those results immediately without qualifying it, we will miss the point and we will miss the professionalism in those counsellors. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what are you proposing?

MR WADRI: Madam Chair, I want to propose that the results be disclosed as soon as possible.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we use the phrase “as soon as practicable”?

MR WADRI: Yes, so that we do a lot of ground work in preparing the clients.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you standing, hon. Nzoghu? (Laughter)  Okay, there is the Floor.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chair. When people go for HIV testing, they usually do it for a purpose. Current trends show that stress is one of the diseases that have no cure. So, in my view, Madam Chair, I would think that the use of the phrase “as soon as possible” could be improved to “as soon as practicable.” That will give the professional counsellors the leverage to decide as and when it will be possible to release the results. I also want to emphasize that when people go for testing, this should not lead to stress or increase their chances of dying because of stress.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, instead of taking a lot of time, let us amend this to read, “as soon as is practicable”. Is that okay, chairperson?

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, this actually removes the word “immediately” so that is very good. We shall take that amendment.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, what you have proposed is good, but counselling should not be done for only HIV patients; it should also be done for people who have tested negative so that they can be told that although they have tested negative, they should not mess up.

I would, therefore, like to amend that to read “…to a person getting the HIV status…” because they came for results and if you do not tell them the true results, they can jump onto the streets and start messing themselves up. So, I think both the positive and negative clients should be counselled.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, but the communication is contained in 2 (a), (b) and (c); this is what will be explained to the patient. Okay, honourable members, the amendment as proposed by the chairperson of the committee is to replace the word “immediately” with the phrase “as soon as practicable”. I therefore put the question that sub clause (2) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, this business of talking about only HIV positive clients is bad. We should refer to both positive and negative clients. Counselling should be a continuous process for both positive and negative clients. The counsellor could even keep visiting those people and urging them to continue living well. That is why I believe if we get people from within the communities, that would work better. 

If we restrict counselling to the positive clients, when the counsellors are seen in the homes of such clients, villagers might start to suspect. However, if the counsellors just visit both the negative and positive clients, it will appear good in the community and people will not be traumatised.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chair, from my reading of clause 8, it seems to contradict clauses 5 and 6, which restrict counselling to only qualified medical practitioners or persons who have been trained as counsellors. In clause 8, we now seem to be introducing a new entity called a health unit. Is this health unit interpreted to mean a counsellor or a medical officer? My proposal is that we amend this by substituting the words “health unit” with the word “counsellor” or “medical practitioner”.

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, the committee takes a health unit as that facility as defined in the Bill. A health unit as defined in the Bill includes a private hospital, clinic, nursing home, maternity centre or other specialized establishment as well as government units of the same nature. Clause 8 refers to the obligation of the health unit to provide these services to HIV positive persons to help them cope with their status. It is about the facility providing continued services to the HIV positive clients.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chair, I do not seem to agree because you cannot vest an obligation on a health facility that may at times not be a legal entity or that may not have a qualified medical practitioner or trained counsellor. Maybe we could refer to a qualified medical practitioner or a counsellor in a health unit. Otherwise, we will be vesting the responsibility into another entity called “health unit” that you have not covered under clauses 5 and 6.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, what I understand is that if that facility has a weekly counselling session, for example, they can ask clients to come in every Thursday of the week or something like that. That is the way I understand it.

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, that is exactly the understanding of the committee. We are looking at the facility in terms of its ability or obligation to provide these continuous services to the HIV positive tested clients. We imagined that if we talked about only the counsellors or if it is an individual, they can move away but a facility will continue to exist. These are some of the obligations that we are attaching to such facilities.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, I seem to have a problem following the argument by hon. Winfred Niwagaba that in having the law as proposed, we are assuming or presupposing that every health unit has qualified health workers. I thought that would not attract any debate because I want to think that a health unit would not be a health unit unless it had some qualified health workers. 

The services we are talking about here, from health centres III to IV and hospitals, are available and I believe this is what the framers had in mind. So, the issue of qualifying it with the phrase “qualified health workers” when actually at every health unit there should be a qualified health worker is not proper. If the unit does not have a qualified health worker, then that unit ceases to be a health unit. That is my assumption. I am just thinking aloud.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Chair. Under the definition of a health unit we only see hospital, clinic, nursing home, maternity centre or other establishments. There is nothing that ties a health unit to the provision of HIV/AIDS services.

I think that hon. Winfred Niwagaba has raised a serious point. The one who provides the counselling is not the unit; it is the counsellor or practitioner, and what are provided in that unit may be the facilities or the staff. So, we may need to amend that clause such that there is a health unit but specifically ensuring that it is not about providing the counselling sessions alone but also providing the facilities or service. Also, in the definition of a health unit, we need to state clearly that these are hospitals, clinics, etc., which provide HIV/AIDS services.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think you are creating problems for the counsellors because it will mean that if somebody has been seen by a particular counsellor, they must follow that counsellor to wherever they go. Even when they are in Kisoro, the client must follow them there because that is their counsellor. The place where the testing has been done is the one that should be obliged to keep monitoring the client. In a way, you are a client to that place. So, hon. Niwagaba, I do not see any problem with this provision.

MR NIWAGABA: Maybe we may not be looking at it in the same way. I would have had no problem if we were not restricting this particular service of continuous counselling to a health unit. When you read the definition of a health unit and what we have passed in clauses 5 and 6, and you do not provide for the counsellor or a qualified medical practitioner connecting him or her to a health unit, then you leave it hanging. This could mean that a health unit that has unqualified persons could also still offer the same service. So, my concern is: why don’t we introduce the same idea of a counsellor and a qualified medical practitioner to attach him or her to this health unit which is offering the same service?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chairperson, I do not find a problem with the way the provision is because the reference is to the health unit providing post-test counselling. It is assumed that the counsellor is already there because the counselling can only be done by somebody who has been allowed to do it. So, we are imposing a responsibility on the health facility that once they have provided post-test counselling, then the facility must continue to provide that support. So, it is assumed that the health unit has the person supposed to do the post-test counselling. I do not find any problem with the way it is. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: It reads as follows: “A health unit shall, after the post-test counselling, offer continuous counselling sessions to a person…” It is after. It is presumed that you have gone there, you have been tested and you will be given the results, so they are obliged to keep monitoring you. That is what it means. I have no problem with it. 

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chair, I look at a situation where we are going to tie a person who is due for post-test monitoring to a specific health centre where the person probably tested from. If I migrated from Nebbi to Mbale, I do not necessarily have to keep on going to a health centre IV in Nebbi. 

When framing this particular clause, therefore, I think we should take into consideration the fact that we should not tie a person to one specific counsellor for post-test counselling. Two, we should not tie this person to one specific health unit because this person can move from one place to another. So, that is what we need to look at very strictly. Thank you. 

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, I understand the concerns of hon. Anywarach. Actually, this does not tie patients to a particular facility. It is also professional practice that when a facility provides care to an individual, there are other avenues or referrals to other facilities. Patients can refer themselves or they can be referred to a facility. 

I want to emphasize that in this case, as is the concern of hon. Niwagaba, when we talk about post-test counselling, it implies that the facility has the capacity to counsel. This is because you cannot provide post-test counselling services when you have not yet done the counselling. So, I think there is actually not much difference in the arguments that are coming up. 

In this case, we only want to make sure that facilities that provide these services are able to provide these post-test counselling services. In some facilities that are money-making, they provide an HIV test for you and when you go back another time, there is not much they can do for you because all they could do was test for HIV. This is what we are trying to avoid.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 8 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9

DR OMONA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We wish to amend clause 9, which is on HIV testing services. We wish to rephrase sub clause (1) to read as follows: “A health unit may offer HIV testing services to a person.” The justification here is: to avoid repetition since the phrase “health unit” is defined in the definition clause. 

MR KAFUDA: Madam Chairperson, I am worried about the word “may.” It says, “A health unit may offer HIV testing services…” Why should it be “may” instead of “shall”?

THE CHAIRPERSON: It also goes back to the other argument that some of the facilities may not have the counsellors. If you use “shall”, it means that even the LC I must have a counsellor. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 9 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, clause 11 is about persons incapable of giving informed consent to HIV testing. In clause 11(3), we wish to substitute the words “form A” with the words “the third”. The justification is that the informed consent form being referred to under the provision is not reflected in the Second Schedule as form A. Therefore, following the amendments made to the section of the Second Schedule where the informed consent form appears, the proper cross-referencing would be to the Third Schedule. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 11 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, clause 12 - consent to test for HIV may be dispensed with. We wish to insert the words “or qualified officer” between the words “practitioner” and “reasonably” appearing in line 6. 

The justification for this is: to make the provision broader by catering for cases where HIV testing may be carried out by a qualified officer, just like we have looked at in the previous clauses.  

We also wish to introduce a new paragraph to read as follows: “(c) a medical practitioner or qualified officer accidentally comes into contact with the blood or body fluid of a patient.” The justification for this is: to enable the medical practitioner or qualified officer establish the sero status of the patient in question so that the medical practitioner or qualified officer can access post exposure prophylaxis where necessary. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I have not understood the rationale for paragraph (c). The sub clause deals with conditions under which consent for testing will be dispensed with. This is the consent of the person who is being tested.

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, what we are saying here is that if the officer who is in charge of taking care of the patient accidentally comes into contact with the blood of the patient or where they suspect contamination with the patient’s blood, the officer can test the blood of the patient to establish his or her sero status. This is meant to protect the medical officer or the qualified officer because if the patient is HIV positive, the officer can benefit from post exposure prophylaxis. This would protect him from having an established infection of HIV. 

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chair, I would need some clarification. Clause 12 specifically deals with testing a person without his or her consent. To me, the conditions given in (a) and (b) are still subjected to the medical practitioner’s reasonable belief that such a test is necessary. Now, if you bring in that amendment under (c) as you are proposing, it is as if you are trying to do away with this discretion still vested with the medical practitioner to conduct the test where somebody’s consent has been unreasonably withheld. Under those circumstances, is it really necessary to have that amendment when all matters you are envisaging under that proposed amendment are covered under this?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Actually, honourable chair, what you are saying is that this medical practitioner or an officer who accidently comes into contact does not require consent for him to be tested; that is what you are saying. This is because the provision deals with people who may have refused to give their consent to be tested, where the consent is unreasonably withheld or in an emergency where somebody has maybe had an accident and he is unconscious. Now, how do you introduce a medical practitioner? I do not see how they link.

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, what the committee is looking at is this: If any of these officers in their line of duty get contaminated with the blood of the patient, what the amendment intends to introduce is that this officer may not necessarily seek consent of the patient. The officer may have the patient’s blood tested and the purpose of this is to establish the sero status of the patient and not of the doctor. The purpose of this is to enable the officer who has been contaminated with this patient’s blood to benefit from post exposure prophylaxis if the patient was found to be positive.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you are suggesting that if my blood drops on you, you can test me without my consent? Is that what you are saying?

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, this is actually a common practice. A doctor may be in the theatre operating upon a patient and then there is a mistake and he contaminates himself, maybe he cuts himself with a surgical blade; in this case, he would establish the sero status of the patient. 

What is normally done is that the results can only be disclosed to the patient after counselling, but the results should be used by the doctor to protect him or herself by accessing post exposure prophylaxis treatment. This is because in order for you to access post exposure prophylaxis treatment, you must establish that there was contamination with infected blood and also that you, the doctor or the officer, is sero negative. So, it takes testing both ways for you to benefit from this.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chairperson and honourable colleagues, I am one of those people who have ever taken HIV drugs because I had a very bad experience when I was operating on somebody with pus in the chest in Mbarara. 

We are saying that when somebody has got HIV/AIDS and possibly is not yet on drugs and the viral load is very high, the chances of that person’s blood infecting you are very high. The earlier you start post exposure prophylaxis, the better for you as a doctor. If you wait for 72 hours to elapse, you will seroconvert.

This is common practice, Madam Chair. Doctors and nurses on several occasions prick themselves, even more so surgeons. You may be cutting a bone and the bone pricks you and the blood of the patient mixes with yours. You cannot tell them, “I want to test you” or you cannot go for the counselling sessions because you do not have that time. So, we are saying, give the doctors and the health practitioners a chance to start drugs. 

By the way, how do you PEP? Madam Chair, when you want to give PEP, you first test yourself before you even test the patient. If you test positive, it means you are a patient; you do not even need to test the patient at that point. You just stop.

MS SANTA ALUM: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I would like the doctors here to clearly explain to us paragraph (b) which says, “in an emergency due to grave medical or psychiatric condition”. Doesn’t this cater for health workers dealing with these patients in these kinds of grave medical conditions? I think this is covered under grave medical conditions. So, please, clarify on that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think that it does not. Supposing you are unconscious and they cannot talk to you, they cannot ask for your consent because you are unconscious for ten hours; that is covered in (b). I have understood the point by the committee.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. There is a study we did in Mulago Hospital, which indicated that there is a higher prevalence among health workers who are in the surgical discipline - surgeons, midwives, and generally, those who get into contact with bodily fluids. So, it is a challenge which is practical.

What the provision is requesting is that when you are a health worker and you accidently prick yourself or get into contact with body fluids of a patient, there is a time limit within which you should take the post exposure prophylaxis treatment. We are saying, let us allow the health workers to take this treatment because if the patient has been tested, then you will not immediately reveal the results but the patient can be counselled and prepared to receive the results if he or she is ready. Mainly, it is to protect the health worker and I think it will not be abused by the health workers in our health facilities.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chair. I have listened carefully to what the chair has said. He has said there should be a provision where somebody has to be tested in circumstances which need action to be taken. What I want to know is, if it is a doctor who is found to be positive, are you going to also handle the patient in the same way? This is because there is a specific time or duration and if it elapses, that the patient is also going to get infected. If the two people, the doctor and the patient, have been in touch, it means that either way any of them can get infected. So, how have you envisaged the protection of the patient?

About your justification, I want to say that I did attend the workshop and it is very necessary to rescue people where certain incidents have happened, where a drop of blood from somebody has reached the next person through a touch or a prick. If we leave this out, many people will get infected innocently. So, it is necessary to provide for this.

THE CHAIRPERSON: How are you protecting the patients, honourable chair?

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Madam Chair. In relation to that, my question would also be: will the patient be privy to the HIV test results of the doctor before the doctor performs the operation, so that this would contribute to the willingness of the patient to consent or will satisfy him that when you are conducting this test on him or her, because it is forced on him or her because of the contact, this very doctor was also innocent? He who comes to equity must also come with clean hands because if that is not the case then you are going to actually put the patient on the more disadvantaged side. The patient should also have access to the results of the doctor from the tests carried out before contact of the blood between the doctor and the patient.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I read this clause very well and it refers to an emergency due to grave medical or psychiatric condition. By the time the doctor panics, then that is a psychiatric issue because he has blood on his hands. It is up to the doctor now because we have already provided that if you are a psychiatric doctor, test but do not declare the results. So, what are we trying to achieve? So, this law as it is protects the medical practitioner and the patient. Whether the patient is normal or abnormal, if you ask hem whether they ready to do it and they say yes, then you can do it. The clause suffices. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable member, when you are unconscious or you have run mad, you are not sufficiently lucid to give a consent, that is a psychiatric condition of the patient.

DR OMONA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I think the main thing here is about how the patient who also gets contaminated with the doctor’s blood is protected. It is professional and it is in the doctors’ standards of practice that certain conventional international standards must be observed in such procedures.

However, in circumstances where there is accidental injury which brings contamination between the two, the doctor should also do due diligence by testing himself. If the patient was unconscious or even conscious, the doctor should be able to inform that patient later that during operation, he or she had an accident and this was the nature of the accident. The doctor will then propose that he or both of them screen themselves and advise that if he or she is HIV positive, they need to take certain steps or just inform the patient.

In this case, the doctor who flaunts this also goes against the law. There are penalties in the law that deal with such a doctor. A doctor who knows they have some infection or disease in their blood and accidentally infects a patient and does not inform such a patient, there are laws that can be used to punish such a doctor. However, the good thing is that in many of these professional practices, a doctor is always assisted by another person. In most cases, operations are done in the presence of another party, who could be another doctor, a nurse and so on. This ensures protection of the patient.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Madam Chair. What the chairperson of the committee is saying is correct. Many times I visit Butabika Hospital because my elder brother is a lab technician there. While there, I usually see him struggling with psychiatric cases. On one occasion as he tried to get blood from a patient, the patient got hostile, removed the syringe and even injured him. So, under such instances, you realise that what the chairperson of the committee is saying is very right. There is need to provide for the protection of such medical personnel. This could be for the good of the patients.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think there is agreement about that amendment but what is coming up is the right of the patient to know the status of the doctor who is handling them. Can someone propose an amendment on that? 

MR BAHATI: Madam Chair, I think it is a valid point that we also provide for the right of the patient to know the doctor’s status in case an accident happens during operation. I would like to propose that we say that, “Where accidentally a medical practitioner or qualified officer or a patient comes into contact with the blood or body fluid during a clinical operation.” That will provide for both - in case an accident happens on the part of the doctor that affects the patient or vice versa.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not think it can fit there. I think it should come under duty to disclose. I am just thinking aloud. Can you, hon. Niwagaba, help us?

DR OMONA: As we move on, we shall get to areas that deal with penalty and I think it can fit there.

MR NIWAGABA: To me, we are missing the point, Madam Chair. We are dealing with a clause that literally can be called “compulsory testing” and we have given the conditions: One, where the person to be tested has unreasonably withheld their consent - in a situation where a doctor comes into contact with the blood of the patient and needs to test the patient to confirm that they have not been infected by the patient; two, in an emergency. We have even said that for those two conditions to exist, it is the medical practitioner to determine if the patient has unreasonably withheld their consent and if they are being tested as a result of an emergency.

To me, this particular clause adequately caters for both the interest of the medical practitioner and the patient. If we are to bring in a clause as proposed, that clause must be a standalone clause. It should not be under clause 12.

MR MAGYEZI: My own feeling on this matter is that the need to protect the doctors is not in question. What is in question is the need to protect the right of a person to consent. To me, the PEP is not taken after one has confirmed that there is danger. It is taken under suspicion. So, one does not have to first test –(Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chair, allow me to correct hon. Magyezi. 

The PEP is taken by that person who has got into contact with blood of an infected person and that person is negative. In order to take PEP, one must have screened themselves and found they are negative. Otherwise, if you are positive, you a patient and you will take the other drugs. So, it is not taken on suspicion. It is taken on confirmation that one is negative but got into contact with the blood of a positive person. It is as simple as that.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you so much. I think what we need to be told is how to protect this practice from being abused. It is not only the medical practitioner that can accidentally get in touch with the body fluids of a patient, but even a policeman can also get into contact with blood of many people at an accident scene. 

I think this is not necessary. We are going too far in terms of the rights of a person to consent to be tested. If the doctor comes into contact with the blood of the patient, it must be up to the doctor to test himself or herself but not to automatically compel the patient to be tested. I think we must protect the right of the patient.

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, I have listened with concern but I am compelled to concede to the proposal by hon. Niwagaba. Look at line six - taking the amendment that we have made by adding “or qualified officer” - it caters for all these circumstances that we are talking about. Line six reads as follows: “…and the medical practitioner or qualified officer reasonably believes that such a test is clinically necessary or desirable in the interest of that person.” 

Maybe the amendment we can now welcome is a standalone clause to protect the patient. If there is such amendment on this, we can take it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, are you withdrawing the amendment?

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, there was a proposal to have a separate clause that protects the patients. If that is not forthcoming, this as it is in the Bill, with the amendment we have made on the sentence by adding “or qualified officer”, caters for these circumstances. In this case, we will drop the amendment to include another sub-clause (c).

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, what hon. Magyezi has brought up has also intrigued me. First of all, a police officer gets a robber on the road who has been shot and he carries him bleeding; how do you protect that police officer who has got in touch with body fluids? (Interjection) Okay, it may not be a robber but an accident victim. How do you deal with that?

Madam Chair, even here, hon. Niwagaba talked about the patient and the doctor. In this case, if we are trying to amend this, it should be in the interest of both and not only one person. However, how do we cater for the Police? I would suggest that we add here, “a medical practitioner or any other person” who could be a police officer or even a Member of Parliament who has got somebody on the road and rescued him or her - (Interjections) - Yes, or a family member. So I want to add that in the interest of both.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think let us deal with the issue of consent first then we can introduce new amendments. The only amendment is to add the words, “or qualified officer” after “medical officer”.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Chair, as we go to consent, I see us on the periphery of this problem of HIV. Circumstances under which HIV tests can be dispensed with – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, it is “consent” - Circumstances under which consent can be dispensed with.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Okay, “consent”. If two people intend to marry and they have agreed or their parents have agreed but one partner is hesitant to go for an HIV test, my considered opinion is that consent should be dispensed with in that circumstance. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then nobody is complaining. If they have agreed then – 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: They have agreed to get married but in the process – I have seen it elsewhere - the boy or girl may begin to play around and refuse to test. I have been sensitive to my community in the villages and I have seen cases where the parents have told young people that, “You two are going to get married”, and the parents have agreed to a give-away between themselves. In those circumstances, I just believe that consent on HIV testing must be dispensed with so that HIV testing for people intending to marry is mandatory.

MR WADRI: Madam Chair, let us not be utopian; we must make laws which are practicable and can be enforced. When you are talking about marriage, there are various types of marriage. We are now treading on very slippery ground. Let us be conscious of what is happening out there. 

When you talk about marriage, what type of marriage are you talking about where you are going to ask the boy and girl to go for HIV testing? How many times do boys and girls marry in our villages? They do it every day and their marriages are recognised by society. Are we going to subject such kind of people to this law? Are we sure that is what is happening in our villages where we come from?

When we are talking about testing before marriage, I think we are just talking about going to churches and mosques. But if it is the everyday marriage that is taking place on the African continent, it may not be important. That is my opinion.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think we should read the provisions together. If we start with clause 10, it is on voluntary HIV testing and it says, “A person may take a voluntary HIV test if he or she gives his or her informed consent.” I do not see it being said anywhere that it must be mandatory. 

Where you are not capable, your parents or your guardian or next of kin or agent can give that consent. Where you are maybe in hospital or you lock yourself in a toilet or you are unconscious or in a psychiatric ward, that is when they say consent should be dispensed with because you will not get it from a mad person.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, I agree with that, but from the reading of clause 12, it is to the advantage of a patient. The committee chair is moving towards conceding but we are asking for the doctor’s protection in this. 

This is because my understanding of the section is that in the interest of the patient, we can dispense with the consent, for example where the patient has unreasonably withheld the consent or in an emergency due to grave medical or psychiatric condition. That refers to the patient under those circumstances.  It goes on to say, “…and the medical practitioner reasonably believes that such a test is clinically necessary or desirable in the interest of that person.” We are talking about the patient here and the amendment intended to take care of the doctor.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is why I said that let us deal with clause 12 as it is and then we can introduce a standalone clause.

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, if you continue reading the Bill, especially clause 42, it refers to offences relating to breach of safety practices of HIV. I think we will deal with that, if you allow, when we reach there. It refers to what the honourable member is talking about.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, have you abandoned the new paragraph and you are only introducing the words “qualified officer”?

DR OMONA: Yes, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 12 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13

DR OMONA: Thank you, Madam Chair. Clause 13 is on HIV testing for purposes of criminal proceedings. We wish to rephrase the headnote and the entire provision to read as follows: 
“HIV testing of persons charged with sexual offences 
A person who is charged with a sexual offence shall be subjected to HIV testing for purposes of criminal proceedings and investigations.” 

Our justification for this is: 
(i) 	For specificity since the requirement to carry out HIV testing during criminal proceedings would only be necessary in sexual offences, which have a direct link to HIV transmission like rape, incest and defilement.

(ii) 	It would not be necessary to carry out HIV testing for a person who has already been convicted as this could amount to discrimination and does not serve the purpose of prevention.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Committee chair, supposing I have complained against you and you have not yet been charged, why should you be absolved from the test? I am a complainant and you are out on police bond and have not been charged, why should you be exempted from the test?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I am sure there is no HIV which is different from one person to the other. Why am I saying this? A woman may claim that she was raped and she is HIV positive but she may have got infected by someone else. How do you prove that the HIV she has is from the accused person? 

I raise this because this is a dangerous clause. Someone may be HIV positive and they wish to have you jailed, so she will say that you raped and infected her. How do you know that the complainant is right on the HIV status? I will give you an example. We had a case in court where Dr Kiiza Besigye was accused by a woman of raping her and the case was dismissed. How do you protect such individuals? Madam Chair, rape is already a criminal act under the Penal Code so it can move there.

Secondly, criminalising somebody by saying that when they test you and you are found to be HIV positive, you will now be responsible – By the way, even the law is not prescribing testing for the person claiming to have been raped. Maybe she is the one who raped the man and has infected him with HIV. 

If you say, “convicted of drug abuse”, that is okay but when you say, “charged with a sexual offence”, that is just still a charge and they have not yet determined. When you say, “convicted of an offence involving prostitution”, who is that? People in Uganda assume that prostitution is only for women and yet even men are prostitutes. In this case, this is also targeting even women now. So, I propose that the person who should be tested is the one who has been convicted but not the one who has been charged.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Chair. I want to start from the premise that while we consider this Bill, our role is to make laws and it will be the responsibility of the Executive to implement the law. It is their responsibility to put in place equipment and machines to test for HIV. Therefore, to start debating on the premise that we do not have the capacity to determine what type of HIV when in other countries that capacity is there is trying to imply that we cannot develop that capacity.

Secondly, for you to say that the person charged with sexual offence should not be tested – For the person who has been raped, in the first place there is the issue of the window period of three months. So if now you say that you will not test this person and yet they are on remand for one or two years and you want to test them after they have been convicted, how will you preserve that evidence? The three months’ window period would have already passed and by the time the person is convicted, you cannot determine whether or not that person was the one who infected the complainant. So, your argument of saying that you wait until a person is convicted cannot hold water.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you, Madam Chair. This clause on HIV testing of persons charged with sexual offences will protect this girl who has been raped. Remember that we can even do genotyping of somebody’s HIV. By the way, here in Uganda we can do it although it is slightly more expensive. 

We are assuming here that you are HIV positive and you have gone ahead to rape this girl; whether she is HIV positive or negative, you have raped this girl. We want to test you so that in case we find this girl positive, we can give her post exposure prophylaxis. This is to prevent this girl from dying. You have raped this girl and you are positive, so we want to test you so that if we find that you are HIV positive and the girl is negative, we give her post exposure prophylaxis and secondly we jail you. Thank you. (Laughter)

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chair, we seem to be failing to appreciate the import of this particular clause. First of all, this clause is in respect of criminal proceedings. From the way it was worded, I support the committee that it should be amended because a conviction comes at the tail end of a criminal proceeding. 

However, when you restrict this testing to a person who has been charged, then you also end up losing a wide length of evidence. Criminal proceedings actually begin at the time a suspect has been arrested. That is where even investigations begin. So I would rather, instead of restricting the testing up to the time a person has appeared in court for charging, it should be at the time of arrest in respect of a complaint – not now an offence – involving a sexual offence.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes. This is because a complaint has been raised. 

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, if you look at the original drafting of the Bill itself, we have done away with a number of these clauses because they were not necessary. Also, in the wisdom of the committee, our thinking was that we get this from the time a person is apprehended. We thought that in good legal practice, everybody suspected should be charged, which begins from the police station and something like that. 

However, since hon. Niwagaba has proposed to amend our amendment, we shall take his proposal. We could say, “A person who is arrested on a complaint involving sexual offences…” Madam Chair, we take that amendment because that is the spirit the committee had.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Chair, I need to get some clarification on sexual offences because it is a little bit broad. What are sexual offences?

THE CHAIRPERSON: They are defined.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: This is because even touching, according to the Penal Code, is a sexual offence. So when you state it like that, it is quite broad and dangerous. We should be very clear on what we mean. That is my worry. I need clarification from the committee chairperson.

DR OMONA: Thank you very much. Hon. Kivumbi is right, and this is also what the committee looked at. “Sexual offences” is very broad and some may not be related to HIV transmission. Now, we have only looked at those sexual offences which are related to body interactions that are associated with HIV transmission. So, the committee had proposed in the amendment that sexual offences include rape, defilement or incest. However, we can still define sexual offences in this case to be limited to those associated with transmission of HIV.  I beg that colleagues reserve that for when we come back to the definition clause, but I buy hon. Kivumbi’s submission.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So do you want us to stand over the clause?

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, you would advise because we have not looked at the amendment clause and we had stood over the amendment to be handled after we have looked at the different clauses.

MS BUSINGE RUSOKE: Thank you, Madam Chair. I have seen the three categories of persons who can be subjected to HIV testing for purposes of criminal proceedings. Where do we place someone who can intentionally get his or her blood and inject another person? I mean deliberate infection, like the nurse who did it to a child sometime back.

DR OMONA: Thank you, honourable colleague. I think if you looked at the Bill, there are other issues to deal with penalties associated with intentional or attempted transmission. I think we shall come to that in subsequent clauses of the Bill.

MR KYEWALABYE: Thank you, Madam Chair. I am rise on a procedural issue. I have noticed that the committee chairperson and the Bill sponsor are not giving enough time to members to contribute. As soon as an issue is raised, the committee chairperson quickly jumps to the microphone to respond and yet some of those responses could come from other members.

Madam Chair, this is for you to rule but in my opinion, the committee chairperson and the Bill sponsor should give opportunity at this stage for other Members to contribute.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, committee chairperson, I will invite you to respond to what they are saying clause by clause. (Laughter)

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, the committee chairperson was alluding to the fact – I think prematurely because I do not know whether it is necessary – that if we are to consider this particular clause, it should be stood over in one way or another. 

Madam Chair, from the interpretation clause, “sexual offence” has been defined to mean many things, including but not limited to unwanted advances or improper sexual advances. We all know how HIV - and we are lucky to have medical doctors in this House – is transmitted. Would it be safe for us to continue talking about sexual advances and sexual offences without being necessarily specific? 

When you look at the ordinary meaning of “sexual advances”, it means both unwanted and wanted advances. That is ordinary English. You can Google it and you will see. So when we use words like “advances”, we shall complicate this law. Is it protecting the man or the woman? This is a bisexual law. So, if I know that somebody is making advances to me, then it is a sexual offence. 

I am glad that hon. Omona has said that they are coming up with proposals to narrow this down. We need to narrow this down so that when we are approving this section, we know what the committee had in mind. We all know how this monster called HIV is transmitted – doctors you know this even better. Should we continue talking the way it is in the Penal Code when we are making a specific provision?

MR BIGIRWA: Thank you, Madam Chair. From the beginning, I was interested in knowing as to why we are putting all these in this area, especially to do with sexual offences. That is why I tend to agree with hon. Oboth. When I was reading clause 41, these areas seem to have some level of connection. 

My concern is on sexual offences, for example, defilement and rape. If somebody is tested for HIV, what are we looking for at this particular point? Are we looking at criminalising the one who has shared HIV with the other? At what point do you tell that it is Junjura who infected so and so? How do you begin?

Madam Chair, I have great concern when it comes to clause 41 – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we have not reached there yet. Please, we are on clause 13.

MR BIGIRWA: But you realise that there is a way they are –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Let me give you free information; it will answer your question. This Bill has very many parts and right now we are on a part to do with counselling and testing. We are looking at a situation where one can even compulsorily be tested. That is one of the grounds which they have brought – where you have been arrested in respect of a complaint involving a sexual offence. 

I will advise the committee that there is a sexual offences Bill by the Cabinet; you can look at it to see the definition of sexual offences so that you can marry it with this Bill. When we reach clause 2, the interpretation clause, we can have a definition which will marry this particular Bill with the offence we are trying to create.

MR BIGIRWA: Thank you for the information. That is the simple question I had - you do compulsory testing as far as sexual offences are concerned and then what do you do?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Junjura, I think you came late. (Laughter) Committee chairperson, do you want us to stand over this provision for now?

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, I propose that we stand over it because of the amendment we have defining sexual offences.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, let us stand over it; we shall come back to it later. Meanwhile, think about how to draft this and maybe someone can get the text of the – You know, that the Sexual Offences Bill has been in the pipeline for almost 20 years and has not even come for first reading. I am sure you know why it has not come -the movers –(Laughter)

Clause 14

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Chair. I would like to move this amendment on clause 14 in the spirit of the object of the Bill, which is to provide a legal framework geared towards the prevention and control of HIV/AIDS, reduce the transmission of HIV/AIDS, and to provide for management and prevention of HIV/AIDS. This also builds on the point made by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi – We could provide something that can help do testing of people who intend to marry. 

The churches are already doing this; before you are wedded, you go through some routine tests. I do not know whether this is asking for too much but I think doing that would help to reduce and prevent HIV/AIDS. If you are talking of a pregnant woman, why can’t you talk about somebody who is going to get pregnant? You are talking about a pregnant woman going for routine testing, why should we wait for a woman to get pregnant? At least we can define at what stage someone intends to marry or at what age a person should qualify to be married. So, I think there should be something to do with that.

MS ASAMO: Madam Chair, this would be an abuse of rights. We must know that there are children born with HIV and are now adults; are we going to deny them rights to marriage when we make this mandatory? Automatically, they will test positive. What is the purpose of making it mandatory? We need to know that so that we do not bar some members. 

Hon. Bahati has mentioned the church; in the church, if one person is HIV positive, they do not allow you to wed. I am just bringing up the point that we need to consider the rights of the people who are born with HIV and now are grown up and want to get married before we prescribe mandatory testing. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chair, the information I want to give her is that requiring somebody to test does not in any way affect their right to marry. That is my understanding. It is just to know how you can be helped; it does not in any way discriminate or do what hon. Asamo is thinking.

MS ASAMO: Madam Chair, what is the use of making it mandatory then? If I have been with a counsellor who has been guiding me throughout my life and I have also told my lover about my status, by making it mandatory, you are now making this person become discriminated against.

MS KAABULE: Madam Chair, I will also add to that by saying that if we are making a law which has no purpose – If we say that we should test people who are going to get married yet they have gone through counselling, what are you going to do if you find that one of them is positive? I think we should leave it to the church. 

At the same time, I think hon. Bahati is referring to legal marriage here, but we know that most of the people are cohabiting and yet that is not considered a legal marriage. So, I think we should not make it mandatory; let us leave it to the people who want to get married.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Madam Chair. I think if we are talking of people going to church to do testing, we should rather introduce the other amendment which was deleted – mandatory testing for everyone. Committing a certain category of people who are willingly going to wed in church, I think is subjecting them to discrimination.

Furthermore, we are introducing the other law of yours, hon. Bahati. That means people are going to run away in church and might end up doing other things. (Laughter) Yes, because we shall discourage people from wedding in church. We rather leave this clause as it is because people test voluntarily. Let us avoid inserting a clause saying, “Before you go to church, you must test.” I think that is wrong and we shall discourage people from wedding in church. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, I would like to help hon. Bahati. Whereas it is possible to make that law and ask everyone intending to get married to have mandatory testing, it will be very difficult for somebody from Kabale. However, what is the import of clause 41? I think clause 41 protects both parties. Clause 41 is silently calling for mandatory testing. This is because in any case, my understanding is that intentional transmission of HIV/AIDS – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, why are you jumping the gun? We are still on clause 14.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, I am giving information that that could take care of – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You cannot legislate in anticipation; we are still on clause 14.

MR OBOTH: Most obliged.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Chair. I think we need to understand the purpose of clause 14. First, the Bill is trying to recognise that there must be a right for a person to make an informed decision. If I want to marry, as an adult I can walk to a clinic and test and if my partner is HIV positive, I can make a decision to refuse to marry or to go ahead and marry even when the person is positive. We need to protect that right.

Clause 14 deals with some category from whom that right can be removed. Now, like victims of a sexual offence, if I have been forcefully raped, clause 14 is saying that the rapist should be tested for the purpose of criminal procedure or post exposure prophylaxis. That is why that clause is there. For a pregnant woman, there is already a policy by the Ministry of Health that to protect that unborn child, all mothers should be tested. That is why we are proposing a deletion of a provision that was saying that you can dispense disclosure.

Now here, we are saying that protect the unborn child by testing - the partner of a pregnant woman who has a stake in not infecting the unborn child. That is why we have three clear categories that are distinct. For the rest of the categories, we leave it to you to make an informed decision whether to marry someone who is infected or not. That is the purpose of this clause. So I would not agree with hon. Bahati’s proposal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister of Health, what is your comment on clause 14?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, before the minister comes in, I never raised an amendment on clause 13 because – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are now on clause 14.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I know. This concerns a victim of sexual offences. If a woman rapes a man - (Interjections)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order!

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If that happens, under clause 14, the man will be tested and if a man rapes a woman, the woman is tested because she is the victim. For the pregnant woman, I agree with hon. Amongi that it is to protect the unborn baby. However, the one which is dangerous concerns the partner of the pregnant –(Interjections)– Just listen to me, please. 

Hon. Bahati, if we pass a law saying that, those who marry will definitely test each time the woman becomes pregnant. However, there is a complication. When the Ministry of Health brought a law that pregnant women should go with their partners, the men refused and boda boda men become their partners. This is a serious matter. How are you going to handle that? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t you want the partner of the pregnant woman to be tested?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, currently, if you did research, - I went round hospitals with my colleagues - women no longer bring along their real partners –(Interruption)

MS KOMUHANGI: Madam Chairperson, hon. Nandala talked of boda boda men becoming the husbands of the pregnant women. Can you substantiate that? That is trivialising the matter. How does that come about?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, she gave me information. Let me help her. In this House, I am sure there are very few of us who are married and as we make the law, it says that if you are married –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much. Early this year, the Public Accounts Committee reviewed the maternal health services, which was part of a value-for-money audit. It was specifically conducted in Pallisa District. The findings there were that men were shunning accompanying their pregnant wives to health units for testing. So the women in Pallisa resorted to bribing boda boda riders to offer themselves to stage as the husbands of these wives. That report is in this House. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, are you suggesting that the partner should not be tested? That is what we are asking. 

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, I think what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is saying is a fact. We have this report; most of the partners do not want to accompany their women to the health facilities. However, that does not mean that we should not legislate and make laws that govern this. I think this is perfectly in order and I want to support it and request Members to support it. However, since – (Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the partner is okay because the only partner you will be sure of is that one hon. Bahati is talking about - those who wed in church or those who do customary marriage. However, a problem will come up with those partners who are not in that category. That is why I thank the Minister of Health for agreeing on this. It is a serious matter. You may sweep it under the carpet, but –(Interruption)

MR BIGIRWA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give you and the House is that recently, I was at a meeting in one of the sub-counties in Kyangwari. One of the issues they brought out as contributing to the low turn up of most of the women in government hospitals for antenatal care is that when they go there, one of the requirements is for them to be tested for HIV/AIDS. For the women, it is okay, but the challenge has been that when they go back home with that information, there has been a lot of punishment including separation. 

I therefore want to tell the House that it may not be necessarily the law. There is defilement even though there is a law on defilement. There is rape although there is a law. So, we passed a resolution in that meeting that we, the leaders, must carry out a high level campaign to sensitise and provide awareness to the population. Otherwise, we might even make a law that will promote traditional birth attendants thinking that we are making a law that will attract people into going to health facilities.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think we should make the law but advocate for responsible parenting. I remember many years ago, men would not accompany their wives to the maternity during delivery. They would just hear the news that she has delivered and he would be somewhere drinking. But these days, there are some men who go and sit there. So, let us advocate for responsible parenting.

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 14 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, clause 15 in the Bill says, “Notwithstanding section 10, a person may be subjected to an HIV test under a court order”. When you simply say, “a court order”, I may not have been arrested or convicted of a sexual offence but someone just wants to subject me to mandatory HIV testing. 

My thinking is that if this is left the way it is, it is too broad and it can be abused. Why don’t we qualify it and restrict it to a court order where someone has been convicted or charged with sexual offences?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have been hearing about these girls in Nansana, for example, who were raped and killed. Four of them have been killed. Supposing someone is identified as a habitual offender but has not been convicted, can’t court say, “Let us test this man because there is a problem with him”? That is what this one is about. 

I put the question that clause 15 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16

MR SSIMBWA: Madam Chairperson, clause 16 provides for treatment, care and support but it does not provide for who will give this care and support. If we pass the clause as it is, I believe it will be redundant because it does not state who is to take that responsibility of taking care, giving treatment and support. To whom are we giving this responsibility?

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, what this clause refers to is entitlement. It means that a person should be given care. Other subsequent clauses in the Bill provide for the obligations – there are state obligations to take care of anybody who is entitled to this kind of care. So this clause only talks about entitlement; maybe we will look at who provides the services when we come to look at state obligations in providing them. 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The words, “support and care”, I think are too broad. Support would mean support as far as medication is concerned but someone may need much more support when they are sick. Are we saying that Government should feed them, house them and nurse them? Is that in the capacity of local governments? Who are we assigning this? I think it is too broad. We must visualise what is possible and what is not possible. Maybe we confine ourselves to treatment and routine medication. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Supposing one day when we get our oil we are able to provide the food for them; shouldn’t we?  

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I am looking at 16(1) and 16(2) and they are referring to 14 above. I was thinking aloud that would it be possible to say, “A pregnant woman or a partner of a pregnant woman” and then the section goes on and we delete (2)?

Why should we have both? We are thinking that a pregnant woman is given a whole section about treatment, care and support and routine medication to prevent transmission to the child. However, can we marry the two and make it into one single sub clause? I can get the point at the end that it is purely to prevent transmission of HIV to the child.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think Government has a programme of prevention of mother to child transmission. I think that is what they are addressing here, and the men do not have babies. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, my proposal is purely in agreement, but I just wanted to marry the two sub clauses and then we delete the words, “transmission of HIV to the child” and then we say, “Prevention of transmission of HIV”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, they are talking of the child in the stomach. 

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 16(1) is a standalone because the issue of having medication to prevent transmission to the unborn child is vital. In (2), it is routine medication, not necessarily to prevent. 

There are different types of medication. If you put the pregnant woman together with the partner, you will be giving the medication of the pregnant woman to the partner, which he is not supposed to take. So, let us separate these two sub clauses. The purpose of (1) is routine medication for both the mother and prevention of transmission to the child and the other one remains just routine medication. 

On the issue of support, I think we need to retain support because already in the ministry policy they talk of treatment, care and support in all the documents of the Ministry of Health related to HIV/AIDS prevention and management. So the ministry will know how to implement this based on how they have already been implementing that support, either by counselling or whatever. It is already in the Ministry of Health policy for PMTCT.

MR SSIMBWA: Madam Chairperson, if we leave it the way it is, we are even disabling the pregnant women. According to my understanding of the explanation now, we are only giving treatment and support purposely to prevent transmission to the child. If the birth has already taken place, then the transmission is no longer there and the implication is that we should stop. 

For the other partner of the pregnant women, it is continuous. However, in clause 16(1), I understand that it stops when the mother can no longer transmit the virus to the child. So I think we need to widen it so that the mother is covered even after giving birth. 

MS TIMBIGAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I think the section the Member is proposing should be pushed to section 3 where care and support shall be given to a baby born with HIV. We can probably include the mother in the amendment. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairman, did you understand his objection?

DR OMONA: I understand the concern of hon. Ssimbwa as far as HIV is concerned. First of all, you should know that as we speak now, HIV infection is a lifelong infection that can only be suppressed with medication. There are three cases where they say a cure is possible but as I speak now, this is not something we can talk about. So care or treatment or support for HIV patients should also be a lifelong process; it does not end. Also, the risk of transmitting HIV from mother to child or from any person who is HIV positive remains as long as the person is alive. So it does not stop as you may think, honourable colleague. 

On treatment, care and support to the child, I think this clause should remain because in this case, we are first of all looking at a child as a vulnerable subject because it can be infected by the mother. In this cause, Madam Chair, you may also wish to know that there are also protocols guiding treatment given to children born to mothers who are HIV positive. 

Also, as hon. Betty Amongi has said, in the strategy for treatment and management of HIV, all these are spelt out. So care to children born to mothers who are HIV positive – actually we lost the routine medication – is continuous. As to when this can end, we may not have the competence of putting it in the law. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 16 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18

DR OMONA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In clause 18(1), we propose substitution of the expression “or medical practitioner” appearing in line one with the words, “medical practitioner or qualified officer.” This is because we want to make the provision all-encompassing and for consistency as we had amended earlier.

We want to delete clause 18(2). The justification is that the whole thing is superfluous because civil wrongs are not codified. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, are you suggesting that I cannot sue you for damages after the event? Can’t I take you to court for a civil matter?

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, clause 18 (2) reads as follows: “A person who contravenes subsection (1) shall be liable to a civil wrong.” Madam Chairperson, the committee has not found where a civil wrong is codified, for example defining a civil wrong in this Bill. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But I can sue you for injuring me and I get damages. In addition to you being locked up, I can still sue you. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I tend to agree with the guidance from the Chair that liability to a civil wrong is a constitutional right that you cannot even legislate by deleting or asking whether you should put it in, which actually should be done to make sure that this health unit or practitioners are not negligent. It could be a tort or anything that could give rise to a civil wrong. 

A civil wrong here means that I can get damages from your wrongdoing, including taking you to court for criminal proceedings but also getting damages. So I do not know why - is it because the chair of the committee is a medical practitioner and could be having conflict of interest? I know that is not true but I pray that we retain this. 

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, we concede to this. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 18(1) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19

DR OMONA: Clause 19 is on disclosure or release of HIV test results. We propose to redraft the entire clause to read as follows: 
“Disclosure or release of HIV test results
(1) 	The results of an HIV test shall be confidential and shall only be disclosed or released by a medical practitioner or qualified officer to the person tested. 

(2) 	Notwithstanding subsection (1), the results of an HIV test may be disclosed or released to-
(a) 	a parent or guardian of a minor; 
(b) 	a parent or guardian of a person of unsound mind; 
(c) 	a legal administrator or guardian, with the written consent of the person tested; 
(d) 	a medical practitioner or qualified officer who is directly involved in the treatment or counselling of that person, where the HIV status is clinically relevant;
(e) 	a person authorised by this Act or any other law; or 
(f) 	any other person as may be authorised by a court.

(3) 	Subject to subsection (4), a parent or guardian of a minor who tests HIV positive shall inform the minor of his or her status as soon as it is practical. 

(4) 	A parent or guardian of a minor shall ensure that before the minor is informed of his or her HIV positive results, he or she receives counselling. 

(5) 	Nothing in this section shall prevent disclosure of statistical information in relation to HIV test results.” 

The justifications are as follows: 
i) 	Clause 19 and 21 - in our amendments, we propose to merge clauses 19 and 21 to avoid repetition. 

ii) 	The requirement to counsel a minor before informing him or her of their HIV positive results is to prepare him or her to receive the results. 

iii) 	Penalty for breach of confidentiality by medical practitioners or qualified officers is provided for under clause 40(1) on page 20 of the Bill. I beg to propose.

MR KARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, I stand to comment particularly on clause 19(3). I would propose that instead of the word, “shall” we say “may” so that a parent does not have to be forced to inform this minor. The circumstances may be different - maybe due to age –(Interjections)- Yes, he is a minor but there is a time when one is a little minor –(Laughter)– probably when they are about seven or eight years. I think let the parent be allowed to have some discretion as to what point he or she may inform that minor. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Isn’t that cured by the last part - “as soon as it is practical”?

MR KARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, I do not know whether that is the case when we say, “The parent or guardian of a minor who tests HIV positive shall inform the minor of his or her status as soon as it is practical.” When you say, “shall inform”, I think the practicability here means access or time and not necessarily the age of the minor. So I do not think the parent has a lot of discretion with this particular clause as it is right now. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, in proper drafting, if you have the word, “shall” and then you say, “as soon as it is practical”, I think you water down the mandatory provision that you are trying to create. You are giving with one hand and taking away with the other. The word, “may” could apply and I support the proposal by hon. Karuhanga. 

Secondly, a minor is a minor, from zero to 18 years. So when we make it mandatory, most parents or guardians can actually comply with this. When the child is born, I wait and tell them, “This is my status.” I have said it and so –(Interruption)  

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chairperson, I want to inform the honourable member that in our new proposal in sub-clause (4), the parent or guardian of a minor shall ensure that before the minor is informed of his or her HIV positive results, he or she should receive counselling. There are specialists in paediatric counselling. So the parent does not just communicate to the minor, but they should take the minor to a trained counsellor. It is only when the minor has been prepared that the results can be disclosed. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Dr Baryomunsi, for the information and I agree with you. However, the dilemma is that as long as we have a minor here and the provision is “shall”, which creates a mandatory obligation on the parent, what is the purpose here? 

You have said at the end, “as soon as it is practical”, which is in good spirit and I think that it covers the intention and the spirit of the Bill. However, here when you use “shall”, it means that this law should be able to provide what is practical. My view is that this provision is very necessary but we can replace the word “shall” with “may”. 

MR EBIL: Madam Chairperson, recently, we read in the newspapers that in Jinja, a person referred to as a minor now was spreading HIV to other minors. So, maybe if they are informed, they would take precaution. I think that is why the Bill intends to cure that problem here.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In the fight against HIV/AIDS, I think the earlier the child or victim knows that they are positive, the better. Some of us operate schools and we go to a class or school and discover that some of the children are positive. Sometimes we get to know as a result of blood donations and the school administration is called and told to talk to the children. When you chat with these children, you discover that whereas they were born with the disease, they do not have this knowledge as their parents have kept silent and never passed on this information to them.

I really think that we should not shield the parent by saying that they may or may not tell their children. Since this is a law, let us make it mandatory that if I am a parent and I have HIV, the obligation is on me to sit down my child or children and let them know the facts. This is positive living; the children and I can move on positively knowing that they have it. So, I support the position of the committee.

MR KAFUDA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Going back to the proposal by hon. Karuhanga to use “may”, I do not think it would make it mandatory. It has to be mandatory that once a parent has received the results of that minor, that child has a right, as they have put it, to get those results. However, when we say “may”, it will not be mandatory and it is up to the parent or guardian to either release those results to the child or not. So, “shall” is better than “may”.

MR OKUONZI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I think it is important to realise that each of these clauses is based on a certain policy on managing HIV. The policy behind clause 19 is that as soon as possible, if you are a parent or guardian, you have the obligation to inform a child about his or her HIV status. It is not something that you can do by discretion; it is actually an obligation. 

The dilemma I see here is just language. When they said “shall inform”, they are then compromised by the fact that they do not know when it is going to be practical, so they said “as soon as it is practical”. If there had been some way of knowing when it is practical - In paediatrics, by the age of about eight years, you can tell a child that they are positive and let them know the implications and explain to them. But again, this depends on different children because children are not the same. Some may understand this at the age of five and others will begin to understand it at the age of 12. So, as soon as it is practical, it is incumbent upon the parents to explain and disclose the HIV status. The word “shall” makes it compulsory and should be retained.

MS NAKAYENZE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would also like to say that the word “shall” should remain. Much as these are minors, many times when these children are on medication, they ask, “Why do you give me drugs even when I am not sick?” So if it is not mandatory, the parent could continue concealing this information. It should therefore be mandatory for the child to know why they take the medication. I think the word “shall” should apply. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think the dilemma of hon. Oboth and hon. Karuhanga is: when can this be done? They want the parent to have leeway on when that can be done, but that dilemma has been solved by providing for counselling. If you take this child to a counsellor who thinks that the child is not of age, I guess they will be able to tell you, “No, let us wait for a certain age so that the child can be counselled.” 

It is important that it is made mandatory to inform the minor so that at the end of the day, it is about positive living and so that this child is helped. It is even complicated when a child is on drugs and the child sees that every day they are taking drugs but they do not know the reason why. I think it is important that this is kept. The fears of the two honourable members have been resolved by providing for counselling. So I would probably suggest to them to allow the House to proceed, given the debate that we have had.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are there Members still objecting to this provision?

MR BIRAARO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have a problem with contradictions. The moment we say “shall”, we are compelling them to do it, but when at the end we say “as soon as is practical”, we are creating a situation where we leave it to the parents’ best judgment. We are giving them flexibility to judge at what age the child is able to reason and understand. Also in homes, there are circumstances when you cannot disclose to a child certain things and there are times when, in the heat of the moment, you can reveal some things. 

So Madam Chairperson, my problem is if we maintain “shall” and then “as soon as is practical”, what are we providing for? How about that parent who fails to fulfil that obligation in the time we anticipate? We have got to answer those questions and then we will make one statement where we are saying the parent may, as soon as practical, because it is the parent to judge when it is practical for the child to know. Some children mature when they are still eight years old and others mature at 20 years old depending on the parent. So we need to provide one direction for this. My thoughts would be that the parent or guardian of the minor who is positive may inform the minor of his status as soon as it is practical. Thank you.

MS MUJUNGU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. A parent or guardian is a caretaker of a minor. Let us leave it to the discretion of a parent or guardian to inform the minor at an appropriate time. A minor of one year old up to 10 years old is not as old as a minor who is 17 years old, but at least the parent should have that discretion as to when to inform that minor. So it should be “may inform the minor of his or her status as soon as it is practical”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Should the parent also have the option not to inform, because I can avoid my responsibility?

MR BBOSA KIYINGI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I also share the same dilemma. At the time when it is practical and you say “may”, one may not bother at that time. So I believe we should maintain the “shall” in line with the spirit of this Bill. Thank you.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you. Madam Chairperson, having listened to colleagues and read particularly clause 19(4), I think with the counselling, it adds up. However, I would propose that a parent or guardian of a minor who tests HIV positive shall inform the minor from the age of 10 – Let us qualify it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do not specify the age. I think leave out the age.

MR KARUHANGA: Well, if the age is not acceptable, then maybe we can rely on the word “practical”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 19 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20

DR OMONA:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 20 is about confidentiality of test results and counselling information. The committee proposes deletion of the entire clause 20 because this is already catered for in clause 19(1); actually, we take it as clause 19.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it? Where? Suppose that person is not your parent but is a doctor who did the test; shouldn’t he or she think of the child?

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, if I could read clause 19(1): “The results of an HIV test shall be confidential and shall only be disclosed or released to the person tested.” Now, clause 20 refers to confidentiality of test results. Having merged clauses 19 and 21, we feel that this clause is already catered for.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You see clause 19 is dealing with information to the person who is tested but in clause 20, I am the custodian of that information; I keep the record. Maybe I have informed the person but I also take the records and then I go to the bar and say, “By the way, that man you see there…” (Laughter)

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. It is good the chairperson of the committee and presenter of the report is a doctor, but he is also getting information from social workers who do counselling. Confidentiality is paramount so we should retain that clause. Thank you.

MR SABILA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I defer with the chair of the committee on his proposal to delete clause 20 because clause 19, as you saw, is specific to an individual that has been tested especially the minor while clause 20 is general and involves the custody of all the information regarding the health status of people. When you go to 20(2), it goes ahead to penalise whoever contravenes. So this one can be used more and I think it should remain the way it is. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 20 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21

DR OMONA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 21 is on exceptions to confidentiality. Our committee had proposed deleting the entire clause 21 because of the following reasons:

i) 	Part of the provision has been merged with clause 19 and we did this to avoid repetition. 

ii) 	The deletion of clause 21(2) (e) is because the provision would be open to abuse and is likely to discourage people from seeking HIV testing and care.

MR SABILA: Madam Chairperson, under clause 21, there are sections that are very relevant. I may concur with the chairperson on deleting 21(1) (a) but not (b), which says, “to a medical practitioner, nursing officer, paramedical staff who is directly involved in the treatment or counselling of that person, where the HIV status is clinically relevant”. I think this one is still very relevant and according to me, this one should be maintained.

Paragraph (d) says, “Upon an order of a court where the information is directly relevant to the proceedings before the court”. This is what we are looking for, so why do we delete it?

Paragraph (e) says, “Where any other person with whom an HIV infected person is in close or continuous contact, including but not limited to a sexual partner, if the nature of contact, in the opinion of the medical practitioner, poses a clear and present danger of HIV transmission to that person” 

I believe those three can be maintained. We can maybe delete 21(1) (a) but leave 21 (1) (b), (d), (e), (f) and (g). Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Actually, honourable chairperson, I do not understood the rationale for deleting this clause.

DR OMONA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 21 is about exceptions to confidentiality. I had said earlier that we merged clauses 19 and 21 and part of 21, like 21(1) (e), we actually proposed should be deleted entirely. Clause 21 is about exceptions to confidentiality and when you read (1) (e) it says, “where any person with whom an HIV infected person is in close or continuous contact including but not limited to sexual partner, if the nature of contact, in the opinion of the medical practitioner, poses a clear and present danger of HIV transmission to that person.”

Madam Chair, where the HIV status of an individual can be disclosed by virtue of that person being in some close or continuous contact with another, including but not limited to a sexual partner and that in the opinion of the medical practitioner poses a clear or present danger of HIV transmission - In the wisdom of the committee, we thought that would be open to abuse. 

Let us take the example of people who play football; they come into contact very often and there are also injuries. In this case, and according to this, anybody or any practitioner who knows the HIV status of an individual or a partner in that game should disclose to the rest that you are playing with x but you should know that he is HIV positive. We think that this could jeopardise the long fight against HIV in which we had gained a lot of success.

MR OBOTH: Dr Omona, when you are bringing in the scenario of football, you complicate it. The word “partner” is quite clear here, and it means sexual partner, unless you are playing with a sexual partner. I think this section here can really help both sides. I do not think that the fear of the committee is justifiable enough to delete this section as this can help both sides. 

You have a situation where you either have fears or the other person has suspicions. You have a situation where people have to separate bedrooms or beds or stop having sexual relationships on suspicion. If somebody has to get information, this is the section. I think this would be very relevant, but the issue of football and playing with the partner - Hon. Bahati helped Uganda and now, we do not have to envisage that another football player will transmit HIV/AIDS to a fellow man. I think that is – (Interruption).

MS NAKAYENZE: Madam Chairperson, I really think we should retain this because somebody in continuous contact may be me or anybody. I may be a caretaker to my mother who is infected and if I am not told to take precaution, I am endangered. Therefore, it is very necessary for me, the caretaker, to be informed of her status so that as I am taking care of the patient, I take precaution and do not handle her without gloves or when I have cuts on my hands. The caretaker is also liable to protection because they can be infected at any point. Thank you.

MR SABILA: Madam Chairperson, when you analyse this statement in (e) clearly and underline the words “continuous contact” and then “the opinion of the medical practitioner as a present danger”, and then exposure and incidence rate, these are directly proportional; the more the exposure, the higher the incidents. We cannot talk about transmission of HIV and not talk about exposure. If the exposure is continuous, then there is a likelihood that transmission danger will go higher. Since we are looking at control of HIV, then this section should remain the way it is. I urge the committee to look into this.

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, if you would give me one more chance before - Looking at (e), actually it is the only one which is not catered for in clause 19. Many of these other provisions in clause 21 have been catered for in clause 19. The only remaining one, which is standing isolated there, is (e) for which we proposed deletion.

Madam Chairperson, in the wisdom of the committee, we think that if you read it as, “disclosure of HIV status of an individual who is in close or continuous contact…” - let us say with a sexual partner. One wonders how this can be done - one has a sexual partner and the practitioner knows the HIV status of one of the parties and it is now law that at his disposal, he can disclose the status of one of the partners to another.

Madam Chairperson, we have found this as one of those challenges that are affecting the fight against HIV. There are situations in health facilities where we have found very many women who, when they are found to be HIV positive, have actually been so skilful sometimes more than our counsellors. They tell them, “No, let me first see my husband before we can begin any treatment plan and seek consent from him so that by the time you start me on treatment, we are at par. If I start now without my husband, I will not be able to carry on with this.”

In this case, if we say it is now mandatory for a health worker who sees x and y as partners and x is HIV positive, this worker should disclose to y the status of the partner, many times we have found this to have caused a lot of domestic violence. This has actually hampered the good practice in the management of HIV that we have had.

Also, it does not shield the health worker from using this information for any other reason other than simply for the care or prevention of HIV. We may have a problem with an individual who may know that x is HIV positive and goes and reports this to the partner for any other reason. (Interruption)

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are listening very carefully to the doctor but still, one of the aspects of counselling and the testing system is that there should be disclosure. Sometimes couples are discordant, so if you keep information to yourself or to one partner, it might be risky because in the long run, the other person who is not positive will still continue with the person who is infected and will get the virus. So, disclosure in the process of counselling is very important and we should retain it. Thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chairperson, I just want to give more information in light of what hon. Kabaale is saying. 

What this provision means, because we had very extensive discussions in the committee, is that as a doctor, I may know a certain lady who is HIV positive but every evening I see hon. Bitekyerezo giving her a lift and I suspect it could advance to a sexual relationship. The original provision says I can be authorised by law to call Dr Bitekyerezo aside and say, “That lady you drive with every evening is actually HIV positive.” Without providing for counselling of the two, I directly tell Dr Bitekyerezo, as an example, not to travel with that lady or not to have sexual relations with her because I know as a doctor that she is positive.

We were thinking that maybe this could cause more challenges and could even be abused. That is why we proposed to delete it so that every disclosure in that kind of situation should be accompanied by counselling first, as you are saying, and not the practitioner just directly informing the other person who is in contact with an infected person.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I want to thank my brother, Dr Chris Baryomunsi, for that information because doctors could abuse if they want to take somebody’s wife or whatever. How do you protect the unsuspecting person? I think we should now find a way of protecting the partner. 

I would propose that if you, the doctor, discovers that x has HIV and is moving around with somebody, you could call the other partner and advise him or her to find out their HIV status. What will happen is that when the woman goes for the test, she will ask the man to also test. In that context, you will be saving a soul or in fact a family. Maybe you have children and one should remain around to look after those children. With HIV, I think that ethical conduct should be put aside and at least doctors should disclose to partners of those that they know are HIV positive.

MR OBOTH: Thank you. I want to add to what has been said and appreciate Dr Baryomunsi. The example that he gave, I think, was just honest and he picked it randomly. However, I did not think that it would be an example of a professional doctor, unless that doctor is a gossip. 

The proposal here is that the infected person is in close or continuous contact. Seeing Dr Bitekyerezo – (Laughter)– cruising his vehicle with another female or seeing somebody else giving a man a lift and then you tell them - this already, in my opinion, is close or continuous contact. I believe that the rationale of this proposed law is to protect the innocent ones who would not be able to know and you, the doctors, are in possession of that knowledge. I do not think that it is just a casual thing, otherwise that gossip is going around and I do not think that the doctors are gossips but professional people with a name and an oath to protect and save lives. I believe that the appeal for the retention of this clause has been made, Madam Chair, and I still do support that this clause, among others, be retained.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Chair. I do not really have a big problem with the principle of this. However, my worry is on the issue of the clause that we have passed on pregnant women having routine testing. Routine testing means that it is compulsory and the Ministry of Health these days requires that once you are pregnant, you go to a health centre and there will be a test. Now, this law presupposes that the partner of a pregnant woman will accompany the pregnant woman because they will be counselled together. If they are found to be positive, they will be counselled and will be told their results and if there is discordance, they will also be told. 

Given the circumstances in (e), if a partner of a pregnant woman refuses to go – actually, as of now, majority of pregnant women are going for antenatal service and their husbands are not going. They are being tested and being given medication and they are continuing to protect the unborn child. If we have empowered a person, because here it is a person and not a medical person, it means that if you go to the Aids Information Centre, there will be counsellors who will counsel you and then they test you. If they found you positive, he or she can tell the partner of the pregnant woman and yet for a pregnant woman, it is mandatory. 

For the rest of us who are not pregnant, you can decide to walk in for malaria or other test, you are tested and found to be positive and with this clause, a doctor or another person who has tested you can decide whether or not to disclose but for a pregnant woman, it is mandatory.  So, if a partner of a pregnant woman has refused to accompany the pregnant woman, I would wish to move an amendment to exclude a pregnant woman from doing mandatory tests to protect the unborn child where the partner has refused to go. This is because earlier, we said that both of them should go. But what happens if your partner has refused to go?

MS KABAALE: Thank you, honourable. I would like to give you this information so that it adds weight to what you are saying, because you are talking of a situation of a married woman. When I was practicing counselling in Jinja, I had a couple that moved in but the man was convincing me that when I get the results, I should not tell the woman. That is why we are insisting that this clause should be maintained because this woman was a white lady and she wanted to wed the man but wanted to test first. The man was convincing us not to disclose. Incidentally, when we checked, the man was HIV positive and the woman was negative. So, for me as a person, I had to disclose and at least I saved a soul that day. That is why I say that we should maintain disclosure. I thank you. 

MS AMONGI: I am not disagreeing with the scenario. The one I am talking about is that this law has made routine checking for the pregnant women mandatory.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, chairperson of UWOPA, for giving way. I think that clause 14 was overwhelmingly passed and takes care of a pregnant woman and the partner of a pregnant woman for the routine HIV test. I wonder where the worry of the whole chair of UWOPA –(Laughter)

MS AMONGI: My worry is that even if this law is passed, there will be men who will not go, and we have seen examples in the House where some men were resisting. There will be circumstances where some men will not accompany the pregnant woman to test but as a pregnant woman, I will not refuse to test when this law is in place. So, how do we protect that category that will walk in pregnant and the man has refused to follow the law by accompanying her? 

This provision is saying that if a sexual partner is in continuous contact, in this circumstance, he should be informed. Can we say that if a pregnant woman goes for antenatal service and a man refuses to accompany her under this clause, then the man is not entitled to know the status of the pregnant woman? How do we handle that circumstance where a man will refuse to accompany the pregnant woman and yet the woman will accept to be tested? 

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, chairperson UWOPA. One of my major concerns, and in agreement with her amendment, is to the effect that much as the intention of the Bill is to try as much as possible to help in issues of HIV and related matters, we are also mindful of others meddling in mutual areas of relationships and possibly even creating bigger problems of denial of pregnancies. If a man is compelled to accompany his wife, you create a bigger source of problems than actually the intended spirit of the Bill. Therefore, I would go for any middle position. 

However, in our culture – If what the Chairperson of UWOPA is raising is the way to go, I would support her amendment so that we do not tamper too much with mutual relations and issues of consent. The man will say, “If we are to go for a test, I am no longer responsible” and you know what that means in our culture.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I want you to read this clause carefully; it says, “…close or continuous contact including but not limited to a sexual partner…” Hon. Connie Nakayenze gave the example of a sick mother whom you are nursing; are you not entitled to know that this mother has a problem? You are nursing her for about six months and every day you are organising this and that! 

MS ALUM: Thank you. As I listen to these arguments, I am a bit worried because I have a practical example of somebody that I know. She is married in the Church but the husband went out and because of fear, discovered that the other lady was positive but he feared to tell the wife that “We are now sick.” He secretly went and started getting treatment and yet the wife was just there, not knowing. Since they are safe, she was just like, “my husband cannot go out; we are safe.” Later on, she started falling sick but since she could not imagine the husband moving out and given the fact that they are saved, she was just there praying. 

When I was informed, I first went straight to the doctor and I explained the whole issue. I said, “we highly suspect that this lady is HIV positive” and then I took her to the doctor –(Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_) - I will give you an opportunity later. 

Madam Chair, this was a lady who used not to fall sick but she started getting malaria all the time and then she got an attack of herpes zoster. All those were signs of HIV. She also got partial blindness and I brought her here to Mengo but there was nothing. I took her to the doctor and she was counselled. When she was tested, she was HIV positive. When we sat the couple down, the husband confessed that he feared and did not know how to tell the wife that this is the problem they have. 

So, I support the view that we should really maintain this clause because even for the married people, sometimes men are funny and they try to hide this kind of useful information.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from the mover.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have listened to various comments from Members and I went back to read the justification for deletion, which says, “The deletion of clause 21 2(e) is because the provision would be open to abuse and is also likely to discourage people from seeking HIV testing and care.” 

This particular provision actually is about the medical practitioner disclosing information. We have seen cases where a woman or man knows that he or she is HIV positive and hides behind other non-communicable diseases, confusing the other spouse that they have cancer. So, the poor woman is there thinking that the husband had cancer or was even bewitched and they end up spending money on other things other than focusing on the actual problem. So, to me, I would support that we maintain this clause. I thank you. 
 
DR OMONA: Thank you. I have listened very carefully to the contribution of colleagues pertaining particularly to clause 21 (1) (e). Just like I had said earlier, the other parts of this clause have been catered for in clause 19.

Much as 21 (1) (e) may be intending to protect those who are not infected with HIV, I also want to invite colleagues to address themselves to clause 3, which is about reasonable care to be taken to avoid transmission of HIV. It obligates every individual to take care of him or herself and avoid contracting HIV. We shall also see subsequent clauses in the Bill that obligate the state to provide services to make sure that everybody is aware of HIV, aware of means of transmission and other forms of care and control.

Madam Chairperson, 21 1(e) as it stands here, first of all, does not clearly state how, where and when the medical practitioner can disclose the HIV status of another person. Supposing he or she chooses to publish or inform - There are many ways of informing or disclosing. Supposing one decides to post it on social media like Facebook –(Interjections)– I am just giving an example. Hon. Minister, I will give you the opportunity but let me first say this – senior colleague, let me just finish what I want to say here and I will give you an opportunity to make the clarification. 

Let me say what I want to say by verbally reading this clause and then saying what I want to say. Clause 21(1) (e) says, “where any other person with whom an HIV infected person is in close or continuous contact including but not limited to a sexual partner, if the nature of contact, in the opinion of the medical practitioner, poses a clear and present danger of HIV transmission to that person.” 

Our great concern as a committee is that openness or public disclosure of a person’s status has been one of the hallmarks in fighting HIV. It fought stigma and made HIV to look like a disease that should not be discriminated against, especially those who suffer from it. We would drum up a campaign for the public to go and know their HIV status. In this case, if knowing one’s status will then endanger one or push one to an angle of discrimination, then we think this will affect the very strategies that we have for long used to fight against HIV.

Everybody is obligated to take care of oneself and there are measures or means available. Why can’t we leave this to individuals to take care of themselves? If testing is available and acceptable, for example, and you know very well that HIV is transmitted majorly through sexual intercourse and you have a partner that you want to marry or want to relate with, why don’t you go and test?

Just like hon. Olivia Kabaale was saying, I think this varies a little bit from the medical counselling that I know. When couples come for counselling, it is optional to them to have couples counselling so that both results are disclosed to them together. It is their choice. As we speak now, if one wants to disclose one’s status to a partner alone, that can also happen. So, if they choose to be counselled differently and receive the results differently, then it is also up to them to say, “I now want to know your HIV status; produce the results.” 

As I speak now, for HIV negative results, we do not write and give. They can only be provided by the counsellor. This means that if you want to know my HIV status, I take the results to my counsellor and he or she will disclose them. The HIV positive results are not written to be carried. In that circumstance, if people are aware of this, they know that even if you have not had disclosure when you are together, you can still follow your partner to make sure that his or her HIV status is established in the guidelines of counselling that we know. 

Madam Chairperson, I want to plead with you and Members because this, according to us, will tantamount to discrimination against people living with HIV  – for a medical practitioner to say - it cannot even be an allegation; I have a right because it is in the law – that so and so has HIV. So, this is our concern that it may be opened to abuse. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, I am constrained to rise on a procedural issue. I have been listening to the chairperson of the committee and he seems to be, to the best of my knowledge, talking to himself. (Laughter) We have to be honest; we had a very prolonged debate on this matter and we are nearing the end. I appreciate the passion that Dr Omona has on this matter. However, is it procedurally right for a Member to speak to himself even when other people are not listening? (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chair, you know that when you bring a report here and you present it, we are not obliged to accept or reject everything that you propose. So, you should take into account what people are saying. Do not say that your position must win. 

DR OMONA: Much obliged. I do not refuse but I have only been putting the position of the committee as we perceived it. We will be in position to accept the decision of the House but we want to be on record as to why we had insisted that this is a –(Interjections)– I am sorry if this is tantamount to speaking to myself, but I am just giving the position of the committee. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The General wanted to say something.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you. I just want to agree with the chairperson that this amendment can be deleted – (Interjections) - I am just giving my thoughts. If we allow doctors to even go against their own ethics and indulge in secret revelations about their patients, who will tell their own stories? If they can talk about others, what about their stories? So, I think –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Mr Prime Minister, are you speaking as the Prime Minister or as the honourable Gen. Moses Ali because this is a Cabinet proposal? Are you speaking as Gen. Moses Ali of West Moyo?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I do not see when I speak in a different position – (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: But this is a Government Bill.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Yes. A Cabinet proposal can also be turned down here because when Cabinet says things here, this House may or may not accept. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But your Cabinet colleague in charge of this sector supports the position.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: But my Cabinet colleague is talking about the amendments. I speak as a Member of Parliament for East Moyo.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thought Gen. Moses Ali, who is the acting Leader of Government Business, was awake because if he was awake, he would have followed the debate of the Members. (Laughter) One of the issues that have been raised is that the committee should also take the position of the Members of Parliament. Now the Leader of Government Business gets up and wants us to take his position. Isn’t it procedurally right, given the fact that the whole Front Bench is tired, that we stop here and we start again tomorrow when they are a bit sober?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this is an intricate Bill and Members have spoken on many issues. I think let us ask the movers to move that the House resumes.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: But I am not asleep. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are very wide-awake. (Laughter) General, you are very wide-awake.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Since this House is in public, I also want to put it on record that I have been awake for every minute that this House has been sitting today. (Laughter) If the former Leader of the Opposition is not aware that I was awake, then he is the one who was not awake. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can we have someone move that the House resumes?

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.53
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Medard Bitekyerezo): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)
 
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.54
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Medard Bitekyerezo): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The HIV and AIDS Prevention and Control Bill, 2010” and it has amended clauses 5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 12, and 19 and has passed clauses 8, 10, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 20 without amendments, and stood over clauses 13 and 21. I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.55
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Medard Bitekyerezo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you very much for the work. It is very laborious but we made some progress. The House is adjourned to 2 O’clock tomorrow afternoon.

(The House rose at 6.55 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 7 May 2014 at 2.00 p.m.) 
