
Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.




Tuesday, 7 May 2019

Parliament met at 2.04 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I wish to inform you of the passing of Mr Jasper Ssekitoleko, the husband of hon. Victoria Ssekitoleko, a former Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries in the Government of Uganda and Member of Parliament for Butembe County, Jinja District.

On behalf of Parliament and on my own behalf, I wish to convey my heartfelt condolences upon this great loss. We pray for God’s grace and support to the Ssekitoleko family during this most trying period. Honourable members, let us rise and observe a moment of silence.

[Members stood and observed a moment of silence.]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I wish to congratulate the Muslim fraternity for observing the Ramadan which started on Monday, 6 May 2019. This annual observance is regarded as one of the five pillars of Islam and we pray that the Almighty Allah provides peace, good health, love, harmony and plenty of food and drinks to enable our Muslim brothers and sisters go through Ramadan.

Just like we have done before, Parliament during the Ramadan period will adjourn earlier than the usual time to enable our Muslim colleagues to break their fast. 

On behalf of Parliament and on my own behalf, I wish the leadership of the Muslim community and all its followers a happy and peaceful Ramadan.

You will also recall that last week, the Uganda Orthodox Church marked its centenary celebrations on Sunday, 5 May 2019. On behalf of Parliament and on my own behalf, I wish to congratulate the clergy and the followers of the Orthodox faith upon the great achievement and pray that the Orthodox Church may continue to grow in leaps and bounds for a better future.

In a special way, I would like to congratulate our colleague, the hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, the MP for Lwemiyaga, who is an Orthodox leader and elder. I remember a few years back, he took me to his church somewhere on Hoima Road and from there, I saw the rigor and the procedures that they use when they are praying and then I came to the conclusion that you will never understand a person properly until you have visited where they pray. (Laughter)

Therefore, I understood the honourable member for Lwemiyaga very well when I saw him at his place of worship and looking at the procedures that they go through when they are worshiping. You cannot risk misunderstanding the hon. Ssekikubo.

Related, the Orthodox Church has set out to build a multimillion church on Lubya Hill in Rubaga Division Kampala. I appeal to all Members to contribute towards this noble initiative.

Honourable members, annually, the United Nations Global Road Safety Week is celebrated in May between the 6th-12th. Therefore, it is appropriate that we commemorate this event. Repeatedly when accidents have occurred, Parliament has not only commiserated with the bereaved families but has proposed measures to render our roads safe for its users. 

It is important to note that the United Nations Decade for Action for Road Safety is coming to an end, and the question to ask is whether Uganda has been able to meet the aspirations and goals as enshrined by the United Nations Decades for Road Safety.

Road accidents in Uganda are still high and need to be curbed. We should continue to sensitise the public on safe use of roads. It is only then that the carnage on roads will be reduced and the misery that arises from the loss of relatives will be minimised.

In a special way, I would like to recognise the good work done by Mr Charles Kizito Nsubuga. He is always in Parliament and our offices trying to remind us of the importance of this thing we call road safety. He is a road and workplace safety analyst, volunteer and we thank him for his activisms in spreading the gospel on road safety in Uganda.

Honourable members, it is going to be a busy week. We have Bills to finish. One of the biggest Bills we need to finish is the Roads Bill and I am hoping that we are set to handle that and finish it today to give this country a better law that will govern our roads.

There are other Bills that were pending from last week; we shall also see how to finish them.

Honourable members, you will also recall that there was a motion that was tabled here and we stayed it for debate until this week. We will also find time and deal with it. It was a motion from the Committee on Health. Thank you very much and welcome again to this sitting.

I have Members who have urgent matters to raise and I will start with the Member for Nakaseke South.

2.13
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke County South, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent public importance regarding the outbreak of Hepatitis B in my constituency specifically the sub counties of Kapeka, Nakaseke, Kasangombe and Ssemuto. We have so far lost six people.

Worse still, our referral hospital, Nakaseke Referral Hospital, has no vaccines. The health centres IV also reported scarcity of vaccines.

Mr Speaker, I have reported this matter so that we find a quick solution. The people I represent do not know the mode of transmission therefore some of them have resorted to going to witch doctors which is worsening the matter. I pray that the Government starts sensitising people on how Hepatitis B spreads and then avail vaccines.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister for Health.

2.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEATH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for bringing this issue to our attention. Some time back, it was raised but he is now bringing specific sub counties that have been affected.

We have taken keen note and as he said, there is need for massive sensitisation of the entire country on how we can avoid getting Hepatitis B and how we can stay healthy. I have taken note and I would like to pledge that immediate intervention will be put in place.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Gulu Municipality.

2.15
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of urgent importance. Over the weekend, on Saturday, we were treated to a very despicable scene in Gulu Referral Hospital where we forcefully discovered two decomposing bodies in the mortuary. We were later on told that they had been there for over three weeks with no responsibility of seeing that those two bodies were properly buried. This raises a very important issue in regard to the management of Gulu Regional Referral Hospital. 

Our prayer, as communities from Gulu, is that the director of Gulu Regional Referral Hospital should be removed with immediate effect. 

I am very happy that the Minister of Health is here. We all share this referral hospital because it covers the greater part of northern Uganda. We cannot allow this level of indecency and immorality to the extent that the management tolerates this kind of behaviour. 

If you saw that site that day, for those who watch NBS and other news agencies, it was like genocide. It is not something that should come from Uganda. It is a very bad image for the country. I pray that the director, with immediate effect, be relieved of his duties. 

2.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Mr Speaker, what happened in Gulu Regional Referral Hospital is indeed regrettable and very unfortunate. We were made to know that the bodies were brought from another district and dumped at the gate of the hospital, which was indeed irresponsible of the people who did that. 

However, it is true that Gulu Regional Referral Hospital is not mandated to take unclaimed bodies and bury them. That responsibility is entirely for Gulu Municipal council; the municipality has the mandate. The fact that it has taken too long in the hospital is also questionable. 

We have also noted the concern on the director of the hospital and I think we will put investigations in place to find out exactly what has happened. It will be very unfair for the ministry and Government to just dismiss him, without putting in place investigations and knowing what has gone wrong. This is important so that, together, we come to a logical conclusion and then make a decision thereafter. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is it true that they requested for Shs 10 million to repair the refrigeration system in the mortuary and that money has not been made available to them? 

DR MORIKU: Mr Speaker, I am not aware of that. I request that you give me time to find out if that is what they demanded. However, what I know is that indeed, the refrigerator in the mortuary was not working. Of course, that amount of money does not really withstand because it is too much to repair a refrigerator. Give me time to get the details. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also do not agree with dismissing that staff and I would like to seek clarification from the minister. Would it be possible to provide this House with a record of mortuaries in all regional referral hospitals? Could you tell us if they are functional or not? 

Mr Speaker, the problem is wider than what we are hearing from Gulu. Let me give you information on Masaka Regional Referral Hospital. When somebody dies, they keep the body in the wards because the mortuary is non-functional. There is no hospital that can get a dead person and fails to put the body in the mortuary because it has to be released on record. 

Honourable minister, could you provide us with information on mortuaries in the whole country against those regional referral hospitals so that we know how they function. That is just one scenario but we, from rural areas like Masaka, find dead bodies rotating everywhere kept in the wards and people complain. Some of us grew up fearing dead bodies but now children are getting used to them because of that. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I do not think bringing that information to Parliament will help the situation. Why don’t you go to these mortuaries, check their state and fix them, instead of coming with a list to Parliament. How will that help?

DR MORIKU: Thank you for the wise ruling, Mr Speaker. I will do that. However, the mortuaries are not meant for dumping every dead body, including those people that die at home. Basically, it is meant to put decently people who died from hospital and those from accident sites. Today, you get people using it for putting all sorts of bodies. 

I oblige with your ruling. I will take time together with the technical people and move around. Where need be, we will come back to the same Parliament that gives us the funds and the resources, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

2.22
MR FRANCIS ZAAKE (Independent, Mityana Municipality, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgency in Mityana Hospital. I have heard my colleagues talk about the non-functioning machines in those hospitals but the situation in Mityana Hospital is that the machines are being stolen. There is a mysterious disappearance of machines, for example, the blood count and gene expert machines. Honourable minister, being a doctor, you know of those machines.

Mityana Hospital also faces the problem of the breakdown of the x-ray machine, which has always been fixed for a year now but keeps breaking down. It works for a day and breaks down for three months, they bring engineers to repair it and it breaks down again. That is the kind of condition in Mityana Hospital. There is also the problem of selling of medicine in Mityana Hospital. 

Before you investigate those issues, please, I beg that you replace the two machines that are being stolen. I thank you. 

2.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for raising that very important issue that affects the health of our people. 

I would like to put it on record that Mityana Hospital is a district hospital. In line with that, the district normally budgets for equipment or the essential medicines. 

I have taken note but I would like to request that we get it through the district. If they have a budget for purchasing that equipment, then, certainly, they will be bought. If not, then we will see how best the ones which are broken can be repaired. 

Of course, we also need to educate our people, Mr Speaker. Stealing equipment meant for the general public is not the way to go and it may be the same people within the hospital that might be stealing this equipment meant to serve the entire hospital. 

Mr Speaker, I request that Mityana District Local Government looks closely into their budget. If there is need, then we could get a new one and if not, we will see how best to repair the old equipment. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister.

2.25
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter I would like to raise is about the recent rains in Sironko, Bulambuli and other parts of Bugisu sub region that devastated the areas and the communities were heavily affected. 

One of the areas which was at the epicentre of this is Kikobero sub county, Simupondo parish where about 70 residential houses were destroyed and numerous plantations of coffee and bananas have been swept away by these rains.

I would now, therefore, pray: That the Office of the Prime Minister goes on ground to assess the situation; responds with some emergency food and provides some shelter, particularly iron sheets to re-roof these houses that have been blown away because the people are now stranded without shelter and food. The biggest concern which we should be bothered about is that these emergencies are across the country.

Today, when we had a meeting of the committee on agriculture, we realised that Karamoja is also affected by this emergency, although not in the same way that Bugisu is affected but by the hunger situation in that place.

We would like to implore the finance ministry to quickly release this contingency fund to the Office of the Prime Minister so that they can respond and address these emergencies both in Bugisu and other parts of the country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.27
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Mary Karooro Okurut): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is an avalanche of disaster across the country because of the heavy rains. Climate change is real.

Just in my backyard, in my own constituency, the iron sheets of two schools were blown away. All the banana plantations are down. As the honourable said, in Bugisu, in Karamoja and in all these areas, it is nothing else but disaster.

Many of the members of the department of disaster preparedness in Office of the Prime Minister are actually on the ground making assessment. I urge Members – you talk about a contingency fund but it was passed only yesterday – and we know that the finance ministry is going to do the needful because we are talking about humanity and human lives.

Otherwise, as I said, there is an avalanche. Please do the needful. Let the CAOs write through you, the honourable Members of Parliament, and it comes to the Office of the Prime Minister. Thank you.

2.29
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I only stand to thank you, Mr Speaker, for your kind remarks and to confirm to the Members of Parliament that indeed I am a member of the Orthodox Church where we were privileged to invite you and you came and attended our service. 

It was so memorable and it is within our records as a church that your presence gave us great honour when we celebrated Mass together.

In the same vein, I would like to announce to Members that indeed the Orthodox Church has made 100 years and the beginning of the celebrations took place on Sunday at Lubya Hill where we are constructing the Hagia Sophia Cathedral. 

We were graced by the presence of His Excellency the President. We had a number of honourable members: hon. Anita Amongi, hon. Ogwang, hon. Elijah Okupa, hon. Tusiime, hon. Bintu Jalia among others. 

On that function, the portrait of the President fetched Shs 152 million and the President himself contributed Shs 300 million, while the Eritrean community contributed Shs 81 million. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you and all honourable members for the opportunity you gave us and to remind you that we are welcoming all contributions to the construction of the cathedral. (Laughter)

We look forward to contributing spiritually to this country through the byzantine culture of our orthodox church. We welcome each and every one to our church. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was still scanning through the rules to find out the provision for fundraising - (Laughter)

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

2.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Money Laundering (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read the first time. It is accompanied by the certificate of financial implications.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. This stands referred to the appropriate committee to handle within the framework of the rules and report to the House on how to proceed with this.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are a member of the commission. Would you like to proceed?

2.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the following:

    i) The consolidated value for money audit report on selected urban infrastructure projects implemented by Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development Programme (USMID) participating municipal councils in the financial year 2016/2017.
    ii) The consolidated value for money audit report on selected urban infrastructure projects implemented by the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development Programme (USMID) participating municipal councils in the financial year 2017/2018
    iii) The special audit of the infrastructure facilities constructed under the Uganda Health Systems Strengthening Project (UHSSP). I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the records capture that. The reports are referred to our Public Accounts Committee (Local Government), both (i) and (ii); (iii) should go to the Public Accounts Committee (Central Government); is it so? Or to the appropriate committee.

RESPONSE TO AN URGENT QUESTION RAISED BY HON. LOKII PETER ABRAHAMS, KOTIDO MUNICIPALITY, ON THE BRUTALITY BY THE POLICE ON SOME OF THE CONSTITUENTS OF KOTIDO MUNICIPALITY THAT LED TO THE DEATH OF ONE PERSON AND THE ARREST AND DETENTION OF 18 OTHERS

2.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This statement is in response to some unfortunate incident which happened in Kotido District where a lady was killed and some people were arrested. 

The facts of the case are as follows:

On 1 May 2019, at round 1400hrs, at Napong village, Lokitelaebu Parish, Kotido subcounty in Kotido District, an irate mob set ablaze the home of one Okurut Denis Robert, a male adult of 39 years. He is an Etesot resident of the same address. They were accusing him of being a rainmaker in the area, who had declined to make them rain and therefore, they attempted to lynch him and his family. 

Uganda People’s Defence Forces, (UPDF) of the nearby detach responded and rescued the victim and his wife as his children ran in disarray. Eighteen arsonist suspects were arrested by police. 

On the way to Central Police Station (CPS) Kotido, another mob group laid a barricade across the road at Lokitelaebu Trading Centre, Kotido Subcounty in Kotido District and waylaid the police in an attempt to hijack the victim and his wife so that they could lynch him and rescue the suspects who had been arrested. The mob also attempted to abduct one police officer, No. 62522 Detective Constable, Anam Innocent in the course.

In the process of dispersing the angry mob, one woman identified as Ajok Anita, a female of 45 years from Acholi, a resident of the same area, was hit by a stray bullet and died instantly.

The body was taken to Kotido Health Centre IV, where a postmortem was done and handed over to the relatives. An investigation on the matter continues. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Any supplementary issues?

2.38
MR PETER LOKII (NRM, Kotido Municipality, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The facts are true to a certain extent. 

I travelled to Kotido on Thursday night and I had a meeting with the District Police Commander (DPC) in the place. Lokitelaebu is a town council, which became operational in July 2018.

It is true that 18 women were arrested. According to the statement by the DPC, this gentleman was arrested from a distance of about 14 kilometres outside the town council. As they were walking on the road with the 18 women being brought to the police station in the town council, the gentleman saw four other men walking on the Abim Road.

The DPC also said that this man could have felt that these gentlemen were heading to kill him and he took off. When he took off, the women tried to run after him and when he could not be found, the women out of temper walked back and burnt down a grass thatched hut where he lived.

When they turned back, reaching the army detach, which is a kilometre away from the trading centre, the force arrested the 18 women. A police vehicle came to move them for safety into custody and that was when a conflict ensued. 

There were basic concerns that were raised in that meeting:

    1. The state of the women under custody. It was agreed that they would be released but the minister has not said anything about that.
    2. What action has been taken on the officer who acted irresponsible with his weapon? The community would like to know what action has been taken.
    3. What are the plans of the police on the family of the deceased? Otherwise, she has left behind six children, most of whom are below 18 years. Her husband is a disabled man on a wheelchair and her mother is also a disabled person and they were all present in the meeting.

Mr Speaker, these are the basic things that need to be responded to. Thank you.

MR OBIGA: I thank the member for basically agreeing to the facts. I have said at the end of my statement that the matter is being investigated. Once those investigations are completed, what he is asking for will be taken care of. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable member, follow up with the minister on other details that you might want to find out. 

RESPONSE TO AN URGENT QUESTION RAISED BY HON. AKELLO JUDITH FRANCA, AGAGO DISTRICT WOMAN MP, ON THE SURVEY OF LAND AND PLANTING OF MARK STONES BY STAFF FROM AMITA PRISON IN ABIM DISTRICT EXTENDING UP TO 2KM INTO AGAGO DISTRICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not see the honourable member. Has she delegated someone to deal with the issue?

2.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Mr Speaker, that matter was listed on our Order Paper last time and when you called it, it was under the Minister for Lands, Housing and Urban Development. My colleague promised here that they were looking for the surveyor and the survey report to answer that question.

Mr Speaker, I was a little surprised when I saw this afternoon that we are actually supposed to answer the question. Nevertheless, I undertake that I will consult my colleague and if he has the documents, by tomorrow, we shall come to answer by laying the documents. Otherwise, this is a matter of facts; whether the survey has gone into another district or not, it has to be factually proved. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Clerk, correct the records. Let this be dealt with by the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. 

RESPONSE TO AN URGENT QUESTION RAISED BY HON. OCAN PATRICK, APAC MUNICIPALITY, ON THE DEPLORABLE STATE OF APAC HOSPITAL

2.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEATH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Mr Speaker, the Member of Parliament for Apac Municipality, hon. Ocan Patrick, sought explanation on the Floor of Parliament regarding the deplorable state of Apac Hospital that was characterised by lack of electricity since July 2018, dysfunctional laboratories, theatres and x-ray services.

Whereas the Ministry of Health has the mandate of ensuring that the population of Uganda is healthy and productive, the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the Local Governments Act, clearly state the roles of each Ministry, Department and Agency. In this line, Apac District Local Government has the key role in terms of ensuring quality health service delivery, recruitment and management of personnel for the district health under the district health services. 

They are also responsible for planning, budgeting, financial management and allocation for health services, supervision, inspection, monitoring and evaluation of health care service delivery. 

Mr Speaker, the fact that Apac Hospital is a general hospital implies that by law, it is under the management of the district local government, which should ensure that the hospital is fully functional. This financial year (2018/2019), Apac District was allocated over Shs 300 million, that is PHC non-wage grant, of which over Shs 160 million was allocated to the hospital. This excludes the Shs 114 million annual budget allocation of this financial year –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Has the figure changed?

DR MORIKU: It is Shs 417,947,502.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You had said Shs 100 million.

DR MORIKU: Sorry. It excludes the Shs 417,947,502 annual budget allocation that is for essential medicines and health supplies supplied by the National Medical Stores. 

The hospital receives medicine from the National Medical Stores every two months, based on their procurement plan and orders. 

Apac Hospital staffing levels stand at 88.7 per cent and the monthly salary for the staff are paid by the district local government from the PHC wage allocation. Of the Shs 162,657,337 PHC non-wage allocation the hospital receives, over Shs 40 million is spent quarterly for recurrent costs, which includes utilities like electricity and operational costs. 

On quarterly basis and release, Shs 5 million is meant to be spent on electricity bills, Shs 5.3 million on fuel, Shs 6.3 million for vehicle maintenance, especially the ambulance and Shs 5 million for porters' wages while the rest of the money is to be used for activities that are meant for hospital management and finance committee allowances, including outreach, supervision, stationery, cleaning materials and detergents, among others.

During the previous financial years, the Ministry of Health has been allocating money for the renovation of Apac Hospital. In the Financial Year 2015/2016, Shs 300 million was allocated. In Financial Year 2016/2017, another Shs 300 million was allocated while in 2017/2018, Shs 900 million was allocated and in 2018/2019, Shs 300 million was allocated under the Transitional Development Health Grant meant for rehabilitation of the hospital towards improving the infrastructure. 

Using this grant, the hospital has been able to renovate the maternity wing, antenatal clinic, main theatre, Out-patient Department (OPD). They managed to expand the mortuary and were able to install six mortuary beds. They constructed two high stance VIP latrines and a laboratory. They still plan to renovate the female ward this financial year.

The issue of inadequate space of the hospital laboratory was identified as a priority by the district hospital management committee, and construction of a new laboratory was included in the hospital work plan. This was approved by the district council for that financial year. Currently, the hospital is constructing a standard laboratory using the funds that were allocated under the Transitional Development Grant. 

On the lack of electricity, the Ministry of Health was informed that the hospital was disconnected from the power grid in November 2016, as a result of an accumulated bill up to the tune of Shs 200 million. Only the theatre was left connected to phase one power supply. The ministry has been informed that the accumulation of this bill was from way back in 1995, when all the meters from the staff houses were removed by the then Uganda Electricity Board (UEB) and the staff houses were connected onto the hospital metre. There is no evidence of communication between UEB and the hospital management as to why this was done because it is not the responsibility of the hospital to pay electricity bills for the staff houses. 

I would like to inform the House that since Financial Year 2017/2018, Apac District Local Government made a commitment to UMEME to pay Shs 20 million per quarter. So far – from what we have been told – they have paid Shs 40 million and will continue to clear this bill until they complete the Shs 200 million. 

In addition to this, Apac Hospital is also paying Shs 5 million quarterly for electricity bills from the hospital PHC non-wage fund. All the staff quarters were disconnected from the hospital meter and the hospital management is working on introducing YAKA for the staff houses. 

As a result of the district’s commitment to pay the bill, UMEME has now reconnected all the wards in the hospital but only that it is in single phase for lighting only, which cannot operate some of the hospital equipment that need two-phase power. The operating theatres are working using solar and a generator. 

Regarding the X-ray unit in Apac Hospital, it is not functioning because it was stopped, following an assessment that was done by the Atomic Energy Council. The hospital did not have a qualified radiographer who is supposed to be recruited by the District Service Commission and other requirements that were needed for functionality of the X-ray unit. The District Service Commission has now recruited a qualified radiographer and the hospital is addressing the other gaps using their PHC grant allocation. 

The hospital management is working closely with the Atomic Energy Council and the medical superintendent expects that soon, the X-ray will be functional, hopefully by June this year.

As I conclude, I would like to inform you that despite all the challenges that I have just mentioned, the Ministry of Health has supported the renovation of the hospital and the hospital is functioning, as per the performance reports. 

In the financial year that is just ending, the hospital has achieved a lot. On average, out-patient attendance stands at 6,175. The hospital delivers 167 mothers per month and on monthly admission, they admit up to 595 patients. In terms of operations, they do up to 52 major operations per month. I thank you and I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is there any supplementary question?

2.55
MR PATRICK OCAN (UPC, Apac Municipality, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the good opportunity. I rise up to appreciate the Minister of Health for this detailed response. I would also like to thank the First Deputy Prime Minister for coordinating with the ministry and making follow up on matters regarding Apac General Hospital. 

Mr Speaker, indeed, power has been restored at the hospital and now, most of the equipment that required power for their operations are functional. However, the X-ray unit was closed on recommendation of the Atomic Energy Council due to lack of qualified staff. However, as we talk now, the district has committed to recruit a qualified radiographer who is present at the hospital and the existing gaps have been addressed by the hospital.

My humble prayer, Mr Speaker, is that through the Ministry of Health, the Atomic Energy Council be notified to go back and perform the reassessment of the facilities to ascertain the functionality of the X-ray unit such that it can become operational again. Thank you.

DR MORIKU: Thank you for that report. I have noted what the honourable member has raised. I was in Apac Hospital two years ago and I hope to go back in some few months to come. Surely, we shall notify the Atomic Energy Council so that they can do assessment and the X-ray becomes functional. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, I keep emphasising this question could not be accommodated under Rule 46 as an urgent question. It is a huge policy question that should have been addressed by another procedure of our Rules of Procedure, “Question for Oral Answer.” Therefore, let us segregate these issues. How did you expect the minister to respond on this detailed matter urgently? It could not be done. So, let us use our rules properly to deliver the purposes for which they were designed other than mixing them up. When you do that, you make the procedure a bit difficult for the person presiding.

RESPONSE TO AN URGENT QUESTION RAISED BY HON. ZAAKE FRANCIS, MP MITYANA MUNICIPALITY, ON THE INADEQUATE POWER CONNECTIVITY IN MITYANA MUNICIPALITY AND THE MEASURES MINISTRY OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT HAS PUT IN PLACE TO EXTEND POWER TO MITYANA MUNICIPALITY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As the minister comes, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have students of Asuret Child Development Centre in Soroti District, represented by hon. Eitunganane and hon. Osegge. Please, join me in welcoming them. Thank you.

Honourable minister, the honourable member who asked the question is there. So, proceed with the response.

2.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Mr Speaker, during the Third Sitting of the Third Session of the Tenth Parliament held on Wednesday, 06 March 2019, hon. Francis Zaake, Member of Parliament for Mityana Municipality, raised a concern over inadequate power connectivity which causes insufficient power supplies within Mityana Municipality. 

Mr Speaker, the issues of power reliability within Mityana Municipality are being addressed. In the last two years, Umeme has implemented the following projects to address the reliability within the municipality:

    1. Transformer injections. In the hospital zone, a 50 Kva transformer was injected. Banda stage 100 Kva transformer was injected, Central College 100 Kva transformer was injected, New District Area 60 Kva transformer was injected, Mityana Market, 50 Kva transformer was injected.

Mr Speaker, there were also upgrades of transformers as follows:

    1. Park Villas was upgraded from 50 Kva to 100 Kva.
    2. Busimbi Kasimbi was upgraded from 200 Kva to 315 Kva.
    3. Umeme also undertook and completed reconductering that is the changing of conductors to bigger sizes, pole replacement and upgrade of single phase lines to three phase low voltage network in the areas of Kiyudaya Zone, Wabigalo Zone, and Buswabulongo.

Rural Electrification Agency is also implementing grid intensification and densification project aimed at connection of the suppressed demand within the existing national grid footprint. This project targets the connections of underserved load centres and load centres within a two kilometre footprint of the existing grid through transformer injections, expansion of the low voltage reticulation network and short expansion of the medium voltage network, majorly targeting high populated areas such as municipalities, divisions and trading centres countrywide.

The schemes and areas within Mityana that are to be covered under the above projects are as follows:

    1. Bulera, Buntetema, Kiryokya, kyamusisi to Nalungi Parish, Namutumba Cycle, Kibuto, Bulamu.

Areas to be covered include Bulera Trading Centre and Primary School, Lwamba Trading Centre, Kibogo Trading Centre, Lusanja Trading Centre, Konde Trading Centre, Kamanje, Mutetema, Kikube, Kiryokya, Kiryamuli, Kyamusisi and Kisosonkole, Namutumba, Seed Faith Ministries, Kabungo, Kitemu, Kabubbu, Sangala, Kibuto and Bulamu.

The others are transformer installations in the following areas: Kagembe Village Farm, Buwunga Village, Nissi Farm at Butalale, Izegebe in Ssekanyonyi, Kawoomya, Kiduuzi and Nabisooto, Ssebobo, Makajo Barracks along Ssekanyonyi Kito Road and Tanda Community.

Third is Kikonge Namungo - Ssekanyonyi covering the areas of Mpumudde Primary School, Kisaasa Trading Centre, Namungo Trading Centre and Health Centre, Kasangula Trading Centre, Buyansa Trading Centre, Mpirigwa Trading Centre and Primary School.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, the Matte-Nakilagala-Kanyogoga-Kyakosi and Kanyogoga Farm – that is the scheme name. This is covering Matte Trading Centre, Nakilagala Trading Centre, Kanyogoga Trading Centre Farm, Kyakosi Trading Centre and Ssekanyonyi. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Any supplementary question? 

3.03
MR FRANCIS ZAAKE (Independent, Mityana Municipality, Mityana): Thank you, honourable minister for the response. I have not heard specifically about what I asked. Most of the areas I talked about did not have power completely. I was not talking about the upgrade. I was talking about the extension of power to those areas and most of those areas are not even talked about. You only talked about the Mityana city centre where there is electricity already. You are only upgrading. That was not my question. My question was, what are you doing about those areas with no electricity and yet they take 88 per cent of the municipality? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That typically was not an urgent question. 

MR D’UJANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. Apart from the first part of my response, I also alluded to a number of schemes. On average, Uganda is about 22 per cent electrified and we are moving on everyday basis.

The schemes within Mityana that are to be covered under the project of intensification – I named four schemes and this is part of our activity to increase the coverage but I am free to discuss with the honourable Member if there are other areas that need to be covered. Thank you. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE TAX PROCEDURES CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t we debate item 12 and then we come back to the Bills? I do not think whether that debate is going to take long since we are just doing the budget.

We might just have to embrace the prayers from the motion so that it is moved to the budget committee, and they see what they can do with those prayers. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO PRIORITISE FUNDING FOR THE HEALTH SECTOR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we received this motion last week; we could not debate it and the background to that is that it arose from the debate of this House about a motion that had come to Parliament and a question was posed that this matter had to come out in detail.

The committee was tasked to look at it again and bring a motion to this House highlighting areas of gaps of funding; these things that are now popularly called “unfunded priorities”, which last time I said was not a good use of words because priorities must be funded. 

The chairperson of the committee brought in this motion and the purpose was that we embrace it. We already know the recommendations and we have already held the discussions so that we can send it to the budget committee as a resolution of Parliament so that they can see what to do with it.

I had proposed this motion for debate; do we need to debate it, and can we adopt and send it to the budget committee? We have discussed this issue very many times. As a resolution can we send it back to the budget committee and the ministers to handle so that these matters are captured properly?

I put the question that the motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to prioritise funding for the health sector be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE TAX PROCEDURES CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you recall why we stayed this Bill? There was certain information that was lacking and we needed you to bring it so that we can adopt it because we adopted the other Bills as financial Bills without debate but for this one, the list caused some issues. Have you prepared the desegregated list so that the House can embrace this and we move forward with this matter?

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, we have fine-tuned and finalised the list which Parliament requested and I beg your guidance whether I should read through the list again. We have stated the taxpayer’s name, amount, period, reasons and then we have also come with the documents supporting some of these companies where we have done MOUs agreements and we have committed.

Colleagues, Government has already committed to pay taxes for these companies but we do not have resources to pay for them; so we are asking to write them off; that is the reason we are here.

Company No.1 is Arab Contractors which was contracted to do the new Mulago Women’s Hospital project under the Ministry of Health and Government committed to pay counterpart funding by paying the taxes required to make this project be completed. We owe URA Shs 28.3 billion; we request Parliament that this amount is written off. 

The second is Roko Construction Limited; it is a period between 2015 and 2016. The amount is Shs 10.8 billion; it was contracted to construct Mulago renovation project and KCCA hospitals which included Kiruddu and Kawempe under the Ministry of Health.

The other one is Cementers Limited for a period between 2015 and 2016; the amount is Shs 9.2 billion and it was contracted to construct a one-stop border post at Malaba and Busia under the Ministry of Works and Transport. 

Nippon Parts Uganda Limited was contracted to do some auxiliary construction services under UNRA and the amount is Shs 2.8 billion. 

Azure Properties Limited; Shs 2.1 billion to construct urban markets development and community agricultural improvement programme under the Ministry of Local Government.

Dott Services; Shs 8.3 billion – was contracted to construct a one-stop border post at Mirama Hills under the Ministry of Works and Transport.

Network World; Shs 1.9 billion for the period 2010-2018 to do urban markets under the Ministry of Local Government. 

TraceMap to do urban markets under the Ministry of Local Government and the amount is Shs 368 million.

SGI Studio Galli was to offer consultancy for development of catchment water protection under the Ministry of Water and Environment and the amount is Shs 1.4 billion.

Summit Project Limited Shs 318 million, it was contracted to construct Mayuge Water Supply System under the Ministry of Water and Environment. 

Mutoni Construction was contracted to construct a military training camp in Bihinga for UPDF and Somalia soldiers. 

Steel and Tube Industries; these are part of Government undertakings already committed to pay for taxes for these projects, which we considered on the part of the Executive as strategic investments. It was a strategic investment in Steel manufacture where Government made a commitment to pay taxes to an indigenous Ugandan to promote value addition, employment and import substitution. The amount is Shs 20.4 billion.

Cipla Quality Chemical – Shs 57 billion to support establishment of the first state of the art plant in Africa to manufacture ARVs and as you know, they are the ones that are supplying National Medical Stores to support Ugandans who need these drugs.

Guangzhou Energy Group- To support an investment of Shs 150 billion to manufacture fertilizers, phosphate glass and steel production in the eastern part of the country in Tororo. The amount is Shs 8.4 billion.

Oil palm - Shs 175.8 billion to support that strategic investment in Kalangala District. Many of us who have visited there have seen how this project has been able to transform the communities on that beautiful island. It is offering jobs to the people in Kalangala, through cultivation of oil palm extraction, refining crude oil, and further processing into soap and animal feeds.

Bugisu Cooperative - the amount is Shs 3.2 billion. Mr Speaker, I must state that this commitment was made well before hon. Nandala became the chairman. Therefore, it has nothing to do with his chairmanship. It has everything to do with what Government committed to support the Bugisu Cooperative Union and the people of Bugisu.

Southern Range Nyanza- Shs 93.1 billion to support textile industries, promote employment and it is currently employing 2200 people, value addition and export promotion.

Fine Spinners- this is a factory on Port Bell Road manufacturing t-shirts and other things and exporting them to the European market. It is to support textile industries and promote employment and it is now currently employing 200 Ugandans, adding value, and supporting the farmers who are involved in the cotton sector. We committed 3.2 billion.

Lydia Home Textiles- Shs 427 to support textile industries.

Lily Benefits Investments – Shs 2.3 billion to support textile industries.

Great Value Investment Limited- 55.9 million to support textile industries.

Aya Investment- Shs 3.9 billion, Government provided land and agreed to pay taxes on the construction of the hotel which has been completed just above the All Saints’ Church.

Shen Industrial Park Company- 26.5 billion Government commitment to support development of the park.

Operation and Development – it is an NGO whose contractual obligation is to implement projects beneficial to the less privileged communities in the field of water sanitation and we committed to pay Shs 345.4 million.

All Nations Christian Care- an NGO in Northern and Eastern Uganda that is providing skills to establish vocation institute in Lira and rehabilitate school buildings in the mentioned regions. We committed to pay 10.8 million.

National Cement Shs 2.5 billion- Government commitment to establish a factory that would make link up from raw material in Tororo and Karamoja.

Office of the Prime Minister was supposed to pay 29.6 billion on the donation of rice we received from the Republic of China as relief for victims of Bududa landslides and Karamoja areas and refugees. We are committed to clear it.

Emas foundation- Shs 25.6 million. It is an NGO with contractual obligation to implement projects aimed at social welfare of the less privilege people of Uganda in the field of education, vocational training and other infrastructural training.

Ministry of finance – Shs 389.2 million to pay for taxes on goods and service for African Development Foundation. 

Ministry of Health to pay for taxes of around 954.4 million. 

A total of this adding to what we have committed under counterpart funding of Shs 429.2 billion plus 70 of those strategic investments. The total comes to Shs 500.2 billion as of 31st March 2018.

Mr Speaker, we have come with agreements. We have an agreement with Emas Foundation Limited, Hilton Hotel project, an MOU with All Nation Christian Care, International Cooperation Development, Quality Chemical Industries, BIDCO Oil Refinery Limited, a number of MOUs under the textile sector where the minister has committed to pay. 

We have all the letters that we have written to URA, National Cement Company Uganda limited, Guangzhou Dongsong Energy Group, Steel and Tube Industries. All the supporting documents, while they were laid here before, we are laying them again to support our argument.

Mr Speaker, with this information I believe that we have been able to convince the House to allow us to write off these taxes because the commitment has already been made. We do not have resources to pay. I think the only prudent way to sort out this issue is to write them off. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there are two points you might help with. If these are tax arrears or contributions that are already in arrears, why then are you extending it to 30 June 2019? This is as of 30 March 2019, why would it go to June 30 2019?

Secondly, why do you want the law to commence in June when the things we are dealing with end in March? This is a specific law dealing with a specific subject- all the events have happened in the past, why are we extending it to the future?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the commitments that were made are up to the end of the financial year and the list that we have brought here captures how far we have gone in terms of tax payment arrears up to the end of March. Therefore, there will be taxes to pay from March to June because a commitment has already been made up to the end of the financial year.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In other words, this figure is not the total. 

MR BAHATI: This figure is the total as far as up to 31st March is concerned.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we were ready to move with this except with this information that the House found necessary to have before we proceed to the next stage. I think we are ready to move to the next stage. Can we go to the next stage now?

Honourable members, we agreed that once we receive this information, we will be able to go to the next stage. We also agreed that these names and figures that have been on the record will constitute what our concentration is as a condition for us to pass this Bill. Are we clear on this? Can I put the question and we move to the committee stage? 

MR AGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. At the time the details of these companies were requested, it was meant to guide the House on the decision on whether to pass the amendments to offset the obligations. If we do not debate them now, after getting the details of the companies, what value will the details have added to the debate? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What you are discussing are the principles of the Bill and not the provisions of the Bill. All those issues that have been added up to now do not constitute the principles of the discussion. The principle is stated and it is to supply and write off what should have been Government’s contribution in terms of counterpart funding as well as the tax obligations it had agreed to pay on behalf of some people, which Government has now failed to pay. Therefore, this is a process of writing those off. That is the principle. Do you want to debate that? If you do not want to debate that - is that debatable even? It is not debatable, honourable member. 

We are now discussing the principles of the Bill before we talk about whether we should add this to be an annex or schedule to the Bill. That will be at the next stage when we are doing the actual provisions of the law. Okay? (Mr Nsereko rose_) Are you seeking clarification from the Speaker, hon. Nsereko? 

MR NSEREKO: Mr Speaker, we took part in this debate and we do not object to your wise ruling in this matter. This does not clearly touch the principles. It is agreeable that Government made a commitment and it must honour it. There are clearly some we do not object to, even before we go to the next stage. 

However, on the matter of exemption of income tax for companies such as Steel and Tube Limited, Cipla Quality Chemicals Limited and Oil Palm Uganda Limited, we still have something to say. Income tax and corporation tax – yes, Government committed to write it off but these are things you should have come to Parliament for us to really analyse with you because we appropriate together. 

In good spirit – we are not saying that Government should fail to honour its obligation but on income tax, it really has a few questions, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are part of this. How do you pay people’s income tax? Let the minister help us with that. Just tell us that issue; how are we undertaking to pay people’s income tax obligations? 

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, to add to that, in light of the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act, it strictly prohibits Government from going into any undertaking in form of a guarantee or otherwise without the authority of Parliament. How does Government commit itself to pay income tax and corporation tax of private individuals and entities? 

I would not mind counterpart funding in respect of Government projects. However, these individuals are earning income and you have given them tax holidays and land. Then, you again commit to pay for them income tax and you want us to write it off. How sure are we that this money is not being shared somewhere? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I think the latter part of hon. Niwagaba’s question should not be part of the discussion because it has a separate way of looking at it. Parliament can do an oversight and find out whether there is anything wrong but the principle is – take an example of the palm oil in Kalangala. The members from Kalangala District can testify to what is happening there. 

A project came and investors came and by then, we did not have the law to exempt. At the time, we were allowed to budget and pay for these taxes. What happened two years ago is that we committed to pay for them because of the strategic position of these investments. They are not as many as you have seen and they are making impact in the lives of Ugandans. They are offering jobs and paying taxes in one way or the other. When you employ these people, you pay as you earn. 

Two years ago, Parliament agreed to appropriate money to allow us pay for these people because we were not allowed to exempt them and give them tax holidays. A few years ago, Parliament removed that money from the budget but the Executive had already committed to pay for them corporation tax. Parliament then agreed that we pay for them and appropriated money for it but the Tenth Parliament refused to appropriate the money. 

Therefore, we found ourselves in a situation where we had already committed to pay this tax - we had been paying it but Parliament had removed the money that we had been using to pay that tax; hence becoming tax arrears.

Last financial year, we normalised this. You will recall that we put tax exemptions and tax incentives on these laws; so now the situation is okay. The dilemma we are in is –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please make your point. 

MR BAHATI: The dilemma is that the Ninth and the Eighth Parliaments were appropriating money to the Executive; giving them authority to pay for these companies they had committed to pay for. The Tenth Parliament removed this money from the budget but Government had already committed to pay this tax and the clock is ticking. We have tax arrears. 

Last year, we agreed to normalise this and we passed the tax exemptions in our laws but this one had already accrued and they are in our books. That is why we are coming to write them off, friends.  

3.33
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This Parliament granted an exemption for aid-funded projects in 2017/2018 and from then on, all projects of that nature have an exemption. 

Mr Speaker, the issue on the Floor has been on-going. It has moved and this is now the second committee of Parliament that is handling it. We have been asking Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) why this outstanding remains in its books and URA said that Government entered into an arrangement with the companies involved, that it will pay the taxes. 

Therefore, there is an obligation between Government of Uganda and the affected companies. In the wisdom of the committee, we looked at it and it is true that corporation tax comes after a company has registered good results, in other words, after it has made profits. Therefore, if a company is making profit, then it should be able to contribute to the development of the country. The committee surely saw and noted that.

However, at the same time, profit is one window through which a company can grow and there is a valid argument that these companies are making a contribution, which will benefit the country better in the long term and therefore, to achieve that, these companies need favourable conditions to enable them grow. 

Considering that this is an obligation of the past events, it is something that has already happened. The committee looked at it and in its wisdom, we agreed with the minister that since it has occurred, let us set off but going forward, in the future, the minister should be restrained and the powers limited in the law to write off such obligations. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But how is counterpart funding a form of tax?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, we have a situation whereby a bank – I would like to use an example of CAIIP funded projects. These are financed by the bank and the bank gives us the money to perform these contracts but the banker will tell us, “Look, we shall not be responsible for paying your taxes.” This is where counterpart funding comes in because there is an element of VAT, which must be paid on these contracts. That is where Government has to come in to provide for such taxes. This is what has led to some of the obligations under the donor-funded projects.

MR MWIRU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural point. Hon. Bahati, while laying the Memoranda of Understanding, mentioned that there was an MoU with Steel and Tube Industries. I have had the benefit of looking at the document which he laid on the Table. It is far from being an agreement. Actually, it is exempting corporation tax. 

When hon. Bahati spoke to this House, he made it very clear that we are dealing with the obligation of Government in terms of counterpart funding; that is why I was inclined to accept us writing it off in respect to that obligation.
However, when it comes to, for instance Steel and Tube Industries, we are talking about corporate tax and this is what the chairperson has just conceded to. 

I wonder whether it is not procedurally right that we exclude Steel and Tube Industries from this list until hon. Bahati lays on the Table the true Memorandum of Understanding because what he has laid is very far from being an agreement. It is just a mere letter. Thank you.

3.39
THE MINISTER FOR KARAMOJA AFFAIRS (Mr John Byabagambi): Mr Speaker, I read a statement on the website which was made by the President of the United States of America in which he exempted a steel company in order to create jobs. He termed it, “Reclaiming our jobs in steel industry from outside America”. They exempted that company because of the strategic importance to the people of America.

The guidance I am seeking is, if there is a strategic industry in Uganda and moreover when you exempt that industry, that money that they were supposed to pay in taxes is reinvested and you create jobs for our people; is the principle bad? Why can’t we do it for the sake of our people and for the sake of the country?

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With due respect, we are talking about a country which is much more developed than we are; he is talking about America which is developed and yet we need taxes and revenue. In addition, most of those companies do not pay our workers well. 

Is the Minister of Karamoja – for that matter not even related to finance – in order to mislead the House and take us to America –(Laughter)– when our people are suffering? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, part of how you interrogate policy, you ask some questions; is the problem properly identified? Is the solution the right one? Has this solution been tested somewhere else? Has it worked? Will it work for us? 

As part of policy assessment and analysis, the minister is proceeding very well to give examples of how it has worked –(Laughter)– because he is doing a comparative analysis and that is all we are called to do. If it didn’t work anywhere else, why bring it here? If it worked somewhere else, will it work in our circumstances considering our context? As to the involvement of President Trump, that might require me to call him in the evening and talk to him first. (Laughter) 

I think there are significant points being raised here and we would like to proceed together. I am not going to put this matter to vote now. We will leave it here for now and come back to it later.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we received the report from the committee, to which was attached a minority opinion from the majority of the committee. These matters were presented and I now propose the question for debate on the principles of the Bill and debate starts now.

3.44
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First, I would like to thank the committee and support the proposal to exempt agricultural facilities. Secondly, I would like to also consolidate the filing of the returns on property rate.

However, the report and the Bill propose to levy a tax on a loss making company. I think this will be the first country in the entire world and this brings me to the question whether the ministry and the people who are proposing this tax are seeking a record in the Guinness books of history, for being the first country that levies penalties for making a loss in a country.

Mr Speaker, it is even inconsistent with what we have just handled. The same ministry here that is proposing to pay corporation tax and income tax is seeking to punish someone who has not made profits. If you can make a law to pay for someone who is making profit as we have seen, then why do you want to punish someone who is making a loss? I think this is in contravention with Government’s policy on attracting investors. You cannot attract investors by punishing them when they make losses. 

Mr Speaker, I have noted that Airtel, one of the most successful companies in this country, took eight years with sound management practices - but they were making losses in this country. Uganda Clays Limited took nearly 10 years making losses. If in the seventh and the eighth year you start punishing someone because they are making a loss, I think we are going in a wrong direction.

This Government has been doing business and they have failed. With Uganda Hotels, they failed, with the defunct Uganda Airlines, they also failed. They actually know the challenges people go through when doing business. Imagine someone has made losses in the seventh year and the Government that has been closing all the unsuccessful businesses in this country is proposing to charge you 0.5 of the revenue. This would not be welcomed and I would like to implore the House to reject it and support the position of the minority report so that we can save the future of businesses in the country. I beg to submit (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister. Chairperson, are you taxing losses?

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to go straight to your question, “Are we taxing losses?”

Mr Speaker, the proposal is to tax businesses which consecutively register losses for a period of seven years – (Interjections) - Mr Speaker, can I be protected? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, the arguments for the proposal are as follows:

First of all, most successful companies in this country which belong to that category and why they belong there is not because these companies are making losses but they are suspected to be producing two sets of accounts; one set of accounts for management and another for the tax body.

When we raised this matter with Uganda Revenue Authority (URA), URA admitted that they have no adequate capacity to do audits in all companies around the country –(Interjections)– I am giving information to the House. Secondly, URA also admitted that technology has evolved and as technology evolves, some of the formulas these companies use cannot easily be traced and interpreted by URA. Therefore, there is an effort by these companies to evade the tax.

The honourable member raised a very good point that Government has attempted to do business and failed. Mr Speaker, I wish to inform the House that such kinds of businesses have closed and there is also an argument that if you persistently register losses, why don’t you close after seven years? If you argue that you still want to be in business, then let us have a mechanism of this company paying taxes.

Mr Speaker, I believe that I have made the necessary justification and I rest my case. Thank you.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, with utmost respect, I have listened to the arguments of the chairperson and the information I would like to give to the chairperson and the House is that last year, we enhanced the capacity of URA by Shs 90 billion for capacity building so that URA could have mechanisms to expand the taxable base, by training people and acquiring the relevant technology. 

Mr Speaker, we were just looking at a supplementary budget and URA has just acquired equipment for that capacity. Therefore, the argument of the chairperson that companies are not registering taxes because URA lacks capacity to investigate and tax them does not stand. Otherwise, the argument that would have been of sound nature is that we should provide more capacity building to URA.

Mr Speaker, for the chairperson to say that we continue to pay money to companies that are making losses so that they collapse is very unpatriotic.   

We were in China and he knows better than anyone else the reason China has developed. In China, even when they are giving you a loan, they ensure that the company must stand. Even banks have a desk officer that monitors loans to ensure that whoever is given a loan must stand. Therefore, even if a company makes losses for 10 years, it can become a giant company, grow and really benefit the country. 

However, if you kill it by punitive tax, it is being extremely unpatriotic. I, therefore, humbly ask my good friend not to be like lawyers who normally say if you have the law, quote the law, if you have the fact, quote the fact, if you neither, argue. Therefore, the chairperson is simply making an argument for arguments sake. I rest my case.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you very much, hon. Kivumbi. Mr Speaker, a couple of years ago, we sat here and granted incentives to investors by way of investment capital allowances. These allowances are deductible from the tax liabilities, which these companies incur at the end of the year.

The implication of this is that the company is allowed to carry forward losses because of this incentive, which we have deliberately and genuinely granted to them under the law. So, we have done it. We said investors beyond Namanve would be allowed to deduct 50 per cent of their investment capital. We did not put a cap on the number of years within which to write off the losses or allowances.

It so happens that someone invests Shs 100 million and with such an investment, the allowance is big. If he invests Shs 10 million, the allowance is small so he can write off the losses in two years. However, if he invests Shs 50 million, he can write off losses for a period of over 10 or 15 years, depending on the amount of money we have invested.

I would like to believe that what is being proposed here is a contradiction in law because we have granted with one hand and we want to take away with another. I think it is a terrible contradiction in law, which we cannot sustain. I beg that we do not proceed in supporting that proposal. (Applause)

MR KABERUKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We know that corporation tax is a tax chargeable on profit. I would like the chairperson to tell this Parliament what name you are giving that tax that you are charging a dead company where there is a loss? Which name are you giving it? (Laughter)

MR ANYWARACH: Additionally, Mr Speaker, for people who have run companies in business, we know that – and this is for the benefit of the chairperson. Unfortunately, he is still consulting with the minister – if you have a company, it may survive for even 10 years when you are making losses and that will not necessitate that you close.

What is happening is that whatever amount you are realising in the company is sustaining operational costs, paying the workers, machinery and so on. In other words, the company is surviving to ensure that it reaches a stage where it now begins making real profits.

Therefore, for him to wonder and say if you are declaring loses for seven years, how come you have not closed? The losses we are talking about are not necessarily that there is no money coming. It is coming but it is taking care of the social overhead costs precisely. I wonder whether the chairperson has a company or has ever run a business because we may be here, dealing with a chairperson who is just getting information from URA and getting convinced. (Laughter) 

Secondly – for his benefit – honourable chairperson, one time you decried the high lending rate in this country when you returned from Europe or Germany. If you want to address situations where there is suspicious tax evasion or diversion, improve the business environment in this country.

Honourable chairperson, I wish you conduct a scientific study of the business environment in this country, then you will be like, “I think actually, even 10 years is less; at least 15 years is when the company will begin picking up”. That is what they call the breakeven point. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are we going to tax losses? Honourable members, this is a provision in the Bill. It is an active provision; I think it is clause 6. Maybe the quicker way of dealing with it is to get there and deal with it. I think the debate shows that it does not make ordinary sense. That is why I am asking the minister to supply us with the scientific sense because it does not make ordinary sense. (Laughter)

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the environment to provide you with additional information, as you make the final decision on this important matter. 

The rationale for imposition of a tax is that the companies that report assessed losses sometimes are not necessarily non-profitable but they are deducting allowable expenditures which always reduce their taxable income to zero or even negative. For example, a company may construct a new office, buy new depreciable plant and machinery and incur other expenses that reduce taxable income. This is a process called gold planting and many countries fight it by imposing a nominal tax so that the taxpayers do not perpetually declare losses.

The fiscal regime gives incentives to some companies to expand more on capital investments and this gives them more allowable deductions on operating profits, which reduces taxable income considerably. In countries like Tanzania, they limit to carry losses forward for only 10 years. In Rwanda, it is five years. If you go beyond five years, they put some incentives for you to start looking at that situation.

In Kenya and Mexico, it is 10 years. In India, it is eight years. In Argentina, it is five years. Netherlands, which is one of the countries that really pay tax – for example, their tax to GDP is close to over 100 per cent – is seven years. Brazil offsets 30 per cent of losses in any year.

There are also situations where these companies, despite the fact that there are allowable deductions, do gold planting, maneuvering to make them look like they are making losses when they are actually making profits. Therefore, when you put something to force them to do the right things, we have seen them doing the right things over the years and in other countries.

We have here a list of all those companies - they are more than 200 and we think that this small measure, which is to help these companies avoid doing something wrong but do the right thing, can raise an extra Shs 40 billion. I think with this good environment and good explanation, the House can make the final decision on this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I will now put the question to the motion for second reading so that we can go to committee stage and deal with these matters.

I now put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax Amendment Bill, 2019” be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the debate has been on only one aspect, the issue of dealing with losses the way the minister is proposing. The Bill has other provisions and it is a revenue Bill to generate money. So, if there is a particular aspect of the Bill which you do not like, you deal with it at the Committee Stage but you do not reject the whole Bill. Therefore, I am trying to explain this so that we take a proper decision at a proper time.

Therefore, I am going to put the question again on the motion for the second reading of the Bill to adopt the principles of the Bill. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 stands part of this Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3

4.05
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Chairman, we propose to delete clause 3. 

The justification is that the proposal is both cumbersome and costly for the taxpayer.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal from the committee is to delete clause 3. I put the question for the deletion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3 deleted.

Clause 4

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 4 as follows:

(a)In paragraph (a), in the proposed Paragraph (ae);
    (i) By inserting the words, “in the fixed assets” immediately after the words, “investment capital” in the second line and wherever it appears in the Bill.
    (ii) By inserting the words, “for a foreign investor or ten million US Dollars in the case of a citizen” immediately after the word, “Dollars” in the third line.

(b)	In paragraph (b), in the proposed paragraph (af), by substituting for the word, “two” appearing immediately after the word, “or” wherever it appears in the paragraph.

(c) 	In the paragraph (c), in the proposed paragraph (ag);
 (i)	Substitute for the word “seventy” appearing immediately after word, “least” the word, “fifty”.
(ii) 	Substitute for the word, “two” appearing immediately after the word, “or” with the word, “one”.
    (iii) In sub-paragraph (ii), insert the words, “or medical sundries, pharmaceuticals” immediately after the words, “medical appliances”. 
    (iv) In sub-paragraph (iii), insert the words, “pulp, papers, printing and publishing of instructional materials” immediately after the word, “furniture”.

(d) 	In paragraph (d), substitute the word, “five” with the word, “ten”.

The justification is

1. To enable citizens participate in the industrialisation of the country for inclusive growth and development.
2. 	It is imperative that the transition into using largely local inputs as intended by the provision recognises this imperative so that the transition is smooth and gradual and not radical as can be imputed from the 70 per cent proposed threshold that would render the offering redundant and unachievable.

I submit, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. That is the proposal from the committee. Honourable minister, -

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, we wanted to convince the chairperson and the House that including fixed assets in the clause in the way he proposed is too restrictive and may negate the benefits expected from the incentives that we try to give to the investors. 

Mr Chairperson, in today’s globalised world and with the increase in the use of information technology, companies, for example, invest in ICT and get franchises and other intangibles, which may require limited fixed assets. So, for us to only restrict this to fixed assets is to be very restrictive and we would actually not offer the benefits we intend to give the investors.

Therefore, I propose that the committee maintains the clause as we had suggested in the Bill and that will actually benefit a number of investors rather than be very restrictive like they have proposed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, you have no objection to the other amendments? It is only on fixed assets that we have an issue?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Arising from the amendment proposed by the chairperson of the committee where he splits the investors between foreign and local, there is a consequential amendment at the end of paragraph (ae). I would like to explain – the first part of that clause is talking about a new investor and somewhere towards the end, it talks about an existing developer; in other words, an existing investor.

When it came to qualification for those benefits, the amount is $50 million. Up there, he has applied the $50 million to foreigners. Now, I suggest that in this particular section, we apply the same principle by adding the following after the word, “dollars” appearing at the end of that clause, “Fifty million US Dollars for a foreigner or ten million US Dollars for the case of a citizen”. That is my proposal, Mr Chairperson.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, I have no problem with hon. Lugoloobi’s proposal. However, is it okay to know how the draft looks like or should we just adopt the principle? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: How what?

MR MUSASIZI: How will the drafting look like or we should just adopt the principle? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Just propose the draft to extend from the semicolon and include “foreigner” and then extend it to include the Shs 10 million for a citizen.

Can I deal with this proposal which the chairman has agreed to and then we see how to process it. I put the question to this proposal that is made by hon. Amos Lugoloobi to extend it to include citizens; I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we now come to the bulk of the amendments from the committee and can we deal with the minister’s amendment right away. The minister proposes that among the amendments proposed by the committee, the issue of making this apply to fixed assets would limit the ambits of tax collection because some of these companies have very little fixed assets and if you limit yourself there, you might go to a company and come back empty handed because they do not have much fixed assets.

He was proposing that we leave it as is in the Bill so that it captures more. Mr Chairman, would you like to respond to that?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, I welcome the improvement by the minister because nowadays, we have a lot of intangible assets in people businesses. Therefore, I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So you withdraw amendments which you proposed in the first paragraph (a)(i), that is withdrawn.

MR MUSASIZI: Yes, Mr Chairman, I withdraw.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, the amendment proposed in paragraph (a) (i) is withdrawn so we will not be considering it –(Mr Waluswaka rose_)- remember if you are proposing an amendment, unless it is consequential, it should have been circulated, if it is not please resume your seat.

MR WALUSWAKA: Mr Chairman, now that the chairman and the minister are proposing to delete section (i), I would like to propose if the House allows - as hon. Byabagambi said - we went to Ethiopia and you cannot begin a factory without ownership from the locals.

I would like to propose - on local content – that for any investor whether with Shs 100 billion or Shs 2 billion should give at least 30 per cent of the shares to the locals. We have companies owned by foreigners; they get profits and go. At least when we have citizens owning - if these investors cannot give you even 10 per cent shares then they are not good. I request that we put that item for the purpose of our people.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is a matter of huge principle. We should have debated it at the stage of discussing the principles of the Bill. Now without discussing a principle that big, how do you bring an amendment to implement a principle that you have never even brought to our attention, it is not acceptable.

MR NIWAGABA: A consequential amendment, Mr Chairman on clause 4 (b)(af), when you look at clause (a) and (c) the targeted persons are those operating either in a free zone or an industrial park with specific conditions for their businesses but (b)(af) tends to widen that category especially when it says that all business outside the industrial park or free zone.

If the intention of the minister was to restrict the businesses in the industrial parks or free zones; bringing in businesses outside the industrial park or free zones will widen the area of exemption and we may end up having business, which are only carrying on importation businesses.

For example they will say, “We operating a supermarket with $ 100 million under this particular clause we qualify for exemption.” I am imploring the minister that we withdraw this (af) since it defeats the intention under (a) and (c) and since it may widen the exemption to even unjustified persons.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I do not know whether the Attorney-General of the Opposition has read the clause very well. It says; “the income of an operator in an industrial park or free zone or other person carrying on business outside industrial parks or free zones, whose investment capital is at $10 million in case of a foreign or $2 million in case of a citizen.”

In other words, in addition to the investors that we have given incentives in the industrial park and free zones; we are now giving incentives to people outside the industrial park and free zones but who meet the threshold of $10 million and $ 2 million.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Does that cover importation of goods, trading without producing anything?

MR BAHATI: We can provide the areas which area covered in a second.

MR NIWAGABA: In (c) you were very specific on which businesses will justify the exemption. Those processing agricultural goods, manufacturers or assemblies of medical appliances and under (a) it is also clearly stipulated, the conditions are restricted to industrial parks or free zones.

However, if you open to other businesses without putting restrictions, tomorrow the Chinese are going to come and open supermarkets worth $10 million and they will say they are entitled to exemption.

Even our locals here who are importing goods from China will say, “Our investment in these shops is $2 million. We are entitled to exemption. At the end of the day, it will defeat the purpose; we will end up losing more than gaining.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, do you want a country that is a huge supermarket?

MR BAHATI: The areas that we are talking about are listed in (c) - processing agricultural goods, manufacturers or assembling medical appliances, building materials, auto-mobil, household appliance, furniture manufactures, establishing or operating vocational technical institutes, carrying on business in logistics and warehousing, information technology and commercial farming.

MR NIWAGABA: In (b) they are separate; my concern is only in (b).

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The spirit of the clause is very good and I appeal to the House not to lose it. However, there is a valid point that hon. Niwagaba is bringing up and I would like to propose that we delete, “or other person carrying on business outside the industrial park or free zone.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is the proposal coming from the committee. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Supposing I am operating outside the industrial zone but also dealing in agricultural value addition, technical schools, etc, how does this cover me?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: (c) covers you.

MR BYABAGAMBI: If (c) covers me, can’t we improve it and capture both?

MR NIWAGABA: I would actually concede to the chairman’s proposed amendment because it captures the spirit. Honourable minister, what you are raising is covered by (c) extremely well. That is why I had initially suggested that we do not need (b) because it tends to open the gates to even supermarkets and retail businesses.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, please help us with this.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I did not understand very well the committee’s proposal. I would have responded.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Would you like to briefly consult?

MR BAHATI: I can consult with him on the proposal he is making to this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The proposal is to limit (af) only to industrial parks and free zones. Honourable member for Kampala Central, as long as it is not outside the discussion.

MR NSEREKO: Mr Chairman, the threshold for foreign investors is at the equivalent of $10 million and that for the local investors is $2 million in the Bill before us. I would like to move and persuade my honourable colleagues that if we would like to promote and encourage investment to echo what my colleague from Butaleja said, I propose that we reduce the threshold to an equivalent of $1 million to the local investor instead of $1 million.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Did we have that in the principle of our discussions that the rates are high for local investors?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, what hon. Nsereko is proposing is consistent with Stamp Duty and the VAT and Excise Duty, which we have already passed. We passed that for a domestic investor or citizen, we should have a threshold at $1 million instead of $2 million. Therefore, I agree with the proposal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment of $2 million down to $1 million for consistency. We passed a law that reduces it last week. Today, we cannot do something outside what we agreed. Therefore, I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, I would like to explain this point. The list in (c) - processing of agricultural goods should apply to both people who are operating in industrial parks and free zones and those outside. The point that we are making in (b) is that there are people who are going to operate in the free zones and in the industrial parks. Now what happens to somebody who is doing the same thing but outside - they should still benefit from the same incentives? I think with that clarification, the Opposition Attorney-General seems to be convinced now.

MR NIWAGABA: Then that would mean you subject (b) to (c) and say, the income of an operator in the industrial park or free zone subject to the business defined under (c) would be entitled but not as presented in the draft. 

Therefore, there I concede that yes, you want them to be covered as long as they are engaged in the businesses under (c) but not this (b) that opens up businesses without even defining which particular business you are engaged in under (b).

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I think that is what the House was expecting from the Attorney-General of the Opposition.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal now is that (af) should be subjected to (ag) so that the same principles in (ag) accommodate the persons involved in (af). Is that okay? Can that make it a drafting point? I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question to the rest of the amendments proposed by the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that clause 4, as amended, stand part of this Bill.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think there is a proposal to make some insertion. Chairperson, can we deal with those?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, we propose to insert a new clause to the Bill to read as follows.

Section 119 is amended by inserting immediately after subsection 5 (g) the following -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable chairperson, you have abandoned paragraph 3 on your insertion of new amendment to repeal of 118(e) of the principal act

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, we propose insertion of a new amendment of the principle Act as follows:

“Repeal of section 118 (e) of the principle Act”
The principle Act is amended by repealing section 118 (e).

The justification is that the tax has caused distortion in the market between designated persons and those who are not designated persons.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, effective July 2018, Government introduced withholding tax of 1 per cent on agricultural supplies as a way of capturing persons in agriculture who have not been contributing to tax revenue.

When we talk about agriculture, we all know that that there are people who are involved in serious farming not people who are growing simple things in the rural areas but we know that there are people who have farms. There are people who bring things to the market such as Nakasero every single day in lorries and so forth. We thought that we could have a way of capturing this section of farmers into the tax revenue from the informal to the formal way of doing business. 

I know hon. Nandala-Mafabi is a good farmer but you can imagine his contribution from farming is almost zero. Therefore, if we put something small to bring him to the – (Laughter) - these are the kinds of people we are talking about. Do not imagine, chairperson, that we are talking about our small grandmothers in the village. We are talking about these serious farmers. 

By the way, withholding tax is not a final tax. It is just a tax that will be accounted for when you make your final tax return. We thought that is a progressive way of bringing the agricultural sector into the tax base. 

We also have some people that have started complaining. They have said that they are not in the agricultural sector but are paying taxes. The same person who is earning the same income – a person who has a farm and earns millions is not paying tax but a person in mobile money business or something else is paying tax. I thought people should look at it that way. I do not know where the friendship has gone in one minute. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Hon. Bahati, I am not on your case. First of all, we are looking at section 118 (e), which talks about designated persons. I think you are talking about section 119. Is it procedurally right for hon. Bahati to leave section 118 (e), which we are discussing and go to a section we have not tackled yet? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We have a strong provision in our rules relating to relevance. If the honourable minister is proceeding in a matter that is relevant to the subject, then, he is not proceeding well. We are dealing with section 118 (e) not 119 so are you being relevant? 

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We have two proposals; to insert new amendments in the principle Act. In order for us to achieve our purpose in section 119, we have to repeal section 118 (e) of the principle Act. I think that is the basis upon which the minister is arguing. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If you are proposing to repeal and the minister is proposing to keep, then you are not on the same page. The minister said, “Do not take it out” but you are saying “take it out.” 

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, we would like to stand our ground as a committee and we want to appeal to the House. We have been arguing here that we need –(Interjection)– I have not made any – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Please make the point. Can we have some order, please?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, agriculture is one of the areas that can stimulate our economy. We still think that it should be given favourable conditions in order for it to prosper. (Applause) That is why we are proposing an exemption to the related supplies. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal from the committee is to insert a new clause, which has provision for the deletion of section 118 (e) from the principle Act. I will put the question to that – 

MR BAHATI: I would like to make this clarification. I think it is important for Members to understand the contribution that Government is making in terms of tax to people in the agricultural sector. For example, all agricultural inputs, equipment, chemicals and fertilisers are free of tax. No one taxes anything. 

Therefore, the only thing we are talking about are those big farmers who run farming as a business. What do we do with them? That is the information I would like to supply as you put the final question; that we support agriculture and exempt everything that the agricultural person uses to develop their – but what we are looking at was a small withholding tax. 

MR KASULE: Mr Chairman, I think the committee must explain to us where they got the proposal to exempt all commercial agricultural farming. Government, through NAADS and all programmes importing agricultural machinery, has exempted importation.

The only way agriculture can add to this economy is paying some taxes in terms of commercial farming. You are saying by deletion of sections 118 and 119, all these big companies such as Madhivani Group are going to be exempted from paying taxes. Unless they explain what they are doing, we cannot just agree to the proposal. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Chairman and hon. Kasule. I will give an example. There are farmers who have formed an association. Take an example of 100 farmers. When they collect their sugarcane, one will get Shs 200,000, another one gets Shs 500,000 and another one gets Shs 700,000. The total does not equal to Shs 1,000,000 per person. When you deliver it to Madhivani, they will say that they must withhold one per cent. This one per cent translates to the other poor person whom he is going to charge. 

Due to that, for agriculture to be able to move - if these poor farmers cannot raise Shs 1,000,000 each, why should they be subjected to withholding tax? That is the justification behind that. A commercial farmer prepares returns. That is true. What will happen when I make returns is that I will be taxed for the income I have made. Withholding tax is an advanced tax. It is not –(Interruption)

MR BAHATI: While it is true that some commercial farmers run them as companies, others do not. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, what explanation will you give to a teacher who earns Shs 500,000 and pays Shs 52,000 as Pay As You Earn tax? In that same scenario, there is also an honourable that runs a farm, earns Shs 50 million and pays nothing. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: He has asked for clarification. I do not know if you remember what graduated tax was. During that time, the “Mutala” chief would come and count how many cows, goats and pigs you have so that they levy your tax. That is why URA has come up with Tax Identification Numbers and that is the best way of doing it. 

It is now upon you to identify those potential taxpayers in the villages – there are even commercial ones who are running big shops in the villages but they are not in the tax bracket – but you cannot go after a farmer because they have formed an association and they are carrying sugarcanes on a lorry worth Shs 10 million, forgetting that there are 50 of them, each of them owning stock worth Shs 200,000; and you say those should pay and you leave the bigger ones. 

What I am trying to say is that it is for you to do identification. I am happy hon. Muwanga Kivumbi said that we gave URA Shs 90 billion for capacity building. We never gave it to them to sit in this tall building we have just launched; they should go to the villages to identify those people who should pay taxes. What we are bringing here – I am a member of the committee and I am here to state that this 1 per cent is being applied to the wrong people. You are leaving the right people who should pay taxes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we need to bring this to a close. Where there is an existing provision of a law that is in force – because that is what we pronounced ourselves on in the past – to depart from it, we need justification because that is what has been implemented. 

The justification being given by the committee is that the tax has caused distortion in the market between designated persons and those who are not designated persons. That is what their explanation is. They have assessed and tested it and it is creating this confusion. 

Honourable minister, is it a sustainable tax if it is causing these problems? If it is a discriminatory tax, if it doesn’t bring equity – one of those principles of taxation – 

MR BAHATI: MR Chairman, we have put very valid reasons to why we would want to have this, especially for large farmers. The reason we want designated farmers is so that those that have been complaining are excluded out of the bracket. However, the mood in the House seems not to be looking at this point. We can go back and reflect on it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What does that mean? 

Honourable members, I put the question to the inclusion of a new clause proposed by the committee, the effect of which is to delete section 118(e) from the principle Act. I put the question to that motion.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the new clause be part of this Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, we propose to insert a new clause to amend the principle Act as follows; amendment of section 119 of the principle Act. 

Section 119 is amended by inserting immediately after subsection 5 (g) the following; “agricultural supplies”. 

The justification is to exempt agricultural supplies from withholding tax.

THE DEPUY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the new clause stands as part of this Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 5 stands part of this Bill.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We had a debate on this clause. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Chairperson, I beg that clause 6 be deleted. 

The justification is the argument we had before we went to committee stage. We agreed and there was consensus that this is punitive and is more or less a primitive tax being imposed. It is very retrogressive and we moved that the whole section be deleted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is that clause 6 be deleted. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, this measure was going to raise Shs 40 billion to help us support our budget. It has worked in Tanzania, in Brazil, in Netherlands and it can work here in Uganda. You are resisting this tax measure but we are not being logical.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I will put the question. The motion is that clause 6 be deleted. I put the question to this motion for deletion. 
  
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6 deleted.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR MWIRU: Mr Chairman, I propose that the third schedule be deleted because of the consequential amendment from deletion of clause 6.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Amendment of the third schedule is a consequential amendment. The proposal is that clause 10 (d) be deleted as a consequence of what we have adopted. I put a question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10 (d) deleted.

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR HOUSE TO RESUME

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports there to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the Whole House report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2019” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the report of Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the Whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

4.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read the third time and do pass. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2019”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations honourable chairperson and honourable minister.

Honourable members, in the distinguished stranger’s gallery this afternoon, we have Ms Cecilia Mbewe, Clerk to the National Assembly of Zambia and Mr Lesedi Gaolaolwe, Deputy Clerk to the National Assembly of Botswana. They are here to attend the meetings of the Association of Parliamentary Libraries in Eastern and Southern Africa. Please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

We also have, in the distinguished stranger’s gallery this afternoon, delegates from the following countries: Kenya, Malawi, Seychelles, Zambia, Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Tanzania, Angola, Ghana, Eswatini and Botswana. They are here to attend the same meeting that I have announced; the Association of Parliamentary Libraries in Eastern and Southern Africa. Please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome.

We also have this afternoon, a delegation of pupils and teachers from Atopi Primary School, Apac District. They are represented by hon. Patrick Ocan and hon. Betty Aol Engola. Please join me in welcoming them.

In the gallery this afternoon, we also have Mr Charles Kizito Nsubuga who I recognised earlier at the beginning of the sitting. He is a road safety analyst and volunteer. He is here to be part of the commemoration of the 5th United Nations Global Road Safety Week, which is being observed by parliaments world over. Please join me in welcoming Mr Charles Kizito Nsubuga. Next Item.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ROADS BILL, 2018

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are talking about the Roads Bill – (Laughter) - it sounded as if we are beginning to discuss matters related to the lord.

4.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Roads Bill, 2018 be read the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Member for Kitgum District, Koboko District, Bukwo District, and Busia. 

Motion seconded.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to speak to your motion, honourable minister?

Honourable members, I do not like the frontbench seconding Bills because they have passed it in Cabinet. I prefer my backbench Members. Could you justify your motion, honourable minister?

MR KATUMBA WAMALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Roads Bill, 2018 seeks to repeal and replace the current Roads Act, Cap. 358 and Access to Road Act, Cap. 350. These are two old laws enacted in the 60s, which do not sufficiently cover matters related to the planning, construction and management of roads. It is important, going forward, that we have a comprehensive law that addresses all matters related to management of our roads to ensure that we have an efficient and durable road network to facilitate economic growth and provision of public services.

I wish to thank the chairperson and the members of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure for scrutinising the Bill and coming up with recommendations for this august House to consider and adopt. I am satisfied with the process of scrutiny right from the retreat by the honourable members of Parliament, the public hearings and the submissions you received from various key stakeholders for consideration.

This level of scrutiny gives me the assurance that once the Roads Bill, 2018 is approved, we shall have a piece of legislation that will facilitate development and management of the road network in this country to the satisfaction of all of us.

Mr Speaker, the key issues for justification for the amendment for existing laws include; 

The road network size and management

The current total road network in the country is estimated at 144,785 kilometres, comprising 20,544 kilometres of national roads, 35,366 kilometres of district roads, 10,108 kilometres of urban roads and 78,567 kilometres of community access roads.

Unlike in the past when the network size was small and managed by the central government, the provisions and maintenance of the network is now the responsibility of designated road agencies. These include; the Uganda National Road Authority, the district local governments, urban authorities and Kampala City Council Authority. The responsibilities of the various road agencies require enshrining this in the law.

The road reserve width

One of the long term solutions to adequately address the issue of traffic jams due to increased traffic volumes especially within the cities, urban areas and along the ways is to expand the road width and introduce other classes of roads such as express ways. By increasing the current road width reserve from 15 meters to a maximum of 40 meters from the road centre line, the increase of the road reserve width requires amendment of the existing law.

Encroachment on road reserves

Mr Speaker, it is worth noting that every year, we have on the roads an average increase of 15,000 vehicles and 30,000 motorcycles. Therefore, if we are going to maintain the current road network, then we are not moving forward. 

Encroachment on the road reserves

The rampant encroachment on the road reserves by developers often leads to high cost of land compensation to allow for provision and maintenance of roads. A stringent regulation should be in place providing for early acquisition, demarcation, survey and maintenance of road reserves as a long term solution to avert encroachment on road reserves.

Development beyond building lines 

Erections of permanent structure beyond building lines sometimes obstruct the line of vision and the passing of public utilities along the road reserves. Appropriate regulation should be enacted to stem out the practice.

Storm water drainage management 

There is need to strengthen the regulation of the discharge of storm water, especially from adjoining agriculture land and sewerage from built up areas directly into the storm water channels along the roads, which often lead to clogging of the drains and flooding of the carriage ways.

Road safety

There is need for stringent measures, prescribed by regulations, to ensure the safety of road users during the construction, operation and maintenance of public roads for example, provision of pedestrian crossings, footways, overhead bridges and road furniture. 

Legislation and policy change

The Land Act 1998, as amended in 2009, places the ownership of land to the people. The Water Act of 1995 and the Electricity Act of 1999 grant the respective entities express authority to enter any land for purposes of passing their utilities and service lines. Meanwhile, the National Development Plan II provides for improvement of quality and quantity of the road network in the country. 

It is, therefore, of dire necessity that the legislation concerning land ownership and implementation of NDP II are harmonised.
       
Introduction of road tolls

Road tolls have been introduced as a source of financing for road infrastructure development projects. The current law does not provide for this.

What are the benefits of the law?

There are a number of benefits, Mr Speaker, that are anticipated to accrue from the new law and these include among others:

    a) A well-regulated, planning, design, construction, maintenance and management of road infrastructure, including bridges and ferry landings;
    b) Improved demarcation and cadastral surveying of roads to limit encroachment on road reserves;
    c) Improved control of the usage of road reserves;
    d) Improved road classification system;
    e) Improved safety on the entire road network and ferries;
    f) Wider road reserves suitable for any future expansion of the roads;
    g) Effective control of traffic restrictions on the use of roads, closure of roads and better axle load control;
    h) Improved control of nuisance on the roads e.g. piling dust, silt, wet sand, movement of animals and destruction of ornamental trees in the road reserves;
    i) Easy access to land for provision and maintenance of roads;
    j) Reduction in the cost of road provisions and maintenance;
    k) Stringent penalties for causing damage to road infrastructure and
    l) Introducing off-budget sources of funding for development of public roads.

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for this. Honourable members, the motion that I propose for your debate is that the Bill entitled, “The Roads Bill, 2018” be read for the second time. That is the motion for your debate and to start it off, I will ask the committee to report and then we move from there.

5.06
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Robert Ssekitoleko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the Roads Bill, 2018. Allow me to lay the report of the committee on the Bill, signed by 21 out of the 31 Members of the committee but also attached is a minority report, signed by one Member.

I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the full take of the report.

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Mr Speaker, I also beg to lay copies of the adverts inviting people to submit their views on the Roads Bill. One advert is in the Daily Monitor – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is part of the records of proceedings. Please lay them.

MR SSEKITOLEKO: I beg to lay an advert in the New Vision. I also beg to lay the minutes of the committee during the consideration of the report. 

I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes and a record of the proceedings.

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Mr Speaker, the Roads Bill, 2018 was read the first time on 26 September 2018 and consequently referred to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, in accordance with rule 128 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. In the interest of time, I will not read the report verbatim but I will focus on the observations and recommendations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, Mr Chairman.

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Object of the Bill 

The object of the Bill is to reform and amend the law relating to the development, management and maintenance of public roads and access to roads in order to conform to current Government policies, plans and programmes.

Observations and recommendations 

Delineation of responsibility centres in the roads sector Part II: Road Management 

The Bill seeks to effectively delineate responsibility centres in the roads sector and provides for tolling of roads. It establishes the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) for national roads, Local Government councils for districts and community access roads, urban councils for urban roads and Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) for Kampala Capital City roads and bestows functions upon them, as you may read subsequently. 

The committee notes that this segregation of responsibility is comprehensive and caters for the various segments of roads in the country. This will not only ease planning and implementation of roads projects but also bolsters accountability.

In line with tolling of roads, Mr Speaker –(Interjection)– I am not reading verbatim. This is on page 6, part 6.2 on tolling of roads.

The committee notes that the Government of Uganda has in the recent past committed a sizeable amount of the national budget towards funding road infrastructure works. However, the available funding has not been able to meet the road infrastructure development and maintenance needs. 

To bridge the funding gap, the Government has moved to attract private sector capital that will be recouped through tolling. Roads are vital and play an important role in the aspect of enhancing economic development in the country. Vision 2040 targets at an 80 per cent paved national roads network. 

Similarly, the long-term development vision for Uganda is to transform Uganda from a peasant to modern and prosperous country within 30 years. Special attention is given to the need to develop a critical mass of transport infrastructure to lower the costs of doing business and to spur economic growth. This agenda is, however, constantly being strained by insufficient funding.

Therefore, the new financing method has been necessitated to increase funding for construction, operation, maintenance and rehabilitation of roads and one such method is the introduction of private finance through borrowing. Government will then be able to repay the private capital by charging tolls on roads, which tolls shall be paid by all road users. 

The committee is content that the provision in the Bill for private partnership in the development, operation and maintenance of toll roads will boost efficiency, effectiveness and the economy in the management and administration of roads.

Declaration and Protection of Roads Reserves

The committee notes that civilisation in the country has continually expanded over the years and because of the high economic activities in the country due to increased rural-urban migration, Ugandans are always on the move for resources as well as places to live, work and play. Roads are the arteries through which the economic pulses because they create linkages between producers to the markets, workers to their jobs, students to schools and the sick to the hospitals, hence making roads vital to any development agenda.

Good roads are an important factor in the aspect of development and therefore, the proposal to increase the road reserves to 40 meters will go a long way in enhancing this development agenda. The committee, however, noted that clause 23 contravenes Article 26 of the Constitution, which protects every Ugandan from deprivation of property, except for public use and upon payment of adequate compensation.

The proposal instead prohibits any person from claiming any compensation arising from failure by the road authority to put to use the road reserves land for two years. In a bid to give powers to declare road reserves to the minister, the committee thinks this will be heavily abused by the person in the office of the minister. This power could be subjected to political manipulation and irregularities, which could worsen the already bad situation in a country where land has been a subject of contention for so long. 

Our recommendation, therefore, is that the road authority should first acquire land in accordance with Article 26 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and reserves after acquisition. 

The committee also recommends that the physical planning aspect be strengthened to provide for cheaper avenues of implementing Government projects. The physical planning sector should look at areas where Government can implement road construction projects at a cheaper cost without having to incur huge expenditures in compensation.

Planning should not only be focussed on the already crowded urban areas in the country. For Uganda to achieve Vision 2040, the planning sector should look at the country holistically and identify potential areas of growth where Government can implement road projects, acquire land now according to the law so as to insulate itself from incurring huge costs of compensation in the future.

Vehicle load control 

The committee observes that the synchronisation of our national axle load control laws with the rest of the East African Community is timely. In addition, the axle load control will help protect roads from damage and increase their lifespan and ultimately value for money. 

Road safety

The committee is content that consideration of road safety will go a long way in stemming the high level and cost of road carnage that the country is grappling with.

Access to roads

Roads stimulate economic responses in terms of trade, location choices and transport use and thus, shape the ultimate development outcomes. The committee notes that with the various on-going and planned road projects, enabling access to such roads will aid the integration of road networks in the country and ease the move of the people and their goods.

Offences and penalties

The committee notes that while the Bill had initially proposed hefty penalties as a deterrent measure against various offences, some of the penalties were totally exorbitant and unrealistic. This would render the law so hard to implement. The committee, therefore, proposes the realignment of the penalties to maintain their prohibitive aspect but also reflect reality and practicality. 

As I conclude, Mr Speaker, the committee, therefore, recommends that the Bill be considered for the second reading, subject to the proposed amendments attached hereto and any other modification that the House may deem fit. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson. That is a good report. I also thank the members of the committee. Honourable members, that is the report; it is a fairly big law. The report has been comprehensively presented. Therefore, can we start the debate tomorrow so that you can - Oh, there is a minority report? It is the chairperson who should have helped me with that. 

MR KAFEERO: I am sorry, Mr Speaker. As I indicated earlier, the committee has a minority report and please, allow the mover and the sole signatory, hon. Jonathan Odur, to present it.

5.22
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to present this minority report on the Roads Bill, 2018 under Rule 202 of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to first put it on record that whereas I have signed this report alone, there are members of the committee who have said that they did not have time but they wanted to be associated with this report and these are; hon. William Nzoghu for Busongora North Constituency, hon. Julius Ochen of Kapelebyong constituency, hon. Francis Mwijukye Buhweju Constituency, hon. Okoth Otieno, West Budama North and hon. Charles Angiro Gutomoi. They were all ready to sign but because of time they were not able to. 

Mr Speaker, allow me now to proceed and skip -(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, some of the honourable members mentioned are here and all of them indicated that they can sign, is the honourable Member in order to import the names of the honourable members of Parliament elected by the people into his own report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, under our own rules he is permitted to present a minority opinion on a matter and the members whose names have been mentioned have a right to object and the honourable Member for Ibanda North was not mentioned as one of those who had signed the minority report.

I would have understood if the honourable Member for West Budama North was raising objection because his name had been mentioned but certainly not the honourable minister. 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, very much. On page 4, I would like to highlight that in preparing a minority report, a Member shall be afforded reasonable assistance by the Office of the Clerk.

However, I wish to state that I was not afforded the reasonable assistance as the committee chairperson gave the majority on Thursday afternoon well aware that we were heading into the Easter season despite me requesting and asking him to avail me the report much earlier. It is the reason Members were not able to sign in time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, would you then like to correct the record? From your statement, it looks like you asked and they refused but now you are saying, it is because it was simply impossible for them to render assistance. Would you like the record to reflect that?

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Mr Speaker, on Thursday, the next available public holiday was Good Friday and then the next was Easter Monday but the chairperson directed me to give him the report on Tuesday by 9.00 a.m. there was no way the Office of the Clerk would avail themselves within that period. 

I brought this up so that next time the House can look into the circumstances and the difficulties that Members who would want to write a minority report have to go through. I had to work through the entire Easter period to produce this report that was the point I was trying to make, thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is okay but I do not like to have any indication that there was failure on the part of the Office of the Clerk to do that or that they refused. That was what I wanted you to clarify.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. We have presented three points of decent and the first one is on page 5, (iii) inadequate public consultations; we observed that the committee made narrow consultations on the Roads Bill, 2018.

Objective 10 of the national objectives and direct principle of state policy guides to the effect that all necessary steps must be taken to involve the people in formulation and implementation and development plans and programmes, which affect them.

Appreciating the sensitivity of this matter, the committee in its work plan, had agreed on holding five regional consultative meetings.

Mr Speaker, we observed that the committee failed to execute a work plan agreed by all Members to the effect that regional public meetings on the Roads Bill, 2018 which was to be held in western, eastern, northern, southern and central regions of Uganda were not held.

This was justified firstly because the Bill has huge bearing on the public one enacted into law and secondly, to facilitate and allow Ugandans to have a reasonable opportunity to air their views on the Bill.

The leadership of the committee was repeatedly reminded about the need to carry out the planned regional public hearings but they superciliously disregarded and brushed it aside without any explanation.

Mr Speaker, it is our observation that only seven stakeholders were consulted and interacted with the committee on the Roads Bill, 2018 namely; the Ministry of Works and Transport, the Uganda Police Force, the Uganda Road Fund, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, the Uganda National Roads Authority and the Uganda Human Settlements Network.

It is worth noting and pointing out that of the seven entities consulted, six are part of Government - the sponsors of the Bill. In effect the committee failed to carry out any meaningful consultations of the Roads Bill, 2018 and it is the observation of this report that this was not by accident but rather deliberate and intentionally orchestrated in fear of its ramifications if brought to citizens as they are the owners of land in Uganda.

Mr Speaker, the only stakeholder outside Government structure who submitted their views to the committee was the Uganda Human Settlements Network. The organisation is a Kampala based civil society organisation. Thus, its opinion and submissions cannot be construed to be representative of the views of the ordinary Ugandan; besides the Uganda Human Settlements Network has limitation in geographical coverage and outreach and it provided no proof to the committee that their views were from the entire country.

Whereas it is true that a public hearing was held on 20 February 2019, it is suffice to note that the advertisement calling for the public to submit their views in a public hearing on the Roads Bill 2018 appeared in the New Vision newspaper barely days to the hearing date.

It is our observation that the New Vision newspaper is an English language medium which does not necessarily reach and cannot necessarily be understood by the larger population of Uganda. Therefore, the one and only public hearing held by the committee on the 20 February 2019 falls severely short of the legislative standard envisaged by this Parliament.

Therefore, the House is invited to take exception on the deliberate failure by the committee to hold meaningful consultations and public hearings and accordingly take action on the committee reports.

Recommendations

Mr Speaker, we recommend that the Roads Bill, 2018 should involve far and wide consultations with the public, the legitimate owners of land. Every Member of Parliament should go back to his or her constituency and consult their respective constituents accordingly about the Roads Bill, 2018.

Secondly, the religious and cultural institutions being some of the leading land owners in Uganda must, as a matter of necessity, be accorded due regard and the same be consulted accordingly.

The second point of dissent is on the object scope and the applicability of the Roads Bill, 2018. The Roads Bill, 2018 lists seven objectives that are expected to achieve eight outputs as stated therein.

Output (3); “provides for increased roads safety in urban and built up areas” while output (5) “provides for additional roads space to enable establishment of utility corridors for laying utility cables and pipes.”

We observe, therefore, that it is noxious for the majority report to mislead this House that there is need to expand the road reserves to cater for road construction and yet the Bill itself and the sponsors did not intend. 

In fact the Minister of Works and Transport, hon. Azuba Monica Ntege, while addressing the press at the Uganda Media Centre averred that the Roads Bill, 2018, if passed into law, will not affect the already existing developments.

It is therefore, inconceivable for the committee to recommend a unilateral application of the Bill if passed into law to the effect that it shall have retrospective application and that would be unconstitutional.

The submission of the Uganda Police Force while appearing before the committee was to the effect that given the nature of developments along roads in Uganda especially in cities, towns and other trading centres, the declaration of extra road reserves beyond the status quo is unrealistic, unenforceable and superfluous.

We recommend that the original intention of the Roads Bill, 2018 requiring road reserves for safety and utility corridors should be maintained and accordingly this House is convinced that 15 meters road reserves in the current law is adequate and sufficient hence no need for expansion.

It is also our recommendation that the application of Roads Bill, 2018 relating to the declaration of the road reserves if found to be justified strictly apply to new and future roads construction projects as envisaged by the Minister of Works and Transport in her address to the country at the Uganda Media Centre.

We recommend that the application of the Roads Bill, 2018 be restricted to only roads maintained by Government or an administration, excluding footpaths, village roads, private roads and community access roads.

Mr Speaker, on classification and declaration of road reserves, section 2 of the Road Act 1949 Cap. 358, states that a road means any way opened to the public for the circulation of vehicles, which is maintained by Government or an administration. The Roads Bill, 2018 however, conveniently omits this definition of the road and leaves out the restriction to roads maintained by Government or an administration.

Mr Speaker, we further observe that the 40 metre distance proposed either side from the centre of the road meaning 80 metres in total is unjustified and unsustainable. It is common knowledge that two lane roads in Uganda are mostly 8 metres wide - 6 metres of the actual road and two metres of the shoulders.

Mr Speaker, the Kampala Express Highway being one of the most recent roads constructed is a dual double lane design with a total width of less than 40 metres including the road reserves. To be exact, the actual road is around 16 metres wide, 8 metres for each double lane. One then wonders the logic of providing a road reserve as big as the size of a football pitch and in any case 10 times more than the actual road itself.

It is our observation that in urban centres including cities and towns for example Kampala, Mbarara, Lira, Gulu, Fort Portal, Mbale, Soroti, Jinja have roads which are often separated by housing blocks of which some have less than 20 meters parallel distance between them. A declaration that extending a road reserve to 40 has the effect of merging the two roads hence the building blocks must be demolished at huge cost in terms of compensation and resettlement.

Mr Speaker, it can be observed that the committee recommended clarification of different roads and accordingly provides for different width in the road reserves in the third schedule. The attention of this House is drawn to the fact that classification of roads is subjective. It is, therefore, important to note that the community access roads can within a matter of days be reclassified as a national road which effect would be widening the road to conform to the proposed 80 metres shared by the national roads.

Furthermore, the Bill proposes that the road reserve has to be kept clear of any activity except those that have been listed. The effect is that no productive activity would take place on such pieces of land. It is our observation that the powers to use such a road reserve are vested in the roads authority.

The effect of such a provision is that the authority can grant any other person the right to use the road reserve. This House is invited to take note of the word “any other person” in light of the rampant land grabbing and abuse of public land.

The committee noted that Government has failed miserably to pay compensation to land owners. A case in point being the Standard Gauge Railway project where many Ugandans including our very own Member of this House, hon. Motonyi, who availed her land, has not been paid for more than two years despite the existence of Article 26 of the Constitution that provides for protection from deprivation of rights to property and fair, prompt and adequate compensation prior to the taking over of land.

We recommend that the road reserves be maintained at 15 metres on all national roads to avoid disrupting the existing development along the roads since these very development were guided by the knowledge that road reserves  were 15 metres on national roads.

We recommend that a single utility corridor be acquired for all utilities - water, pipe, and cables contrary to current practice where different entities acquire land for their utilities.

We recommend that roads that are not under maintenance by Government or an administration such as footpath, private roads and community road access roads be excluded from the third schedule.

We recommend that the definition of a road reserve be changed to mean the distance from the shoulder and not from the centre of the road to take care of the different categories of roads that the Government intends to build.

It is our submission that whereas the Road Bill 2018 seeks to introduce important provisions such as road tolling, axle load controls, offences and penalties. It also seeks to introduce several other provisions which have the effect of impeaching the provision of the Constitution in Articles 26 and 237. 

It is the view of this minority report that the House rejects the committee report in as far as the points of dissent raised in this report are concerned and we further pray that this House reflects deeply on the implication of declaring 80 metres of road reserve and accordingly finds merit and adopt this minority report. I beg to present.

MR KAFEERO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. For the record, it is important to put some of these allegations clear. In light with adequate consultation as mentioned on page 5 of the minority report, whereas at first the committee drew a work plan including five regional public hearings in a meeting which the honourable member did not attend, that decision was rescinded, having been resource constrained in terms of time and logistics. It is on record and in the minutes.

Mr Speaker, the minority report talks about the scope - the applicability of the Bill after assent. The committee is cognisant of the fact that the Bill, once passed into law, will not apply retrospectively as alleged by the minority report. Therefore, there is no provision in the Bill to that effect.

The committee has already gone ahead to clarify the roads and also specify the width for different roads. When you read the report, it is in the new proposed schedule on page 25. 
Therefore, the prayer by my honourable colleague has been taken good care of in our report; if he could only give us a chance to consider the proposed amendments. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we are not going to debate this now. We – 

5.43
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I am not party to the minority report. I do not see how my name was dragged into that report when I have not even signed it. I did not even know that there was a minority report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was not the issue, honourable. Your name came in the sense that many people have not been paid on Government projects that have already taken place. For example, the honourable member has not yet been paid. If your objection was to say that you have been paid, that would be sustainable. 

MS MUTONYI: I did not complain to him. Why is he bringing in my name? (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, we deliberated on how long people should be compensated. We put a limit because we said that sometimes it takes long for Government to find resources to compensate the people. Instead of bringing it out rightly, he brought it out as if I was complaining that I have not been paid. Hon. Nzoghu was not even part of the committee. He did not even sign the report.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, now you leave us wondering how this information came to be. You are not denying that you are owed money but as to how he got the information, we now do not know. However, it looks like indeed you are owed money, except you have not complained to the honourable member. (Laughter)

Honourable members, the drafting of a law of this nature should have a transitional provision on how you deal with the status quo as is and how you transit into the achievable targets. It would have helped because you make declarations on existing situations and how they are going to be handled. 

That notwithstanding, the Bill is here and we will be able to proceed with it in that form. However, if you find it so desirable, we might have to think of doing a transitional arrangement to move from now to the next stage. How do you handle existing institutions? A law causing these kinds of changes normally has provisions on how you handle the transition but you might want to think about that for the next process of the Bill. That notwithstanding, the Bill is here. 

Honourable members, we agreed earlier that we would be adjourning early because Ramadan has started. It is from my communication and all Members from that faith know that, that is what I said. They are counting on me to implement what I stated earlier. 

I said that we will be adjourning early to allow them go and break their fast and continue with the commemoration of this event. I announced it earlier, honourable. You were not in the House so please stop doing what you are doing, member for Lira District. It was in my communication that we would recognise this period when our friends from the Islamic faith are observing Ramadan.

We recognise that and factor it in our sittings so that we adjourn early. It does not have to be raised by another member again because it is from the Speaker. I expect you to respect that without question, doubt or anything that tends to suggest that you have issues with the Speaker’s ruling, without following the rules that you need 40 Members to stand to challenge my ruling. 

Honourable members, we will adjourn and have this debate on the principles of the Bill tomorrow considering what I have said and we see how to proceed. 

We will also see how to handle the other pending matters tomorrow. The honourable Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development should be able to help us clear this tax procedure law tomorrow so that it stops appearing on our Order Paper. 

The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock. 

(The House rose at 5.48 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 8 May 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 

