Tuesday, 3 May 2011

Parliament met at 3.05 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you and I hope you had a peaceful weekend. On Sunday, I learnt that one of our colleagues, the First Deputy Prime Minister, Eriya Kategaya, lost his dear father who was buried on Saturday. We did not know but death had occurred earlier. I was informed about this by the Prime Minister on Sunday. He told me that he would not be able to attend Labour Day celebrations because he had been at burial of late Kategaya. The late Kategaya died at the age of 102! Let us observe a moment of silence.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, again last week, the staff of Internal Affairs were here to get details from all of you so as to issue the national identity cards but a few of us were able to give them the details. I have been informed that they will come back for two days. So those who have not given their details, please go to the Conference Hall.

We shall adjust the Order Paper to enable the Chairperson of the Budget Committee to present the final report. The committee has made the Budget which I am due to send to His Excellency, the President, for consideration. So, we shall adjust so that this can be done. I thank you so much for your kind attention.
                 
PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.08
THE MINISTER OF RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Mr Speaker, I have to lay on Table the National Policy for Disaster Preparedness and Management, a policy that we have been waiting for a long time. This being the first of its kind in the history of the country, it needs a lot of consultation. I am glad and proud to have been associated with it.

I would like to recognise the contribution of my colleague Musa Ecweru in steering the process. I cannot forget the hosting we have had in the Office of the Prime Minister under Prof. Nsibambi. 

The vision of the policy is to minimise vulnerability levels for the people of Uganda against natural and human induced hazards and to save lives and livelihoods assets when disaster occurs. The policy creates an effective framework through which disaster preparedness and management will be entrenched in all aspects of development process in the country focusing on service, saving lives and livelihood assets.
 
The policy establishes institutions and mechanisms for addressing vulnerability of people, livestock, plants and wildlife to disasters in Uganda. 

It also establishes national, district and sub county level institutions for effective coordination preparedness and management of emergencies and disasters. 

The policy provides for the establishment of a national integrated system for early warning information dissemination and networking from the centre and with the districts. 

I lay the copy of this document on the Table and I appeal to Ugandans to translate this into a tradition of preparedness and management so that we minimise the impact of disaster and emergencies whenever they occur.

THE SPEAKER: Let the relevant committee dealing with the subject study the policy and then write for the entire Parliament. I imagine that you have given it to us and each will get a copy.

PRESENTATION OF A REPORT BY THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FINANCIAL YEARS 2011/2012 TO 2015/ 2016

3.12
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Rose Akol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In accordance with the requirements of Section 4(1) and (2) of the Budget Act, on 1st April, the hon. Minister of Finance laid on Table the National Budget Framework Paper for financial year 2011/12 up to the Financial Year 2015/16 incorporating the medium term macro-economic plan and programmes for social and economic development and the indicative revenue and expenditure framework. This was subsequently referred to the Budget Committee for scrutiny and report thereto. 

I now, on the behalf of the Budget Committee, beg to lay on the Table the recommendations of the Budget Committee on the medium term macroeconomic plan and programmes for economic and social development for fiscal years 2011/2012 up to 2015/2016 and the indicative preliminary revenue and expenditure framework of the Government for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

Each Member of Parliament received a copy of this report on their email addresses. But I request that you allow me to present here just the introduction of this report.

Parliament has considered the medium term macroeconomic plan and programmes for social and economic development and the indicative budget framework for the next financial year submitted in accordance with Section 4 (1) and (2) of the Budget Act.

The Budget Committee also considered the report and recommendations made by the sessional committees on the Government proposals. The Budget Committee has prepared this report for His Excellency, the President, as per Section 7(iii) of the Budget Act. 

The Budget Committee has outlined key principles and proposals for effective budgetary allocations and implementation. This is expected to guide the President in the subsequent presentation of the Budget proposal and plans in June 2011.

According to Section 11 of the Budget Act, Parliament is enjoined to analyse programmes and policy issues that affect the national budget and the economy and where necessary, recommend alternative approaches to the government. 

At an appropriate time, Parliament will crosscheck the programmes in the various ministries and departments to ensure conformity to these principles and a pre-requisite for budget appropriation.

The Budget Committee considered the submissions from sessional committees and made adjustment to figures within and across sectors in accordance with priorities of the country and in line with national goals contained in the national development plan through general and specific observations and recommendations. 

The committee has also made suggestions to improve the effectiveness and responsiveness of the national development plan to the country’s economic and social needs. 

The Budget Committee supports the theme of the national development plan being gross employment and socio-economic transformation for prosperity. 

The committee will ensure that budgetary outlays in the medium-term deliver the objects of this theme. The committee notes that budget programming for the next financial year is an improvement over previous years where outputs target performance indicators and planned activities are outlined.

The committee recommends further refinement of this output budgeting tool by estimating economic and social rates of return on investment as a basis for prioritising programmes and activities. 

Standard costing of the various inputs should be established to avoid unnecessary inflating costs of imports. The procurement module of the OBT should be urgently developed to guide releases of development funds. 

The committee commends the deepening of the financial sector with the reform of the pension sector. Further reforms are necessary to support the extension of banking and financial services to rural areas, including making arrangements to support the creation of a national agricultural bank.

The committee is concerned that efforts to contain inflation are failing as the rate of inflation is persistently beyond the five percent target. The committee wishes to see more efforts to provide sufficient regulatory and legal framework to support the private sector. 

The business cost structure of bank financing, production inputs and utilities make Ugandan businesses uncompetitive both regionally and internationally.

Attention should also be paid to stabilising fuel prices and transport costs. The Government should also urgently address the issue of land compensation as it affects implementation of public works. 

Domestic Arrears

The stock of domestic arrears is also a concern of Parliament. These arrears include: pensions and gratuity, unpaid wages and salaries of workers, unpaid services and supplies, court awards, utilities, rent, compensation, contingent liabilities and interest thereof. While the arrears are reducing, Parliament wants to see these arrears completely paid up and eliminated. 

Domestic arrears have persisted despite the implementation of the Commitment Control System. There is need to reinforce the Commitment Control System Policy with a view to making it more effective.

Widespread lack of money among individuals and households is largely attributed to the accumulated arrears by the Government and this has an implication for investment, growth and tax collections.

The Macro-economic Framework 

The committee notes the projected convergence criteria for key national economic indicators with the East African Community convergence criteria. Budget discipline is crucial for the attainment for this criterion and decline in external assistance as a share of GDP and the projected compensatory increase in domestic revenue as a share of GDP from current 13.3 percent of GDP to 15.7 percent in the medium term. 

However, the committee recommends that the scope for tax improvement should aim at widening the tax base rather than over burdening the existing taxpayers. 

Interest Cost and Financial Policy 

The committee is concerned about the big burden to the budget arising from large outlays on interest which are a reflection of the state of the nation’s indebtedness both locally and internationally. 

Most of these interests arise from Treasury Bills which are an expense of monetary policy which should be borne by the Bank of Uganda.  

The committee recommends that interest on sale of treasury instruments for monetary policy purposes should be borne by the Bank of Uganda. 

Other interest costs resulting from unpaid certificates of works and contractual arrears are causing a risk premium on road works thus making them more expensive.

A deliberate effort for managing the interest cost and other measures that would free up resources in the domestic financial system should be treated as a matter of urgency besides being a burden to the budget.

Domestic borrowing crowds out the private sector as banks prefer to lend to the government via purchases of Treasury Bills.

Further, the committee reiterates its earlier recommendation of raising the Pay-As-You-Earn threshold from the current Shs 130,000 to Shs 235,000 and this measure is meant to relieve the low paid public workers. Pay-As-You-Earn, however, has not been reviewed for the last 20 years and we recommend that in order to recover what has been lost from the lower tax band, that the top most tax band may be raised to 32.5 percent.

The committee is concerned about inadequate tax collection from the service industry such as mobile phone companies. The committee had earlier recommended that URA and UCC acquire network intelligence equipment to monitor sales revenue of communications companies. The equipment will enable the assessment of tax on the right amount of sales revenue.

The committee notes that management of petroleum and gas resources should be transparent so that the economy benefits now and in the future.

Labour and environmental concerns should also be taken into account in the exploitation of the resource. While the committee was informed that a petroleum fund would be formed to deal with oil revenues, the committee would like to have a comprehensive review of the status and performance of all the funds set up by various legislations currently in operation. For example, these funds include the Road Fund, Energy Fund, UPDF Fund and the Contingency Fund. There is a danger of abuse and misuse of these funds if no reports about their performance are made to Parliament as required by law.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure. At the beginning, we thought the Chairperson of the Budget Committee was going to present papers on Table and she also told us that she was just going to present a summary but the summary seems to be very long and yet we have a lot of business to handle.
 
I wanted to see, if it is not offensive to the committee, if we can just have the papers laid on Table. I trust these Members will read through this report and then we proceed with the other business.

THE SPEAKER: It appears that they are contented that you have laid on Table the report. They will read it and I think you have done your work. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay this report: Recommendations of the Parliamentary Budget Committee on the Medium Term Microeconomic Plan and Programmes for Economic and Social Development for fiscal years 2011/12 up to 2015/16 and the Indicative Preliminary Revenue and Expenditure Framework of the government for financial year 2011/12.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I want to thank the various sessional committees for having worked round the clock to make sure we present this report in time. I also want to thank Members of the Budget Committee for the hard work, staff of Parliament including the staff of the Budget Office for the hard work for the last two-and-a-half years I have managed this committee as a chairperson. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, there is something which you probably overlooked; the report of the Budget Committee was presented to us, there was some detailed explanation which was being given but you said you were satisfied and I intend to send the report to the President as the Budget Act stipulates.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: I thought it was hon. Katuntu who was making a submission.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr speaker. My understanding of the situation then is that, the report has been laid on the Table, we will be given opportunity to read and have our own input in that report and eventually we shall adopt it as a House then you can do what you are saying. Of what relevance is it to us if you are just sending it to the President? 

THE SPEAKER: What does the Budget Act provide for? Can you refer to the Budget Act?

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Maybe you will respond tomorrow after looking at the Budget Act.

MR KATUNTU: Yes, but even then, I hope then the decision of the Chair will be tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: I am saying tomorrow you will have the answer.

MR KATUNTU: Much obliged.

STATEMENT ON THE ARREST OF COL (RTD) DR KIIZA BESIGYE ON THURSDAY, 28 APRIL 2011

3.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I am going to make a statement to this august House on the recent riots, unlawful assemblies and processions during which process Dr Besigye was arrested again.

HON. MEMBERS: Copies!

THE SPEAKER: Do you have copies for -

MR KASAIJA: Other copies should be outside there, can you check? Mr Speaker, do I proceed or we wait until copies are available?

THE SPEAKER: Did you send the copies to us?

MR KASAIJA: Yes, I did, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Where are the copies? Well, I understand that the copies are not enough for us. But I think what we are interested in is to hear what he says. Proceed with your statement.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, concern has been expressed about Police action in response to what is being referred to as the Walk-to-Work campaign against the current cost of food and fuel. I want to inform the House and the country that Government is equally, if not more, concerned about the rising cost of living in the country. This is why Government has stated on several occasions that the matter is under active consideration and action will be taken where possible and is good for our country.

The Walk-to-Work campaign, I must say, has nothing to do with the current high prices. The intentions of those organising the demonstrations and processions are clearly very different. If the Walk-to-Work campaign was genuine, there are clearly spelt out methods and procedures as I will elaborate later on.

Honourable members are definitely aware that Article 29(d) of our Constitution guarantees freedom of assembly and to demonstrate together with others peacefully, unarmed and to petition.

Article 43(1), however, guides us on how those freedoms can be exercised and it states: “In the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms prescribed in this chapter, no person shall prejudice the fundamental or other human rights and freedoms of others or of public interest.” 

Secondly, it is the duty of the Police to ensure that law and order are maintained. It is clearly spelt out in Article 212 of our Constitution. Under this Article, functions of the Police among others include the following: 

1.	To protect lives and property.
2.	To preserve law and order.
3.	To prevent and detect crime.
4.	To co-operate with the civilian authority and other security organs established under this Constitution and with the population generally. 

I must also mention the fact that in performing its functions, the Police are always guided by section 22 of the Police Act. While it is true that part of that Act was struck out by court, the same court in its wisdom reiterated people’s freedom to assemble, but at the same time emphasised the role of the Police to regulate the assemblies and demonstrations. I must add that these decisions are in line with international practice. In all jurisdictions, the Police must regulate assemblies and processions. This is necessary for the maintenance of law and order. 

So, while walking to work as a demonstration is absolutely legal, the Police are mandated to regulate that action. It is in view of this that the Police requested the organisers to inform Police for coordination purposes. Unfortunately, however, the organisers turned down the Police request. They went ahead to organise the demonstration and assembled. The Police with mandate to protect life and property had no choice but to come in and restore order. 

Hon. Members, the refusal by the organisers of the recent demonstrations to follow established procedures confirmed intelligence reports that suggested that the intentions were not to demonstrate against the high prices. The formation of a committee for change and the institution of “Activists for Change – A4C” confirm that the organisers had other intentions.

Regarding the events of 27 and 28 April 2011, you will recall that on 27th of April, Dr Besigye was granted bail from Nakasongola court. One of his bail conditions clearly stated that he should not involve himself in unlawful assembly and procession as it would attract crowds within Kampala City disrupting the peace, security and possible loss of life and property.

On 28 April 2011, at 6.30 a.m., Dr Besigye started walking from his home, Sseninde Road, Kasangati accompanied by seven foreign journalists and three local journalists. Clearly this violated Section 65 of the Penal Code. Allow me to read Section 65: 
“When three or more persons assemble with intent to commit an offence or are being assembled to carry out some common purpose, conduct themselves in such a manner as to cause persons in the neighbourhood reasonably to fear that the persons so assembled will commit a breach of peace or will by such assembly needless and without any reasonable occasion provoke other persons to commit a breach of peace, they are an unlawful assembly.” Under this section, when three or more people are assembled, it is an assembly calling for Police intervention.  

Senior police officers advised Dr Besigye to follow the court directive by her worship the Chief Magistrate, Justine Atukwasa, to avoid unlawful assembly and processions for at least seven months. He responded by challenging the Police to buy him fuel for his car. 

Dr Besigye moved on while the Police tried to keep him in order on the road especially at strategic locations towards Kalerwa bearing in mind the busy nature of the route especially around the Kalerwa Market area. At the market, he got through the roof top of his vehicle and beckoned the crowd to join him. The crowd kept building up. I wish to add that by then he had a convoy of eight vehicles. Clearly this was a procession that required Police intervention.

Dr Besigye reached Kubbiri around 8.00 a.m. and insisted on driving towards Wandegeya Centenary Bank. The Police blocked him at this point for two major reasons: One, the route to Wandegeya has many people of different characters many of whom have potential to turn violent with intentions to loot. Two, Police had intelligence reports that Dr Besigye wanted to divert through Makerere University to attract university students to boost the size of the crowd with increased chances of causing chaos. 

Intelligence information indicated that his agents had mobilised students to join him into the city centre. Consequently, Dr Besigye was advised to go through Mulago roundabout to go to any Centenary Bank branch. If his intentions were genuine, he would not refuse Police’s humble advice. He remained standing through the roof top of his car chatting with foreign journalists and issuing instructions to his agents for about one hour. 

Therefore, he took the left turn towards Mulago roundabout; as he drove, he kept beckoning the crowd to follow him. The mob started to throw stones at Police who responded by chasing them away using batons and shields; without using tear gas at all. 

Dr Besigye drove to Mulago round about and parked his car in the middle of the road after Police blocked him from driving towards Wandegeya. He was directed to drive through Yusuf Lule Road. He stayed in the middle of the road for another three hours, from 9.30 a.m. to 12.30 disrupting traffic flow despite repeated advice from senior police officers. 

All this time, Police acted with extreme restraint, keeping at bay the crowds from Katanga and Wandegeya who were being called in by Dr Besigye. The crowd started showering stones at the Police. One stone hit the eye of a police constable. At one time, the crowd surged and wanted to grab the policeman’s gun from him. Other police officers saved his gun and the injured constable was rushed to hospital. 

At this time, a senior police officer approached the left window of Dr Besigye’s car urging him to drive off. The officer was sprayed with a can of pepper spray by one of the associates of Dr Besigye who was seated with him in the car.

Pepper spray is a commodity that is readily available on the market –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I raise on a point of order, in any case this Parliament is left with less than two weeks. Is it in order for this honourable Parliament to be seated to listen to the minister giving a blatant lie that Besigye sprayed the police officer with tear gas? You are adding an insult to an injury. That is an outright lie! Is it in order for the minister to come and give a blatant lie to this Parliament as if we cannot stop him? We cannot continue like that – that Besigye sprayed the Police with tear gas? No; if that is the statement then we would rather leave it and do other things. We cannot be fooled! No! Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Odonga Otto, since I do not know the facts because I was not there, it is not possible for me to say he is telling lies. You will be given the opportunity to debate this statement. I cannot say he is out of order because of this. I do not know the facts. Proceed.

MR KASAIJA: The officer was sprayed with pepper spray by one of the associates of Dr Besigye who was seated with him in his car. At an appropriate time, we shall show footage to that effect. Pepper spray is a commodity that is readily available on the market. The fact that Dr Besigye’s associate had it is not surprising. The act must have been planned. While this was going on, Dr Besigye was giving press interviews. By this time, it had become evidently clear that:
 
(i) 	Dr Besigye was disrupting traffic intentionally.
(ii) 	He had defied Police advice for three hours.
(iii) He and his group in the car had clear intentions to harm the Police. This was exemplified by the pepper spray used by one of his aides to spray the eyes of the police officer while he himself was handling a hammer –(Interjections)- threatening Police with the words, “I will hammer you.” 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of order for the second time. Is it in order for the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs to come before this Parliament and continue lying that Besigye came with a hammer and threatened to hit a police officer yet it is clear in all the newspapers that the Police are the ones who came with a hammer? Is it in order to proceed with this nonsense? We beg for your protection from these blatant lies. There is evidence that the Police came with a hammer. Is it in order for the minister to say that the party President of FDC, Rtd Col Dr Kiiza Besigye, came out in the public with a hammer to hit the Police? This is nonsense! Is it in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I will give you an opportunity to give the facts as you know them. Let him complete his statement, which we shall debate. Proceed.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, last Thursday in the afternoon, many people made statements here which we shall disprove if we are allowed –

THE SPEAKER: Proceed with your statement as written down.

MR KASAIJA: Thank you. 
(iv) The crowd following him had become more militant and violent to other road users by throwing stones. 
(v) Dr Besigye was blatantly disobeying one of the conditions given to him while being granted bail at Nakasongola Court the previous day.

Basing on the circumstances at the time and keeping in mind the degeneration of the situation, it became justified to use appropriate force to effect the arrest of Dr Besigye and his accomplices. They were driven back to Kasangati Police Station enroute to court. 

While at Kasangati Police Station, Dr Besigye was offered the services of a police surgeon which he declined. Instead, he asked for his sister, Dr Kobusingye. The Police contacted Dr Kobusingye and brought her. She, together with the police surgeon, gave him first aid. His lawyers and hon. Alaso also had access to him.

Late in the afternoon, Dr Besigye, his driver Kato Fred, Kavuma Robert, Mugumya Sam, Kalanzi Geoffrey, Mwijuke Francis and Martin Byomuhangi were charged with taking part in unlawful assembly contrary to Section 65 (66) of the Penal Code Act and assaulting a Police officer contrary to Section 238(d) of the Penal Code. Dr Besigye was bailed out while his accomplices were remanded to Luzira Prison. 

Last Friday, 29 April 2011, beginning around 9.30 a.m. some rowdy groups crowded and began forming up at different places trying to block access roads to the city centre.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, the document that is being circulated to us – I do not know whether even on the other side – does not have pages 6 and 7. Could we –

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I think it is the clerk who photocopied; let him provide pages 6 and 7.

MR KASAIJA: My apologies, Mr Speaker, if my office did not do a good job but there should be page 7. I am now on page 7.

Last Friday on 29 April 2011 beginning around 9.30 a.m., some rowdy groups crowded and began forming up at different places trying to block access roads to the city centre. This was after a false report that Besigye had died and that rumour was circulated around. The Uganda Police, with assistance from the Military Police, within its constitutional mandate again restored law and order and removed blocks from the roads. They opened the roads and disengaged the crowds to ensure peace within our city.

Hon. Members, it is true Dr Besigye did not conduct himself in a proper manner. Had he acted in a proper manner and followed established procedures as advised by the Police, all this would not have happened. Government condemns, in the strongest terms possible, the perpetrators of unlawful assemblies, processions and riots such as those that took place on Thursday and Friday. We cannot rule out the possibility of one or two Police officers acting outside the operational guidelines issued on specific occasions. The activities of those officers are now under very vigorous investigations and for some, we have finished investigating. Appropriate action is being taken or will be taken on all those who will be found to have committed operational mistakes. 

We have noted a growing tendency to condemn the Police Force all around for the acts of an individual. This is not fair. Investigations into the Nyendo incident concluded that the officer responsible for the act acted outside the operational guidelines for the day. He was therefore arrested very promptly and the matter now is before court. Investigations into the Kireka incident revealed that the culprit is not even a police officer. Efforts are being made to identify him. Once this is done, he will be arrested and produced before the courts of law. 

Lastly, the Police and other security agencies call upon the public to work hand in hand with them to ensure that law and order are maintained all the time. Government wishes to assure the country that the situation is totally under control. Every citizen should go about his or her way and anyone who disturbs peace should be reported to the authorities for prompt action. Government will do whatever it takes to protect the lives and property of Ugandans. 

Mr Speaker, I have footage which I would like, with your permission, to be played before this august House to prove each and every point that I have mentioned in my statement. I beg, Sir. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, proceed. (Mr Kyanjo rose_) You will come in, hon. Kyanjo. He is adding more information and then after he has done that you will be able to debate 

(Interruptions due to the presence of a stranger in the Chamber.)

HON. MEMBERS: But who are you? You are a stranger! Procedure, Mr Speaker! The rules of Parliament are very clear. What are you doing here? Just go out! How do we have an ISO fellow here? How do we have -

THE SPEAKER: Proceedings suspended for ten minutes. 

(The proceedings were suspended at 4.02 p.m.)

(On resumption at 4.20 p.m., the Speaker presiding.)

THE SPEAKER: We left when the minister was giving his statement but apparently there was a problem that occurred. Therefore, I had to suspend the proceedings for 15 minutes to allow whoever wanted to arrange the gadgets to do so and also for us to cool down. I do not know whether you are ready to watch the footage. I would allow time - because one may think that the footage has been doctored – to whoever has un-doctored footage – 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, we are ready to proceed with viewing the documentary but it is important to put on record that there was a stranger who came into the House to try to operate the system and that really upset us. Moreover, the man walked in here with a pistol. (Laughter) So, it should be recorded that strangers are not allowed into the Chambers of this Parliament and that is very important. Otherwise, we are ready to watch the documentary.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the tempers are cooling down. However, before we proceed we need an explanation from the parliamentary administration, headed by you, on who this stranger is. Where did he come from and who allowed him in here? How is he connected to what is being shown to us? 

To sit here and proceed as though nothing happened would be wrong on our part. We have parliamentary staff and an IT department. In fact, as you realise, when the gentleman who we all know is a parliamentary staff was operating the laptop, there was no problem; we were only waiting for the pictures. It was not until this stranger was allowed in ­- 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, Sergeant-at-Arms, can you tell us what happened? Sergeant-at-Arms is in charge of admission here. 

I understand that the person who came in is a staff of Ministry of Internal Affairs and he is – I think we should train ourselves to listen to each other. Do not be emotional all the time because it is not necessary. According to the information I have, he is an ICT staff and these gadgets must have been brought by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Sergeant-at-Arms, in his wisdom, permitted him to come in. That is the position, but he is now out.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, this House operates on our Rules of Procedure. There are rules on how a stranger is admitted into these Chambers and you are the custodian of these rules.

THE SPEAKER: Then what you should have done was to stand up and say, “Mr Speaker, a stranger!” You did not do that; you just attacked. Proceedings adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.27 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 4 May 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)

 


