Tuesday, 8 May 2012

Parliament met at 2.35 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS
 
(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Parliament of Uganda has partnered with HS Optikmaschinen from Germany and Prince Kimbugwe Foundation to provide free eye care services to Members and staff of Parliament from today, Tuesday 8th to Thursday 10 May 2012. The team will also give out free sets of eye/reading glasses to correct refractive errors to those who need them. This will be after undergoing a test. Additionally, any intensive eye problem will be forwarded for operation. 

The exercise is already going on in the HIV/AIDS Resource Centre in the basement near the First Aid Room. It will always start at 9.00a.m. to 5.00p.m. for three days. This is therefore to invite all of you who require this service to make use of it and if possible, invite your immediate family members and dependants to benefit from it as well. Please ensure that you benefit from this service as it is a once in a long time opportunity. So, you are all invited.

Honourable members, on the Order Paper, I would like to say that I have been informed that item No. 8, which is, “Presentation, Consideration and Adoption of the Report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs’ Inquiry into the Procurement of Equipment for the National Security Information Systems”, will not be handled because it is not yet ready. That space shall be treated as if it was empty and another item will replace it. Thank you.

2.36
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise on an issue of national importance. I would like to give some information to the House on the issue of the nodding disease.

Last week, I was in my constituency and while there, I visited the main regional government hospital at Kitgum and moved around with the medical superintendent. Later on, I moved to the villages of Tumango and Okidi to assess the situation faced by children suffering from the nodding disease.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I would like to say that what I found on the ground is quite shocking. In the main hospital, I found most of the children with nodding disease having wounds that were not being dressed. Actually, most of the wounds were rotting, which situation I brought to the attention of the superintendent. He revealed to me that up to last Friday, no single coin had been sent to this hospital to help in treating this disease despite the fact that it is one of the centres that were gazetted to handle such cases in Northern Uganda. He said he had no money to buy the materials for dressing those wounds. By Monday, one of the children’s arms was amputated because it had rotted up to the born. 

This forced me to get in touch with the Third Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister of State for Finance about this issue. This was owing to the fact that this House passed a resolution allowing for supplementary allocations to be made to take care of the nodding disease in Northern Uganda. I also got in touch with honourable colleagues in Amuru who also told me there had been no money released.

I am raising this issue because it is an urgent matter that is eating up the nation. Money was approved for that purpose but it has not been released to enable those centres operate. Even the medical personnel who were trained to do the monitoring have never gone to the villages to ascertain the situation. When I had a meeting with the people in a village called Tumango where over 200 children were ferried from Pader and Lamwo districts, – unfortunately one of them died while on the way to the centre – they said they had never seen any medical personnel in their villages.

Mr Speaker, I want to call upon Government to treat this matter with the utmost urgency it requires. The Minister of Finance is at least here to confirm whether that money has been released. If it has been released, where did this money go? 

Much as many of us still think that the nodding disease only affects children of between ages 4 and 18 years, we are wrong. I already have three cases of adults suffering from the nodding disease. These are Aryemo of age 42, Olara Livingstone aged 35 and Oponya Robinson. This shows that there is already a potential problem. That is why I am calling upon Government to urgently address this matter.

I remember one time we have prayed in this House that Northern Uganda be declared a disaster area because of this epidemic – (Interruption)

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Mr Speaker, Parliament passed a resolution while you chaired the session that Government finds Shs 3,805,000,000 for the immediate intervention of the nodding disease. The resolution also said that Government reports back to Parliament within a specified time to ascertain the progress in the use of that money. The information I would like to give is that since this resolution was passed under your good guidance, wouldn’t it be prudent for the minister, as a matter of urgency, to give a statement to this Parliament as to where this money has gone? 

I am saying this because, as hon. Beatrice Anywar said, not a single coin has arrived to my constituency. The only information I got regarding this money was that in the meeting that was held in the Prime Minister’s Office – I was told by one of the health personnel in that ministry - the budget was summarily slashed from Shs 3.8 billion to only Shs 100 million. Even then, there are three departments fighting for this little money. There is a department that wants to do community sensitisation and it needs 30 percent of it. There is one that wants to take the relief and needs 30 percent and the other 30 percent goes directly into medical interventions. This is very serious information, and I can testify before any committee. 

Mr Speaker, since you chaired the session when the resolution of this Parliament was passed, would it not be prudent that the responsible minister be ordered by your Chair to come and explain what is happening because we are also Ugandans. We are tired of complaining every day. We also want to be treated like other people are treated and we do not want to bring these sentiments into this issue because this Parliament agreed that money should be given to Northern Uganda. Thank you so much.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, honourable colleague, for the information. His area is also one of the places to be declared a disaster area. 

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I wish I could have an opportunity to take some of my colleagues to see what is happening in the villages where these children are located. You would not imagine a mother or a parent of six children waiting for the six children to die one after the other and remain with nothing. 

The situation is so bad that we cannot just sit here and look on as Government dilly dallies over the emergency money which we have passed. I would implore you, Mr Speaker, to make our stand very firm and urgently call on Government to respond to this disaster. It is a national disaster which needs attention. 

Secondly, the information I want to give is that food supplies were taken from the Prime Minister’s Office and distributed through the Red Cross. However, I was informed by the sick people that when the food was being distributed, they found metallic cans in the beans and posho in three different places labelled “poison”. This has created panic among the sick children and the parents. I would want to take this opportunity to ask the government to explain these food supplies labelled “poison”, which were distributed to those afflicted with the nodding diseases. 

As I sit down, as is the practice of Parliament, we have shown solidarity on very many occasions and I would implore honourable colleagues that as a matter of solidarity, we do the same. I know it is a burden on Government to act but I would request that honourable colleagues show solidarity with the nodding disease children of Northern Uganda by making a humble contribution towards this cause. We have done this in the past and contributed to the Barlonyo matter and in the Buganda fire outbreak – (Interruption)

MR KATOTO: Is it in order, Mr Speaker, for hon. Anywar to state an allegation on the Floor of Parliament that there was something put in the food written “poison” when she has not laid it on the Table? Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The allegations are certainly serious and grave. I was about to ask hon. Anywar to actually demonstrate clearly what these things look like and if she has a copy of them, because those are allegations that are really serious. 

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, indeed this is a very serious allegation. This incident happened while I was away and I even read it on the internet. However, when I met my people, they told me about it; even the person who got the item from the sack said it was handed over to the LC chairperson of Akwang Sub County and the LC III chairperson went with this metallic container to the LCV. So, we were unable to access the can. 

I would still request that Government takes interest in this and investigates because the people who picked the can are there and I have their names. They are even willing to give testimony to that effect. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Anywar, you are a senior member of this House; statements are not made on the Floor just like that. You need to be able to substantiate, especially allegations of poisoned food or allegations that food supplied to sick people by Government is poisoned. That is certainly a serious matter that you should not have taken lightly. If you did not have any information that could back it up, you should not have raised it altogether. 

I shall ask you then to withdraw those particular remarks and ask those people to go find the cans if they are there, and then bring them to Parliament. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you for your guidance. I am just giving information that the people I represent gave me and I am willing to give the names – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have not given any information. You have made allegations that are serious and you cannot substantiate, honourable. That is why I am saying that for now, withdraw those statements and stick to the earlier issues you raised so that we proceed and ask the minister to make a statement on this. Be fair to the House, honourable.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you for your guidance, Mr Speaker. For now, I withdraw it but I will make efforts to bring those details and table them in the House. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, a Member of Parliament in the hierarchy of this country might be at No.6 or No.7. He or she is a very important person. We hold a lot of power. When we talk in public, the public tends to believe what we say because of the power we hold. Madam Speaker, a statement has been made here - (Interjections) - Mr Speaker, you will excuse me because for some time now we have been having Madam Speaker there. I withdraw that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I ask the honourable member to keep looking at the Speaker when he is speaking. (Laughter)  

MR BYABAGAMBI: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. To develop my procedural point; when we talk, whether on radio or to the press, it is very serious because of the power we hold. Therefore, I do not know whether it is procedurally right when - (Mrs Bakireke rose_) - This is a procedural matter; it takes precedence. 

As a Member of Parliament representing the people of Kitgum, what would have been the first thing to do after hearing such information, whether an allegation or a rumour? It should have been to immediately contact security to ascertain whether it is true that there are some people who are trying to use such a situation to poison our people. But to bring it to the Floor, I do not know whether it is procedurally right.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are extending that debate. The statement was made and in the direction of the Speaker, those particular statements have been withdrawn because this House has refused to entertain them in the absence of any matter that could substantiate the allegations. So, that matter has been concluded. 

I see the Minister of Health in here and I see on the business to follow there is a ministerial statement supposed to come on the health sector. Minister, there was also a request, by a resolution of Parliament, that you update people on the situation of what steps have been taken on this issue of the nodding disease and you were supposed to report to Parliament. Since you have not done so, I am giving you Thursday to come and present a comprehensive report covering these matters so that Parliament is apprised on what is happening, what steps have been taken and what we should expect as Ugandans from the intervention of the government. This matter was exhaustively debated and all we are waiting for is now updates – a progress report - of what is going on. You could well to do that. 

MRS OGWAL: Rt hon. Speaker, before the minister stood up to declare you “Madam Speaker”-(Laughter)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, with due respect, I do not remember standing here to declare the Speaker of this Parliament a “Madam Speaker.” I withdrew what I said and apologised, but I did not stand to declare the Speaker of this House “Madam Speaker”. Is she, therefore, in order to insinuate and impute ill motives on the personality of my character, the Minister of State for Works and a representative of the people of Ibanda County South? Is she in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The word “declare” has several meanings. One of the meanings of the word “declare” is to “call out loudly”. (Laughter) Proceed. 

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Rt hon. Speaker. The Minister does not know that I went to the Royal University of Nairobi. (Laughter) 

Before the speaker on the Floor, hon. Anywar, was interrupted, she had raised a point and I had just wanted you to guide us on that. She said that the issue of nodding disease is becoming very devastating and particularly for some of us who have watched it on TV and read about it in the newspapers, just like the people of Acholi who actually physically relate with the people. It is becoming so devastating that it is important Parliament as an institution takes a strong position. I know that we have debated this matter elaborately, as you have stated, and a position has been taken but Government has not acted fast enough as we had expected. 

However, there is one proposal she has made, and that is why I am standing up, that can we as individual Members of Parliament give a token contribution. We have done that before; we did that when there was serious disaster in Northern Uganda, we did that when the hurricane devastated the constituency of the Speaker then, now Vice President. So, I would like to raise this matter; I do not want it to die. I would like to know whether you could ensure that we make a token contribution. Even if each member contributes Shs 100,000, it will at least show that Parliament as an institution has made a contribution towards an emergency. Thank you, Sir. 

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The matter of us making a contribution is a noble one, but we authorised some money to go towards this emergency. Before we make a contribution, could the people who are in Government tell us whether they have either failed to get the money or have refused to do so? In that case, our contribution will serve only symbolism purposes if there is money to go towards that purpose. However, if they have failed, instead of making a contribution of Shs 200,000, probably I will make Shs 1 million. So, that is the guidance I am seeking from you, Rt hon. Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was going to allow the Minister to make a very short statement and then request that when the matter comes back on Thursday, we could have a slightly more comprehensive treatment of the subject because it will be providing us with the way forward. That matter could then be entertained more properly because we would be in the know about what is happening. 

3.01
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Ms Christine Ondoa):  Thank you, Rt hon. Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member for raising this concern, and I am going to give a brief account of what we have done. As the Rt hon. Speaker directed, on Thursday we shall have a comprehensive report.

The nodding syndrome was reported in Northern Uganda beginning 2009 and since then, the Ministry of Health together with partners such as the World Health Organisation (WHO), Centre for Disease Control (CDC) and others have been working to find out what the cause of this syndrome is. To date, we have been able to identify over 3,000 children who are suffering from this disease. 

The Ministry of Health made a comprehensive response plan, which we costed at about Shs 7 billion, and we forwarded the request to the Ministry of Finance. We are grateful that part of that money has been released and also a promise has been made to release the remainder. 

In the first place, we got Shs 1.1 billion to cater for the immediate emergencies, and that included the procurement of medicines and other emergency supplies, vitamin supplements and also costs which are associated with treatment and investigation.  We also used part of this money for continued research into the cause of this disease. 

Another supplement was released by the Ministry of Finance of about Shs 2.75 billion. Our initial plan was to have an emergency plan which we costed at about Shs 3.7 billion and the remaining money was for comprehensively settling these children and their families, which was a long term plan. 

As I talk now, the nodding syndrome is not only a Ministry of Health mandate; it is now inter-ministerial. We have involved the ministries of agriculture, finance, information and national guidance, water and environment, local government and that of the Presidency. Now it is coordinated in the Office of the Prime Minister. So when I give the comprehensive report on Thursday, I will not give it as Ministry of Health alone but also what these other partners have contributed as far as tackling this disease is concerned. 

I am also glad to inform the honourable members that His Excellency the President gave a directive concerning the management of this disease. Since we discovered that river blindness was significantly found in over 80 percent of the affected victims, His Excellency directed that we get rid of the river blindness in this area by doing two things: one, mass administration of Ivermectin, which is the treatment for river blindness; and secondly, aerial sprays to kill off the flies.

I am glad to report that the Ministry of Health has set 26th of this month as the date when we will carry out mass administration of Ivermectin to all the regions in the North affected by river blindness. The other plans for aerial spray and the long term plans for managing this disease will follow suit. This is the brief update I can give but on Thursday I will be able to give a comprehensive report. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I think that covers that subject. Honourable members, in the gallery this afternoon we have businessmen from Bukooli Islands County, Namayingo District represented by hon. Okeyoh Peter and Makhoha Margaret. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

3.06
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to raise a matter of national importance from my constituency. We have so many problems but this is one of the latest amongst the problems we have.

In my constituency in a place called Dura, we are endowed with a mineral called limestone, which is currently being mined by Hima Cement to manufacture cement. This is besides the controversy over the sale that was between Hima and another company, which is being handled by PAC as a result of the Auditor General’s query. I am not talking about that one because I know PAC is handling it and we will debate it.

There are reports that came out in the media, the Monitor, on Saturday and even today concerning the same area with limestone, which falls under Hima Cement as the licensed holder. The reports stated that the licence of Hima Cement has expired. Apparently, we did not know this. Leaders of the area were informed through the media, which reports have not been denied by the Ministry of Energy, that another company called East African Gold Sniffing has been licensed to take over the rights of Dura and that there is a dispute between the sniffers and the Himas.

Whatever they are, I have the following questions: Unfortunately, the minister is not here but perhaps the Leader of Government Business can take this up. Is it true that the license of Hima has expired? Is it true that another company called East African Gold Sniffing has taken over? If so, in the exploitation of natural resources in our respective areas, what procedures should Government follow to contract or license mining rights? Are those procedures exceptional to the PPDA regulations because they are public assets? We need to understand that.

Two, Hima Cement I know for sure have been taking the limestone to Kasese, and that has been our complaint as people of Kamwenge. However, that notwithstanding, we know they have a factory in Kasese as the area MPs from Kasese also know. Now, my question is: Where are these “gold sniffers” taking the limestone if they are given the mining place? We call it a kinombe, meaning the mining area. If they are given the rights this is really very serious, and our constituents ask us these questions and we – (Mr Wamai rose) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, my rule is always that the person raising the matter has all the information. So allow him to raise it first then you can supplement. He has not finished.

MR TUMWEBAZE: I read in the media reports, which have not been rebutted or denied, that some officials in the Ministry of Energy have even been interdicted over that dubious transaction.

Why should national resources be handled in such a manner? We know that at the end of the day, as leaders from the area - Members of Parliament, LCV, district council - we are entitled to royalties. If you do not know the process of getting the license, you do not even know how the royalties you expect will come and how they are calculated. So I would request that we get an explanation. 

My constituents would want to know who East African Gold Sniffing is. The licence, if true, is for how long? We would imagine that limestone has a timeframe and it will be dug out completely. What is the maximum benefit that we are getting out of it? Are we beginning to export limestone? We need to know. Where is the factory they are going to take it to? Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Frank Tumwebaze, I think you are beginning to out step the rules. You have not stated the urgency of the matter. This is a matter that should have been properly phrased under a parliamentary question so that you get a comprehensive response from the minister concerned. You are raising questions. I have not seen anything that says something is going to happen tomorrow and we need to take a decision so we cannot wait for the other provisions of the rules to kick in. 

However, you have taken the opportunity to make the statement known. I am going to ask the person leading government business this afternoon to raise this matter with the ministers so that we receive some comprehensive responses on these matters. If you had told me earlier, I would have advised otherwise because now how do you move from here? It is not a matter that is urgent; it is a matter that requires more detail. For that matter, I am not going to go into the debate on this issue. I want it to come from the government on Thursday because he has raised the questions. 

Can we get a response on these issues and then the debate can be taken on Thursday; same with the nodding disease. I have ruled on this matter already. Let us have a guided debate on these matters because now we are going to just start unguided. Thursday afternoon, let this matter come up. Leader of Government Business, take notice.

3.13
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of public importance. You realise since last week we have seen in the press the army commander, the army spokesperson, the ambassadors of Sudan to Uganda - both Juba and Khartoum – and yesterday a delegation to your office commenting in respect to the conflict between South Sudan and Sudan. Our army commander and army spokesperson indicated that the LRA’s Joseph Kony is one of those at the forefront, being used as a pawn to destabilise the region. 

Mr Speaker, we in Northern Uganda experienced war for 24 years and the last two or so years have been peaceful. The people there have gone back home and are now focusing on resettlement. News like this has caused unrest and unease, not only among the people in Northern Uganda but also nationally and regionally. If what the army leadership is saying is true, we know that as South Sudan borders Northern Uganda, any threat to its peace is a direct threat to peace in Northern Uganda. 

When we went to Juba – Mr Speaker you were there – for almost two years we were in Garamba trying to look for peace so that our people could settle down. Therefore, this matter is urgent because we want stability for our people. As a leader from Northern Uganda, I want an assurance that Government is doing something. I am happy that as I raise this issue, for the first time the Minister of State for Defence is present in the House. (Laughter) I want an assurance on this particular agitation. 

You know, when a foreign ambassador gets up and addresses a press conference in your own country appealing for help; when you have a delegation from Khartoum coming to Uganda’s Parliament asking for our help in ensuring that the conflict does not escalate, it is a serious matter. We need answers so that our people are assured that peace will prevail. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As to whether a foreign ambassador can address a press conference in another country is a matter that should be handled by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. It is not common for heads of missions to call press conferences which are not attended by officials of the host country. I think this should be investigated because although I have a little experience in these matters, I have not usually seen such a thing happening.

3.18
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of Kony coming back to destabilise South Sudan will not only affect Northern Uganda but Uganda as a whole. We are looking at the trade between South Sudan and Uganda as very significant because over 80 percent of South Sudan’s imports come from Uganda. Thousands of Ugandans are in South Sudan and if this matter is not addressed, we shall get a problem of unemployment right here in Kampala. 

I therefore think that Government should speak out on this because people are panicking; some of them are leaving South Sudan fearing that war may soon erupt and Kony will return, cutting off their trade routes. So when this issue is being handled, it should be handled with a lot of care and attention. Thank you.

3.20 
MR KRISPUS AYENA-ODONG (UPC, Oyam County North, Oyam): Mr Speaker, I wish to raise a lot of concerns and support the sentiments expressed by my sister, hon. Amongi. You and others who know what transpired in Juba and the bushes of Garamba know that when we hear that Kony is about to come, it sends shivers down our spines. 

Before some of us left what we were doing to go and do the unthinkable, – to persuade Kony to lay down his arms and leave the bush - it was after realising the suffering of the people of Northern Uganda. I speak from an authoritative point of view that at the time we took a decision to go and talk to Kony, in every IDP camp more than 100 people were dying every week. So, while some people are thinking about trade, we are talking about the survival of the people of Northern Uganda.

Mr Speaker, as one of those involved in the peace talks, you are aware that it took a lot of tact and sometimes a lot of bending over backwards in order to persuade Kony to come out of the bush, at least for a short time. Sometimes, I begin to wonder whether Government did the right thing to contain the situation where we put Kony. I remember one time we had a light moment with President Museveni during a fundraising occasion in Lira. He said that those of us who had gone to Juba had gone on a tour; the war that ended in Northern Uganda had nothing to do with it but rather the result of the barrel of the gun. (Member timed out) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, just use one more minute.

MR AYENA-ODONG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I remember that on a light note, I took to the microphone and reminded the President that when a mad man throws a stone at you and you pick that stone to throw at him, he will throw it back at you again. I told him this ping pong had been going on for over 20 years but it took those of us without guns to take our pens and brains to contain Kony in some area, and that is why and how he managed to defeat Kony. 

Mr Speaker, what I want to emphasise is that if these statements that we are hearing from the Army Commander, from those in Government, from the Ambassador of Sudan, are true, we want to call upon the government to do everything it takes to make sure that Kony does not plough back into our country again. If Kony wants to come into Uganda let him find another route, not through Northern Uganda. (Laughter) Thank you very much. 

3.24
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (NRM, Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of South Sudan and the Republic of Sudan in Khartoum is an issue that should touch all Ugandans. Just like it was discussed in the UN Security Council, I think it would be prudent for all of us to understand the genesis of this conflict. The issue is all about the unresolved border conflict in the north of South Sudan in the oil rich region of the Heglig. 

Honourable members, it is very important that we clearly understand that unless the border issue is resolved and we accept to adopt the plan of the African Union that was laid on table, the region shall not see peace. It is important that we offer honest advice and we do not take sides because it is important for our brothers in the south to restrain themselves after knowing that initially they are not as strong as the north. It is important that they use dialogue because if they do not use dialogue, they will lose a lot of lives like we have witnessed. Therefore it is important that – (Interruption)

MR ACHILE MILA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Mr Speaker, we are dealing with a very sensitive and delicate matter. I stood up to give this information to this House. The characters we are dealing with are very difficult characters- both the north and the south. We must be very careful about this matter. Some of us know these characters very well. So, therefore, my caution to this House and my information to this House and the government in particular is, please do not take this matter for granted. Uganda may be in trouble in no short time. That is the information I want to give. (Laughter)

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, honourable member, for that information. Mr Speaker, as good neighbours and people that are advocating for South Sudan to be part of the East African Federation, our humble and honest advice would be, South Sudan embrace diplomacy as – (Member timed out) 

3.28
MR SIMON PETER ALEPER (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Just as my colleagues have made their comments on this matter, the issue of South Sudan affects Uganda. I can assure you it is not about Kony only. When there was conflict between South Sudan and the North, the entire north and part of the east suffered. How did they suffer? Because it was a loose state, there were a number of small arms coming into Uganda and ending up in Karamoja; and Teso, Acholi sub-region, Lango sub-region and Kapchorwa all suffered. 

What I am bringing out here is that whereas we have interests in ensuring that our brothers in the greater south and north are at peace, we should not drum messages of war. (Applause) It is very unfortunate. I read in the press where the minister made the statement that we are reading. How do we say we are ready? Who is going to suffer? It is the women of this country, the children of this country and the citizens of this country. So, honourable ministers and all people in good positions, stop drumming messages of war. Uganda is tired of war. Sudan will affect our country, not only the trade. These small arms that the Karimojong had for many years came from Sudan and the moment it is opened, the region will suffer again. 

This is a caution to all who think Uganda can fight. We are not going for a fight. If we are peacemakers, we must go and preach peace and take methods of dialogue and not encourage people to fight. That was very unfortunate and nobody should continue talking about war. We have lost many people in Northern Uganda. (Member timed out) 

3.30
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I had stood up originally to make my contribution but hearing the honourable member from Moroto Municipality, I thought he had made the point I wanted to make.

However, we have been reading in the press recently- I think it was yesterday- that actually you did receive a delegation from one of the Sudanese parliaments, either the South or the North. Wouldn’t it be better, Mr Speaker, if you briefed us such that maybe we can make an input before we start making all sorts of proposals and so that honourable members are aware of the mission of these honourable members from Sudan who visited you? 

Having said that, this is not an issue about Northern Uganda; it is about Uganda. Any war that sucks in this country, Uganda, sucks in the human resource in the UPDF who may not necessarily be only from Northern Uganda. It sucks in resources which may be for the entire country and not only Northern Uganda. So the matter is very serious. It is about this country. 

Our colleagues in the Executive, please save this country. Do not talk like you are not diplomats – (Mr Kakoba Onyango rose_) - I do not have the time, hon. Kakoba, otherwise I would have. Do not talk about war. Do not be proud that we have jets and all these things we have been reading about. It does affect this country. We are not dogs of war. You have a minister of foreign affairs; you need to speak diplomacy. You are not war merchants. Many people have lost their lives because of war in this country; we cannot afford to lose any other life because of war. Any war within that region will certainly spark off in the entire region. It is easy to start a war by even reckless statements but it is more difficult to end that conflict.

Honourable ministers, UPDF Generals, please save us bloodletting; it could be a profession that when you are in the army you fight and die - (Member timed out)

3.33
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Honestly, I just wanted to thank hon. Betty Amongi so much for bringing up this issue. When this statement was made, I read it in the news and so many of my people became scared. The House and the country must know that any mention of the name Kony to the people of Acholi, to the people of Northern Uganda who have suffered because of the conflict for all that time, is enough for my people to get their things and go back to the camps, the IDP camps. 

I kindly request Lt Col Felix Kulaigye, the spokesperson of UPDF, - those are their military issues quietly - if they want to deal with Kony, please, let them go and deal with him wherever he is. Anything to do with letting the spillover of any war, of any potential conflict in Sudan to Northern Uganda will be a very bad one to some of us.

Secondly, the people of Northern Uganda, especially those of us who went through a lot, some of us who carried scars of bullet wounds, do not want to hear anything to do with threats of war. 

Like all the other members have said, Mr Speaker, we kindly request that the Ministry of Defence, together with the spokesperson of UPDF, sit down and find an amicable solution. If they see some problem, let them first prepare a statement, present it before Parliament so that Parliament is able to also have their input before they can make reckless statements. 

3.36
COL (RTD) FRED K. MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Mr Speaker and dear colleagues, I also rise to add my voice to my honourable colleagues who have expressed this concern.

Dear colleagues, God gave us this platform to use it to guide this country. We should use this platform called Parliament to promote peace and stability in this country. Any conflict is expensive; it wastes resources, it destroys human beings. Therefore, we should guide this country. We should guide the media because what we know is what we read from the media. It is our duty as leaders of this country to guide the media, to also guide the politicians from both sides by the way, to mind their language. Our tongues can cause fire in this region but also save this country from fire. Therefore, we should be mindful of how we debate here. 

We should be mindful of how we judge this country. I do not support any war between the two countries. We should all support the comprehensive peace agreement, or we should work because we are all leaders. We are involved in this issue. Hon. Ayena, I know what you went through. What you said is right. We should support the peace, but we know that Northern Sudan has been fighting a proxy war but we should all know, we should be concerned, we should be mindful. 

We should study the history of both Sudans and speak with authority, speak after research instead of coming here to sound war drums. It does not pay anybody to go to war. We know what war means and we do not want to go back to war. We should guide this country to promote peace, to promote stability, to promote love and fraternity -(Member timed out)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Just guidance as the minister comes in. Article 210(d) of our Constitution says, “Parliament shall make laws regulating the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces and, in particular, providing for – 
(d) the deployment of troops outside Uganda.”  

Article 124 of the Constitution also gives the President power to declare a state of war but with the approval of Parliament.

So, the guidance I wanted to seek is if the UPDF soldiers in the Central African Republic have got any blessing and approval from Parliament in relation to Article 124 and Article 210. That is the guidance I wanted the minister to also elucidate. 

MR ONYANGO KAKOBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am doing this for the benefit of this House. I know very well that Article 210 provides for deployment of troops but for it to be implemented, to be operationalised, there had to be an Act. Under the UPDF Act, it is provided for but the grounds under which it is provided for are for peace-keeping. In the Central African Republic, we are not peace-keeping, we are peace-making, and it does not require Parliament to approve. This is in the UPDF Act. I read it because I did my dissertation on it and I know it very well. 

3.41
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to assure members that we have taken note of all the issues they have raised here. As you will agree with me, these are fairly weighty matters. I therefore request that I be given time so that I can be able to share the views raised on this Floor with the Leader of Government Business so that we can be in a position to get a fairly comprehensive statement on this highly weighty matter. I beg to request.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have a timeframe? 

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, on Thursday we should be able to provide a statement on this matter. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, Thursday this week, we expect a statement from the government on this issue of Sudan.

3.42
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance in my constituency. I am seeking intervention by this Parliament to help me on how to go about this issue which happened this morning in my constituency. This morning at around 7.00 a.m., a group of prisoners went to my district to a village called Mpambire-Kaligwa, which is found in Mpigi Town Council. When the villagers went to their gardens to cultivate, they found prisoners busy cutting down everything they could land upon. As I talk now, my people are displaced; they have nowhere to go and all their crops have been destroyed. 

After the invasion of the village, they went to the police. The Police CID rang the owner of the land who arrogantly said that he was not ready to meet those people. He said they should come here to Kampala and meet the Administrator General. Imagine a poor man down in the village coming here to Kampala asking for the Administrator General’s chambers. So I need the intervention of this Parliament.

Again, a few weeks ago, the same thing happened in a parish called Maziba, one of the parishes that make up Mpigi Town Council - it is composed of seven villages and there are over 4000 homesteads. The same so-called land developers went to that village, after meeting the landlords in Kampala, and evicted all the residents there from their land. They leave the tenants with 30 percent of their land and take away the 70 percent. At times, they may leave the tenants with 25 percent of that land. They dictate the portion they take according to their wish. 

Mr Speaker, in case one wants to pay money for their land, they are asked to pay a lot of money which they cannot afford. Some of the residents who are living on that land were re-located to swampy areas. So, we have a problem. The youth have moved down to the villages – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think the matter that you have raised that is urgent is what happened this morning; that is what you should address. What happened two weeks ago or months back cannot be the subject under this item. 

So you have raised a matter that early this morning, there was a problem and people were displaced. You have raised a question on how they can be helped. I think that is sufficient to cover that subject. If you go into those ones, you should have raised a Parliamentary question instead so that you have a comprehensive answer from the minister. I think the matter is that. 

Did you say that prisoners went there or they were taken there? I am not sure prisoners can just go - (Laughter) – If prisoners went then it means they have escaped, but if they were taken, then somebody is responsible for taking the prisoners there. So, is this matter raised by the honourable member from Mpigi in the knowledge of Government? 

MS NAKAWUNDE: Mr Speaker, I would request the minister responsible to address this issue (Applause).

3.48
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank hon. Nakawunde for raising this urgent matter. I would like to request – (Interruption).

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter the honourable member has talked about is to do with prisoners going to a certain place. The Minister of State for Internal Affairs is in-here. I do not know whether my colleague, hon. Daudi Migereko, would like to take over his job. The minister should be given his rightful opportunity. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Epetait, I thought you were shadow minister from this side and this is Government side. They determine how they handle their business, just like you determine how to handle your business. 

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, the matter that hon. Nakawunde has raised involves both internal affairs and lands. I want to make a request to hon. Nakawunde that we meet so that she can avail us with more information. I request that we meet her with the ministers of internal affairs and of lands so that we can be able to take up this matter in a fairly comprehensive manner. I beg to request.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As Members of Parliament, we come to this House to represent issues concerning our constituencies. The honourable colleague has shared the pain in her constituency with this august House but we are also beneficiaries of that concern. So, is it procedurally right for the honourable minister to shield this information away from the House instead of taking the right procedure and reporting it to the House so that even those of us who have not contributed can also benefit from it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the purpose of this House is not to debate in vain. The purpose is to deliver something to the people affected. Whatever way can make this happen is proper. So if the honourable minister can interact and get more information from the person concerned and have the matter handled before Thursday, then it would be better. But if the matter is not handled, the honourable member has recourse to come back and say, “The honourable minister consulted with me and nothing has happened, so can the House help me with this?” so that House can see how to help.

Honourable members, we keep saying this, and I should say it again; it is very important that when matters of this nature arise in your area, you notify the people concerned immediately, both the ministries and departments. Let them have information so that when we come to the House, you do not talk to yourself but you talk to somebody who will give a comprehensive response. Even the people in the constituency, when they look, they can say, well she has spoken and Government has responded to the issue in a comprehensive way. It would be more beneficial. But if you come and talk when nobody has the information, then it becomes very difficult. That is why we keep on postponing because we need more time to get more information. 

We should try and first interface with the minister so that by the time we come here with an urgent matter, information has already pass to the other side and the minister responsible is here to make some responses. I think in future this will make these matters more comprehensively handled.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE PUBLIC FINANCE BILL, 2012

3.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that a Bill entitled “The Public Finance Bill, 2012” be read for the first time. 

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, in accordance with the Budget Act, I beg to lay the Certificate of Financial Implications of this Bill. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you, honourable minister. That Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee for handling and the 45-day rule applies. The time starts ticking now and please, observe the time required to report back for Second Reading.

PETITION ON THE LEADERSHIP VACUUM AND RESULTANT INSECURITY FACED BY THE RESIDENTS OF KIMWANYI LC I ZONE, WANDEGEYA

3.54
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA-MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): I thank you, Mr Speaker. This petition is moved under rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. 

The humble petition of the residents of Kimwanyi, LC I Zone, Wandegeya, Kawempe South Constituency represented by me; they are the people behind this petition.

This Petition showeth and states that:
i)    The subject matter of this petition is the leadership vacuum and resultant insecurity being faced by the residents of Kimwanyi LC I Zone following the abandonment of the area by the chairperson and purported vice chairman, and unlawful arbitrary dismissal and appointment of council members by the chairperson.

ii) 	The petitioners are residents and electorates of Kimwanyi LCI Zone, Wandegeya, Kawempe Division South whose identities and particulars are reflected in the individual petitioners’ voter cards authenticating their locus in the matter.

iii) 	The nine member executive…….”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, would you like to state the prayers that you want this House to handle?

MR SEBULIBA-MUTUMBA: I thank you for your guidance.

Your humble petitioners pray that Parliament resolves that:

1. 	The executive committee of Kimwanyi LC1 Zone is not properly constituted having lost the mandate the residents vide vote of no confidence and unlawful inclusion of new members by the chairperson.

2. 	Election of the executive committee of Kimwanyi LC1 Zone, Kawempe South Constituency be held to replace the current defective executive in whom the petitioners passed a vote of no confidence.

3. 	Any administrative relief deemed necessary to maintain order and the rule of the law in the zone will be welcome.

And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray and hereto append their signatures.

Mr Speaker, as I beg to lay this on the Table, I think it is a matter that should be given due attention and expeditiously be dealt with because of the insecurity and break down of the rule of law. You know that the area I am talking about is in Katanga, Wandegeya, which is very volatile. They even wanted to go on a demonstration. 

I recently met the Minister for Security, hon. Muruli Mukasa, and I talked about the same issue. As I lay it on the Table, I wish it could be given the due attention, expeditiously, such that these matters are amicably resolved. I beg to lay on the Table.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I thank my colleague for laying this important petition before Parliament and I congratulate him. However, the guidance I am seeking is based on the spirit under which rule 27 of our Rules of Procedure was drafted. Generally speaking, I seek your guidance whether this Parliament will be engaged – First of all, there are no LC elections countrywide and not only in Kawempe. The LCIs have abused their positions, others have appointed their family members to the executive and others have declared themselves life LCIs.  

I seek your guidance if it would not be prudent for this Parliament and the minister to give us a comprehensive explanation on the status of LCI elections countrywide because this problem is not only in Kawempe. To tie a committee of Parliament to investigate issues in Kawempe and yet there are over 500,000 LCIs not fully constituted would be underscoring the role this Parliament could do. 

I seek your guidance because my LCI in Opolachen village has also become very terrible. I do not want this Parliament to be overwhelmed with receiving 385 petitions. If we could comprehensively be advised by the ministry on when the Electoral Commission is planning to have LC elections all over the country; I seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you very much, the honourable member for Aruu County. You see, the matter raised by hon. Sebuliba-Mutumba is cross-cutting; it is not just about elections but also has to do with security. I think it is multi-sectoral and has been brought in good time. All the statements that you have made could easily come back when the committee finally reports on the petition. When they study the petition, it could be one of the recommendations that the committee would make after a comprehensive coverage of the subject because they will have the mandate to do that. The matter is before them. Honourable members, this petition is referred to the appropriate committee.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I do appreciate your ruling but notwithstanding, now that the petition is going to the committee, could you order the minister to come and give a comprehensive statement to Parliament on the status of the LC lections. This is because the petition may take six or seven months but the minister could even come on Thursday and tell us when the Electoral Commission is going to carry out elections. I seek your guidance and order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that it will still fall within that. If we have a more comprehensive way of handling this, the minister could even be summoned by the committee to give some outlines so that when the committee reports here - I was about say that the budget issue is quite urgent too but this particular matter should be accommodated within the next three weeks and immediately Parliament resumes, we start with these matters and we dispose them off.

MR SSEMUJJU: The issue that hon. Sebuliba-Mutumba is raising from Kimwanyi village are issues some of us share. We face similar problems. There is insecurity partly because of the issues his petition is raising. Is it possible for all of us to go and follow the same procedure and bring a similar petition here or we now carry our problems to the committee, because in Bweyogerere somebody is killed almost every week?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that is a general security situation, and that is why I am now saying you do not know which committee this matter should go to as it is cross-cutting. Local government would certainly be one of them. okay, I think the committees should handle it jointly. The committees on local government and that of defence and internal security should jointly handle this thing so that when we come back in three weeks, we should be able to get a comprehensive report on this particular matter so that a decision can be taken that can help the suffering people.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

4.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Alex Onzima): Mr Speaker and honourable members, allow me to say something just very briefly before I get on to this – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, lay the document on the Table. That is what is on the Order Paper. 

MR ONZIMA: Mr Speaker, you have a lot of power. I just need one minute.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I am just using the rules and not my powers. The rules say, “Presentation of Papers” and you lay the document on the Table.

MR ONZIMA: Obliged. Mr Speaker and honourable members of the Ninth august House, section 25 (3) of the Local Government Finance Commission Act of 2003 commands the Minister of Local Government to cause to be tabled before Parliament the annual reports of the Local Government Finance Commission. Accordingly, I hereby do beg to lay on the Table the said report for the 2011 calendar year. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, what do you beg to lay on the Table?

MR ONZIMA: The said above Local Government Finance Commission Annual Reports for the calendar year 2011, sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. 

4.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I beg to lay on the Table the semi-annual budget performance report for financial year 2011/2012. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Let the records capture it as such. 

4.07
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I have two reports to lay on the Table. The first report covers the activities of the Sixth Ordinary Session of the Second Parliament of the Pan African Parliament which was held in Addis Ababa between the 16th and 20th of January this year. For the second report, we had agreed that it has not been the tradition of this House to regularly bring the reports of the activities of the Pan African Parliament, so today, I am laying the second report and – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the report that you should be laying on the Table is, “the Report on the Permanent Committees’ Session of the Second Parliament of the Pan African Parliament on the Eastern Region Caucus Workshop, 4th to 14 March 2012.” That is the report I am expecting. Kindly lay it on the Table.

MRS OGWAL: That is correct. Mr Speaker, whoever prepared the Order Paper put the meeting of March before that of January but it does not matter; I have both reports. So, allow me to lay on Table – (Laughter) – the reports by the Pan-African Parliament delegation, led by me, on the permanent committees’ meetings, which took place in South Africa between the 5th and 14th of March 2012. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the records capture it as such. 

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I wish to first of all draw the attention – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, first lay that report on the Table. There is another report under (iv) which has been called by the clerk. 

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the second report, which is dated 16th to 24th January 2012. It covers the activity of the Sixth Ordinary Session of the Second Parliament of the Pan African Parliament held in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. I beg to lay on the Table, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the records capture it as such. The dates are from 16th to 20th January 2012.

MR ONYANGO KAKOBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I seek your guidance. I definitely know our rules provide for presentation of papers and I also know that at times we do not have enough time to debate everything here, but we are aware that the Pan African Parliament is the Parliament where we are represented and which deliberates on matters of Africa. We thought as a delegation, we would probably be given more time so that these reports are debated instead of just presenting them. 

I am seeking your guidance, Mr Speaker, on whether we could be given this opportunity in future, because now it may be late, so that members get to know what really happens. If we just lay the papers on the Table, members may not get time to read them. That is the guidance I seek, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, honourable members, the rules under which these particular reports have been brought and laid are clear. It is called “Presentation of Papers”, which means you just lay the papers on the Table and that is it. Debate can then be scheduled for a future date if a matter of this significance has got to be discussed and Parliament has got to take a decision on some of the recommendations. 

I am sure members of the Pan African Parliament, who are actually members of this august House, have recommendations they want to specifically make to this House on what they have deliberated. So, I think at the earliest possible time, proper business will be scheduled for debate of this report so that they can make a presentation properly and then the House can debate and take a decision on it. However, under the rules under which it has been brought, it does not even attract a speech because you are just laying the paper and off you go just like hon. Alex Onzima has left, hon. Omach Jacan has left; so shall hon. Barbara Atim Ogwal leave. (Laughter)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I just want to remind you that I had a small comment to make. First of all, one of our members had a terrible incident in the month of March where she was attacked by robbers in the company of her husband and son. She sustained serious injuries, was hospitalised but has now been released and I do believe that she will be able to join the delegation – (Interjections) - The name is hon. Beatrice Barumba Rusaniya, and I thought that many of you had visited her in the hospital. She is still not very well but recovering. 

The second point that I would like to raise on the Floor of Parliament is that – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have not sought the indulgence of the Speaker. The Speaker had asked you to only lay the papers and leave but now you are continuing to contribute.

MRS OGWAL: Through the Chair, I would like to say that I thought that it would be important for the House to get to know of the condition of our colleague. Secondly, I also want the House to know that Pan African Parliament is increasingly becoming a very important institution that we cannot ignore. It is important that you give us slot on the Order Paper so that Parliament is given the opportunity to debate the transformation processes. 

It is important that Parliament gets to know that the reason we had a workshop in Mombasa was to promote inter regional trade. Unless we get involved in the discussions of these crucial matters, other countries will come prepared with a position while Uganda will not. So, it is important. You should know that Uganda is being applauded for the role we are playing in Somalia. How else will you ever know how much Uganda is being applauded unless Mrs Ogwal, the Leader of the Pan African Parliament delegation, informs the House. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for that time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you too.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO REVERSE THE DECLINING TREND IN THE IMMUNIZATION PROGRAMME IN UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Huda Oleru, I have been informed that this motion was presented already. Is that correct? It was presented but it is now coming for debate; is that correct? Was it debated?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No!

MS OLERU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Two weeks ago, I moved a motion for a resolution of Parliament to reverse the declaiming trends in the immunization programme. My prayer now is that the motion be seconded, debated and adopted. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable minister, now that we have already looked at the motion, it would inform you better if you listened to the members and then you closed with your presentation; it would be more comprehensive –(Interjections)- You mean it was presented without being seconded? Okay, the seconder did not speak to it. Let me allow the seconder to speak to it.

4.17
DR JEREMIAH TWA-TWA (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before I speak to the motion as the seconder, I beg that you allow me to make my contribution from the Table because I have some documents to lay. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, you have been allowed, and for that matter I give you five minutes.

DR TWA-TWA: Mr Speaker and colleagues, I beg to second the motion as moved by hon. Huda Oleru on the declining trends in immunisation. You know that these diseases which we are talking about affect children and they kill and maim them. These diseases include tuberculosis, polio, measles, whooping cough and tetanus. Also coming on board now is pneumonia and cervical cancer.

Looking at history, from the period 1962 to 2000 – actually between 1962 and 1970, we had a successful programme. You know that we managed to eradicate small pox and Uganda was certified and declared free of small pox in 1973. All this was achieved because we had a vibrant and good health programme that covered immunisation.

Between 1973 and 1979, I think you know what happened; because of the civil unrest, immunisation responses went down. That meant that immunisable diseases would kill a lot of our children during that time. Actually, immunisation was below 50 percent.

In 1983, the Government of Uganda introduced another successful programme on immunisation under the project codenamed UNEPI. From 1983 to 1998, we again had a successful immunisation programme that covered the immunisation of children on most of the antigens, above 80 percent. I must state here that to prevent the transmission of these immunisable diseases, we need to immunise a critical mass of children or people in order for them to get hard immunity within the community to resist their transmission. Usually, you have got to immunize a population of children of at least 90 percent. When you cover that, yes there will be transmission going on but on a limited scale.

Between 2000 and 2010, we again scored some kind of achievement with immunisation going on at a good coverage. However, after 2009 we have seen these programmes start to fail with the diseases we had worked on returning. The hospital wards for measles had been closed between 2003 and 2009, but of recent measles has shown up and these wards have been reopened. This is very sad.

I have a report with me here, and at some point I will beg for permission to lay it on the Table; it is about a review that was done by the ministry together with development partners. The review covered the period 1962 to 2010 looking at how the immunisation programme has been performing. In their review, they established that the coverage that I have been talking about had declined. However, they also looked at what actually went wrong. 

In this review, there are recommendations that were given. Some of the issues that are raised are particularly issues on money. If you read the report, you will realise that the proportion of money assigned to EPI, for instance, has been falling from 7.7 percent to 3.6 percent in the Ministry of Health budget. I notice that this is a problem relating to operational funds.

When you look at the money as it has been allocated in real terms, you realise that there is a constant Shs 5 billion meant for routine immunisation. However, there is also another constant Shs 2 billion, which is co-funded, for the pentavalent vaccine; this is a DPT/HIP/HEP. The operational costs, however, have been falling from Shs 1.4 billion to a miserable Shs 700 million in the last financial year.

When we talk about operational funds, this is money which is used for distribution of logistics, maintenance of the cold chain, transportation, distribution of materials, printing things like cards, surveillance, support supervision, capacity building, payment of allowances and transport for the healthcare workers. These things, particularly the allowances and transport for the healthcare workers, are not adequately paid. For that reason, the outreaches are not being carried out. No wonder the immunisation programme has gone down. The vaccines are there but the human resource is not motivated and is not supported. 

So, it is appropriate for this august House to rethink the immunisation programme. We need to look at the laws and by-laws governing immunisation to ensure that people comply. We have got to look at the financing to ensure that Government increases the funding of this activity. We have had some discussions with the ministry and they think that if this Parliament can increase the budget for EPI by Shs 2.0 billion for operational costs, it will definitely reactivate the programme. 

Mr Speaker, let me stop here but I would like to lay on the Table this supportive evidence. This is a report of the review of immunisation in Uganda carried out in October/November 2010 by the Ministry of Health and development partners. I beg to lay. 

The other document which I would like to lay is information from the Ministry of Health surveillance programme. It shows that in the last six months - as I had told you - we had closed the measles wards but there is a cumulative 4,000 measles cases which have occurred. This spells an epidemic. So, Mr Speaker, once again – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is that? What is it called?

DR TWA-TWA: It is an internal memo - a summary of an outbreak of epidemics from the epidemiology surveillance division.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will not take that. You will bring that to the appropriate people to handle it later when Parliament finally takes a decision.

DR TWA-TWA: Okay. Mr Speaker, I support the motion. (Applause)

4.28
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank hon. Huda Oleru for the motion she presented. 

As hon. Twa-Twa said, Uganda performed better in the past but our achievements seem to have regressed. Today, Uganda is among the 10 worst performing countries in terms of immunisation just by looking at the number of unimmunised children. When you look at the 10 worst performers in the world, Uganda is among them and there is cause for worry. Therefore, it is important that we should find time to discuss this issue of immunisation and the wider aspect of healthcare in this country.

In my view, I think there is complacency at the Ministry of Health but also generally with Government and therefore some of the diseases like measles have come back. When you go to Mulago Hospital, the children’s ward is full of measles’ cases. This is true with many other hospitals in this country. 

One of the challenges is that our health system remains weak. It is dysfunctional. While it is true we need more money, there are other institutional and systemic challenges that must be addressed in order for programmes like immunisation to be effective. 

Talking of money, when you look at the national budget, the total amount of money which is allocated for providing tea in offices is more than the budget for primary healthcare in this country. We have done analysis of the national budget. The money which we spend on tea in offices is more than the money given to the Ministry of Health for primary healthcare where immunisation and other essential services fall. We must realign our budget to fund some of these key priorities. 

There are also other systemic issues in the sector like the pay for health workers. Right now vaccines are delivered but the health workers are not motivated to provide the service both in the facility and outreach programmes. We would want the minister to develop a comprehensive plan on how she is going to revitalise immunisation in this country. Yes, the money is a problem but there is also need to stimulate the whole sector to develop a comprehensive plan on how, for instance, you can involve Members of Parliament to assist in community mobilisation. We do not get guidance from the Ministry or Government on, for instance, what we can do at community level or what the district leadership can do. So, we need a comprehensive plan from Government on how we can take up this issue of immunisation and other key primary healthcare interventions. (Member timed out)

4.31
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support the motion of reversing the declining trends in the immunisation programmes in this country. 

From 23rd to 28th April, the World Health Organisation declared this the African Week for Immunisation. I would like to thank the Minister of Health for the statement she made in as far as highlighting immunisation coverage in this country is concern. It was unfortunate that during that week, we had wanted to make this statement to reinforce the efforts she was trying to put in place but we were unable to. Nevertheless, I stand to support and encourage all the stakeholders in this country, more so the Executive, to follow past trends where we performed so well in as far as reaching the required level of 90 percent immunisation coverage is concern. 

Unfortunately, as my colleague has stated, it is due to laxity in as far as involvement of local leaders is concern. It was mentioned that the LC structures, which are supposed to mobilise and ensure that every child in the every household is immunised, are not doing that. There is that laxity, which we need to address to ensure that we help the ministry reinstate the problem solving and development strategy approach which they had emphasized, so that there is maximum utilisation of all the human resources - the local leaders, the parents, religious leaders, cultural leaders. All these should come on board to ensure that immunisation is carried out. 

We would also like to request that Government brings on board tetanus vaccination for all the girls from the age of 14 as long as they are still within the pregnancy carrying capacity. There should also be special cervical cancer vaccination which prevents cervical cancer among pregnant and mature ladies who suffer from these tumours. 

If we are to realise MDGs 4 and 5, we have to work on a strategy of preventative healthcare approaches, which are very critical. I appeal to Parliament that together with the Ministry of Health we sit down and put in place a strategy of mobilizing, even to the level of carrying out death audits as to why a child should die if we are able to vaccinate that child in the health facilities in our constituencies. (Member timed out)

4.35
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. We all know that immunisation is a safety measure for children’s survival. This is the protection that has to be given by both parents and Government. Currently, we have eight immunisable diseases, which we intend to increase to 10.
 
On 23 October 1983, the vaccination programme was launched by the then President, Dr Milton Obote, but it did not take off very well. On 15 June 1987, the programme was re-launched by His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of the Republic of Uganda, and it took off very well. The United Nations Children’s Fund, UNICEF, provided vaccines and operational funds. In fact at that time, UNICEF was funding the programme by 99 percent.
 
From 1996, Government took over the immunisation programme completely and infrastructure was put in place to handle immunisation programmes. Vaccines were availed, cold chain management was put in place, needles and syringes were availed, register cards were provided, mobilisation was done and health workers were trained. Why is there a decline now? 

The review that was done in 2010 shows that immunisation coverage has been deteriorating due to the following reasons: 

•	Only 50 percent of the approved positions in the health sector have been filled and yet the population has increased and the number of districts has also increased. 

•	The quarterly releases are decreasing and are not done on time and yet immunisation is done on planned schedules. 

•	Mothers are not eager to walk long distances because their children are not sick like those who require urgent medical attention.  

•	The negative attitude of health workers; that is, they lack good public relations.
 
Mr Speaker, the national survey on full immunisation by region done recently shows that urban areas stand at 61 percent while rural areas stand at 50 percent and the national average is at 52 percent. The east central region, which is Busoga, is at 39 percent. I think there is something wrong with Busoga. (Laughter) The other day, I was talking about malnutrition, which was eating up my children in Namutumba; the jiggers are there. Even now with the immunisation, we are just at 39 percent. This means Busoga needs affirmative action. (Member timed out)  

4.39
MR JOSEPH SEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of immunisation is very important and I would, therefore, like to thank the mover of this motion. 

We need to reflect on what happened in the 1970s. Immunisation in the 1970s was done at community centres. I was born in 1969 but I remember being taken for immunisation in 1972 at an immunisation centre, ekitawuluzi in Luganda. What used to happen then was that they had local leaders who used to mobilise all the people with young children. Even those with dogs at that time would take them for immunisation against rabies as we went for ours as human beings. All this was during the Amin Government. 

When immunisation came in recently, politics also came in. People feared immunising their children saying that they would not get children when they grew up. Here in Buganda it is on record that it was the Sabasajja of Buganda who asked the people of Buganda to take their children for immunisation and that is when they responded positively. 

Currently, the Ministry of Education has sent deworming tablets to schools, which has enabled children get dewormed easily. However, the problem in Uganda is that we have failed to look back at what used to be done and apply the same practices. 

Yesterday we met officials from the National Medical Stores who said they have all the vaccines but health centres and districts do not order for them. As a result, they just keep them there until they expire. So, I am of the view that we revert to the old system. (Interruption)
 
MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Actually, the reason as to why districts and health centres do not pick those drugs like the vaccines is because they have no fridges to keep those vaccines. That is the only reason they give as to why they do not pick them. 

MR SEWUNGU: As I wind up, Mr Speaker, so far now we have village health teams but are they performing? Reflect back to your constituency and ask yourself whether you have a village health team that is performing since it was set up? The issue of immunisation should be designed once again. Some parents produce outside hospitals; how do you get them on board? We have to use the village health teams to perform. 

I support the motion, though I believe that we should re-establish the former system where village health teams are concerned. We should go back to community centres and have a timetable of activities to follow per day. I remember an MP from Kaberamaido talking about dogs biting people and causing rabies. (Member timed out)

4.42
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise to support the motion for a resolution of Parliament to reverse the declining trend in the immunisation programmes in Uganda. I thank the mover of this motion and the subsequent members who have spoken to it.

As a Parliament and a country, we have time and again come here to borrow funds to go to critical areas. I do not see why we should not look at immunisation as one of the critical areas. This is about the health of our children. These children are the MPs of tomorrow, they are the presidents of tomorrow; if we do not have a healthy community of children, then just know the future of Uganda is in shambles. 

Our President is on record for telling people to produce. He needs a large population but he is not capable of looking after this population. Can we, as a country, look at our priorities and put them right? Can we, as a people, see how to look for money and we put it in immunisation?

Members are saying that one of the reasons why the trends are declining is because we do not have the money. One of the movers did mention this and was saying we would need this much, and Dr Chris Baryomunsi was even good enough to say that most of the money that is spent on tea is even much more than the money that goes to real things. (Interruption)

COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE: Is the honourable colleague in order to say that the President is not capable of taking care of this country? Is she in order, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that is a question of opinion and I could give you an opportunity to raise a counter opinion in your debate. That is a matter of opinion, really.

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. I will still say that as a people, we need to support this statement of the President of “muzaale mwale” by borrowing money if we cannot find it in our budget, and we see how best we can put things right.

Mr Speaker, there is a serious issue regarding staffing levels in our health centres and facilities. We are not going to shy away from the fact that health workers are running away from Uganda because of the pay given to them. The people who are supposed to carry out these immunisation programmes are nowhere to be seen.

I will give you a terrible scenario in one of the hospitals in my district where we went. The staff levels are supposed to be 49 staff but we found only seven on duty, and the seven who were on duty were nursing assistants. The drugs were there but with no doctors to dispense them. Children were sharing the same ward with old people. Women and men were in the same ward – (Interjections) - Yes, I am talking about a hospital in my constituency and the hospital is Rwesande Hospital. Go there, it is on record.

I am saying there is a lot that needs to be done to put the healthcare systems in Uganda in order - (Interruption)

MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN: Thank you, Opposition Chief Whip, for giving way and thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I want to give is that when we are talking about the immunisation trends going down, we should know that there is laxity from all the key stakeholders who are supposed to monitor these projects. I want to challenge this House to go back to our districts and look at how much of the primary health care budget is being utilised at the district level. We have left everything to go the way it is supposed to go and I think we have not concentrated here. I think monitoring and evaluation of most of these programmes has totally gone down. Now we have gone into a situation of lamenting 24 hours. 

Honourable members, the health trends are very challenging -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you still giving information? 

MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN: Yes, I am driving to the point. The information I wanted to emphasise on is that when it comes to health, we must all play a key role especially in monitoring the health budget and programmes that go to our districts. Every year we pass budgets here to support the primary health care programmes in our districts. That is the information I wanted to give. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS KIIZA: Thank you, my sister, for that information. It is true we are supposed to participate in the monitoring processes but like you will be aware, not all of us have this knowledge and information regarding what is supposed to be done - (Member timed out)

4.49
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the mover of the motion because immunisation is so critical in this country. I also want to request the ministry to look at other places in Uganda, which do not look like other places. We have the islands, for example, and we have places which are hard to reach. If there is funding going to different districts, let the ministry look at these places. Buvuma District, for instance, is a typical island and the fuel you use on the mainland is not the fuel you use there; obviously, the other one is more. The budget for the islands should therefore increase.

Other places, which are also considered hard-to-reach places, are Bududa and the far North. Some people do not even get such services because of the low funding. I want to give an example. On Friday we went with hon. Nduhuura to the islands but the ministry almost failed to fund the movement of hon. Nduhuura to the furthest island in Buvuma. This was because of the budget. People from the ministries do not even know how these districts look like. They do not even go down to the grassroots to see what happens there and yet whenever we pass the budgets, we always put money for monitoring. Where does it go? We want them to go down there and see how those places look like and see the differences so that they can budget for them well.

I also want to pray - I saw yesterday on TV the minister and others saying there will no increment in salaries of health workers. It is very disappointing. This is not the time to say that because we are playing with life. A doctor may be operating on someone and they get such shocking news and will just sit down and someone dies. This is not the time for giving such bad news to the public. When we are looking at critical sectors to be given some small funding, let us motivate our health workers.

I saw a circular - and I want to put this to the honourable minister – about the nurses and health workers who have been working and who are working in hard-to-reach and hard-to-serve areas. There is a circular moving around indicating that they will not get the allowances they have been getting as additional funding to motivate them to work in such places. Due to the few nurses and doctors we have, some of whom refuse to go to such places to work, does the ministry want our people to die? Does Government want our people to die because we live in such places? (Member timed out)

4.53
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support this motion, which is really timely or even long overdue. 

First, while we lament that immunisation has gone down, I think all of us are responsible. We say immunisation used to be good in the 1970s, but the people who were there then are still here with us, why aren’t they mobilising now? (Applause) 

Having said that, there are certain things that have gone wrong; in the health centre IIs, for example, there is no power and there is no way a health worker will carry out immunisation. A vial of vaccine is supposed to immunise about 10 babies. I have witnessed a situation where the health worker has sent some people away saying, “Since your number has not reached 10, I am not going to open this vaccine.” This is because after opening it, there is no place to store it. Therefore, we have to equip our health centre IIs because they are the nearest place where mothers can go with their children for immunisation.

Secondly, there is the issue of the logistics for the health worker. I used to see health workers using bicycles but today, I do not see them riding in villages mobilising people. Let us budget and facilitate the health workers so that they can also get motivated. During the time UNEPI was immunising, the process was vibrant because everyone wanted to associate him or herself with the immunisation programme. However, as soon as soon as the UNEPI programme was integrated into the Ministry of Health programmes, the enthusiasm died away. So, what has gone wrong? What can’t we do under the ministry what used to be done under UNEPI? After all, it was the same government and the same staff doing that. 

I will end by saying that prevention is better than cure. In fact, it is even cheaper than cure. If we allow our children to fall sick with measles, malaria and so on, the cost of treating them is much more than we would have spent during immunisation. People are so poor that they cannot even buy a dose of medicine to treat either measles or any other disease that has affected the child. So why don’t we intervene now and save the time and money which our poor people will have to incur. Thank you.

4.57
MS SYLVIA SSINABULYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Oleru for moving this motion. I support it. It is a shame that Uganda is among the 10 worst countries in the world with the highest number of children who have not been immunised. It is shameful to witness this thing in this century and yet we know that Uganda in the past had made such tremendous improvement that some of the measles wards were shut down.

Mr Speaker, the motion makes a number of prayers and number three is that, “Government ensures that there is increased awareness of the immunisation benefits among the constituents by emphasising the value and importance of immunisation.” I want to urge the Ministry of Health to put more emphasis on prevention other than curative approaches. There is a saying that health is made at home and is only repaired in health facilities. So it is high time the ministry invested in teaching the population about simple things that contribute to good health; issues like taking their children for immunisation – because people do not know the benefits of immunisation. There are very many things people do not know. Simple things like washing hands and digging pit latrines are not being done and yet they are very important to the health of Ugandans.

The other prayer is about identifying emerging health issues that require new legislation. The Public Health Act is outdated. I remember about three months ago, through the Clerk to Parliament I wrote to the Ministry of Health inquiring as to when the minister intends to move an amendment to the Public Health Act. That was supposed to be a question for oral answer but that answer has never come. I ask the minister to think about amending the Public Health Act because there are very many emerging diseases that need to be included in it. (Member timed out)

5.01
MR PETER BAKALUBA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the movers of this important motion, which comes at a time when my constituency is experiencing an outbreak of measles, especially the village of Mbazzi in Mpunge Sub County. It is not affecting only children but even the adults. 

The problem in this country is not only money; every time we talk about programmes like this one, people lament about lacking money. When we have the human resource, we can utilise it to help us in immunisation. We see A4C, FDC and other Opposition activists moving around mobilising people. I call upon them to come up during this opportune time to help us mobilise citizens so that we save our children who are the future voters. (Laughter) Not only the Opposition but I call upon the President to come up once again as he used to do before in mobilising people. 

The ministers and all the MPs, we are always talking, it is high time we went to the grassroots to save our children. We need to walk the talk. Local council chairpersons will also need to join the struggle including religious leaders. I remember that time when religious leaders of all faiths came in to promote immunisation. We only need vaccines to have this work done. Cultural leaders can equally do this. I remember our Kabaka of Buganda used to do it very well. All we need is to empower cultural institutions to come in and support us. The media can also be utilised; all we need is to contact them. So it is not only money that is required to have the work done. Corporate bodies are always ready to come in. 

We need to sensitise school children and even make outreaches in our areas. So, I want to support this motion. As Members of Parliament, we have a role to play, to walk the talk and not this business of walking around to mobilise for goats and politicking, hon. Nambooze. We need to kick out these immunisable – (Interjection) - Instead of hon. Nambooze stopping buses to come to Mukono, use this opportunity to mobilise our people (Laughter). I thank you.

5.04
MRS KEVINAH TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the mover of this motion and those who seconded it. I support it also. Life begins with the mothers if we are to talk about the children at immunisation. In most cases, when mothers go for antennal care they are also immunised. So, it also helps the baby who is inside.

Another problem we are having is that those nine killer diseases are the most terrible diseases when it comes to children but in our health facilities, like in Busia, we do not have a children’s ward. They put the children in a major ward and you find that there are about 10 children on one bed because it is for the adults. Transmission of disease is therefore very easy. If we had proper facilities in the children’s wards, we would have isolation wards whereby if you have an infectious disease then the other children would be isolated in order to deal with that transmission.

We also lack equipment. The vaccines are supposed to be kept under certain temperatures but we lack fridges where to keep certain drugs like those. That is very serious.

We also have a problem of remuneration and motivation of the staff. Most of these health facilities are understaffed. In Busia, in my constituency, I have only one doctor and the entire district has three - two are operational with one District Director of Health Services. 

So, Mr Speaker, this time round in the budgeting process, let us look at the children. The children are the Uganda of tomorrow. They are the future presidents and the future everything. We need a healthy nation. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

5.08
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to support hon. Huda Oleru for this important motion. If we look at the trends - as she calls it, the declining trends - what are the causes? Is it money? Is it the human resource? What is causing this declining trend? 

Certainly, there is money. Money is available. Drugs or vaccines are available but they are not going where they are supposed to be. Therefore, whoever is blaming the managers, the MPs - not until these drugs are there to monitor, what do you monitor? You monitor what is available!

Therefore, I would propose that the Government should wake up and use those available funds and put them to their best use. Remunerate the workers and these vaccines will certainly be used. It is a shame, as one honourable member has put it, to find that we are the 10th worst performing country in the world. By the way, it is not only in the Ministry of Health. If you go to agriculture, one expert has been telling me that most of the grants and loans that we have acquired, nearly 60 percent is not utilised. If you go to GAVI, I am told that 40 percent is used to pay commission agents but 60 percent goes back to the donors. Now, these vaccines are lying here in Kampala; so, who is to blame? It is the government that we put in power to manage society. If they fail to manage society, I think the people should now question why they are there. 

In Rukiga Constituency, we have no vaccines, we have no doctors, we have no midwives; we have no technical people to do this work. You cannot blame a Member of Parliament that the children of Rukiga are dying because hon. Sabiiti is there. No! It is because the government - which government I pay tax to, which tax is supposed to be given to purchase these drugs - is not doing its job. Therefore, it is lack of capacity in terms of government, lack of capacity of the mangers and accounting officers, lack of capacity to do business. 

I would request Government to look for the right people to manage society. It is not just a question of politics. You put a permanent secretary who cannot manage, you put there an under secretary who cannot manage, you put there a commissioner who cannot manage. When doctors are there, they are looking for funds - (Member timed out)

5.11
MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to second the motion on behalf of the people of Budadiri East Constituency. What hurts me a lot is that if you went and read the Hansard, the same song we are singing now about health is the same song that has always been sung by other parliaments. They have talked about the health sector, they have talked about immunisation but the question is: what is the problem? 

Madam Minister, some members have reasoned and said that the sector was headed by non-professional people that time. Now that you are a professional in that sector, can you help us so that we can help the health sector to move up? 

As we talk about immunisation, I am very concerned about Hepatitis B. Whenever we talk about these killer diseases, we forget Hepatitis B. So, my request is that as we talk about immunisation and we are to implement what we are talking about, we should also include Hepatitis B because it is very expensive and dangerous. I was at the health centres and I moved around and I wanted to get immunised, but they were telling me that a single dose goes for Shs 90,000 and a person is supposed to take two doses for immunisation. So, in case I am to take two doses, I need Shs 180,000. I could afford as a Member of Parliament but what about the people we represent in the villages? So, my request is that we should include Hepatitis B among those most serious diseases that need to be immunised against. I beg to move, Mr Speaker. 
                  
5.13
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Mr Speaker, I want to appreciate the mover of this motion and all colleagues who have contributed. 

You recall that when the NRM took over power, the population of Uganda was 14 million but now it is 34 million plus. This is a very clear testimony that the President of this republic made a clear declaration in his pro-people policies, and one of them was universal immunisation, which has led to the growth of the population. Therefore, I want to challenge all these colleagues here; I have not heard anybody during his rally or her rally mobilising people to take their children for immunisation. Instead, they go for walk-to-work, go what - (Interjections)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Well knowing that the honourable member was a former soldier and he had chances of moving around Uganda to mobilise, protect us and do whatever he did and liberate us, today on the same Floor he is telling this House that he never saw any Member of Parliament at his rally or in his constituency talking about immunisation. Is the honourable member really in order to deceive this House? Did he take time seeing us wherever we were campaigning yet he was also campaigning? Is he in order, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the honourable member’s opinion. You are also entitled to your opinion.

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that guidance. I appreciate my honourable colleague but I want to tell all of us that as leaders, it is our right and duty to appreciate and implement the direction of the President. He has given us the way, he has given us the tools, so it is up to us to mobilise our population against this declining trend. 

I therefore appreciate the contribution of hon. Kiiza. I admire her brilliance but I want to call upon her to appreciate the contribution of the leader of this republic. He has made a tremendous contribution towards the development of this country - (Interjections) - and the development of the population. Therefore, you should appreciate his contribution. It is our prayer as leaders of this country. Thank you very much. 

5.17
DR KENNETH OMONA (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): I want to thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion moved by hon. Huda looking at the declining levels of immunisation in Uganda.

Allow me to first appreciate the health workers who are out there, some of whom walk on foot or ride bicycles to go and attend to the children of this country. Allow me to also realise the efforts by the Government of Uganda in curbing communicable diseases, particularly those which are immunisable. 

It is also on record that the NRM Government, more than any other government, has brought down the levels of people who are disabled by polio in Uganda. This is on record, and I think the records on immunisation in Uganda had gone up. It is now a challenge, therefore, to find out why this has come down.

Allow me to say that immunisation is a question of policy and involvement of other key players. In the Health Information Bulletin, which is the WHO office information in Uganda, it was indicated that among the very many reasons why the immunisation levels in Uganda are coming down is the lack of involvement of the local leaders, the politicians, religious leaders, the cultural leaders, name it. Therefore, as leaders also we should stand up to our challenges to mobilise the people to appreciate the value of immunisation, so that they take up the available facilities provided by Government.

I also want to say that it is important for us to look at the budget allocation for immunisation. Many members have lamented the shortage of health workers. When you talk about improved technology and also in health, technology means a combination of skilled manpower and equipment. When you have the equipment without the manpower, it makes not much sense. Therefore, we should work towards increasing, attracting and retaining the number of health workers who attend to the people.

Allow me to also say that we need, as a country, to include these other diseases in our immunisation programme, particularly Hepatitis E which is caused by a virus one hundred times more infectious than HIV/AIDS. The vaccines are very expensive. Not everyone can access them. I think our country should come up with a policy which includes this.

There is also the Human Papillomavirus (HPV) which causes cervical cancer in women. Now the screening of cancer has become the work of politicians. They use it to canvass for votes. We must make this a principle of our country so that we prevent our women from developing this challenging condition.

I want to end by saying it is all our responsibility but we must appreciate what Government has done as far as immunisation is concerned. Let us also applaud the health workers who devote their time amidst the meagre salaries which you allocate them in this Parliament. (Member timed out)

5.21
MR GEORGE STEVEN EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to also support the motion. I thank those who brought the motion. When we talk about immunisation and the children who die on a daily basis, the problem is Parliament. We are the people who appropriate these funds, why don’t we appropriate enough funds to the Ministry of Health such that the Ministry of Health can be able to handle all these challenges which we face in the country?

I want to talk about a certain vaccine in the Ministry of Health which costs - just a dosage of 2,000 packets - Shs 3 billion! How do I get this data? Due to my background, I have looked at most consignments. All consignments of the effective vaccines are too costly, and you realise that it is donor governments which send these consignments to this country. We are only helped because we do not pay taxes. The Ministry of Health is not able to afford the high cost of these effective vaccines. 

What am I trying to say? Parliament can save Ugandans by at least improving the budget allocation to the Ministry of Health. Right now, we are operating at less than five per cent to the Ministry of Health. What are we talking about here? We are lamenting but the key is in our hands to support the Minister of Health.

Let me talk about the plight of these nurses who move around from trading centres to health centres to reach out to these few babies to immunise. These old women, old men and young men are not facilitated. They have no bicycles, they have no vehicles, they have no motorcycles. How do you expect this programme to be effective with a very small budget? The whole thing really rotates around the budget. 

Let me talk about the storage facilities. You find health workers carrying these vaccines in very old facilities. By the time the vaccine reaches the intended beneficiaries, they have expired just because we lack facilities! 

Parliament is now considering budget proposals. Let us put more of our funds to health so that we can achieve the goal of eliminating the diseases which are affecting our people. (Interruption)

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to tell lies to this House that it is lack of funds that makes the vaccines not to move to where they are supposed to go? He knows that recently we had to double the budget of State House and he supported it. Now, instead of channelling this money to the relevant institutions, he supported the doubling of a given institution. Is he in order to tell lies to this House that we have no money?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are the one who has just said that we doubled the budget of State House as Parliament and the honourable member is saying, double the one for health as well. I do not see any contradiction. (Laughter)

Honourable members, we had agreed on 16 minutes and I have only six left. I am going to take two members who will speak for two minutes each. We could benefit from the former Minister of Primary Health Care. 

5.26
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you very much. I want to go straight to what my colleague has said about the budget. The Abuja Declaration states that by 2015, MDG4 and MDG6 should be achieved by 15 percent. But as we stand now, it is at nine percent – in fact, eight percent! We seem to be going backwards because in 2010, it was at 11.5 percent, including the donor funds. That means there is a problem of lack of support to Ministry of Health and passing its budget to deal with activities within the ministry.

The second point is lack of combined efforts from all the stakeholders. The precedent was set in 2010, when we were immunising against polio. We called upon Members of Parliament and when they participated, we got 102 percent success. All the children in the whole country were immunised. So the problem now is laxity. 

We, the leaders, are supposed to do the monitoring. Read the monitoring and evaluation report of the budget; with decentralisation, the monitoring and evaluation service is incumbent upon the district, but there is no supervision. Look at the report of local governments; the ceiling for recruiting health workers is at 65 percent but how many districts have achieved that level. It is averagely about 48 percent. That shows that there is need for combined effort from all the stakeholders. 

As Members of Parliament, we do monitor but when we go to the districts, do we supervise what they are doing? It is funny that even counsellors at the district level, at health centre IIIs, close up and go to the districts and yet they are leaders, they are supposed to monitor and guide what is being implemented. Health cannot be compromised and we should not put the blame on anybody. We need combined efforts from all of us in the system, be it from the Opposition or Government. 

This Government has done a lot. For the last 12 years, this country has been declared polio free. There have been only two cases reported all that time. In former governments, there were a lot of cases of polio. Therefore, it is incumbent upon this Parliament to do what we are supposed to do. Let us allocate money to health services and the Ministry of Health so that the Ministry of Health can do its job. What I am talking about is health centre IIs, health centre IIIs and health centre IVs are supposed to be monitored by – (Member timed out).

5.30
MS SARAH NYIRABASHITSI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the movers of this motion and I support the motion. I would like to understand what hon. Jack Sabiiti has said. Is the problem money or just having vaccines reaching the people? Look at the hard-to-reach and hard-to-stay areas like Kisoro, for instance, and particularly look at the health centres in these villages. By the time these vaccines reach – I do not think these vaccines even reach them. So we want to know from the minister what the problem is. Is it money or the vaccines not reaching the people?

Another thing is they have not always taken into consideration border districts. If you take Kisoro, for instance, we have Congo on one side and Rwanda on the other. What does the Ministry of Health have to say about this? You may carry out immunisation but the people across are not immunising. How do you go about that?

At the moment in Kisoro, we have an outbreak of typhoid and we do not know where it is coming from. I was monitoring and they told me there is an outbreak of typhoid. So, let Ministry of Health come and help us out on this – (Interruption)

MR WAIRA: I thank you for yielding to my pressure. (Laughter) I have an outbreak of measles in my constituency, Bunya East in Mayuge. We have been burying children who have died from measles. People are saying that even those children who have been vaccinated are dying of measles. That means that these vaccines are becoming weaker. 

The other issue is lack of communication on the side of the Ministry of Health. There is an outbreak but what is the Ministry of Health doing? What is the problem; why can’t you communicate to the people? You should communicate at least through radio and tell them “the Government is doing this, but the parents and the local people should do this.” Thank you, my colleague. 

MS NYIRABASHITSI: On top of being on the border, right now we have an influx of refugees from Congo. On top of having very few staff, they expect these few medical staff to go and work in the refugee resettlement – (Member timed out)

5.33
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH (Dr Lulume Bayiga): Mr Speaker, we have observed that there is no disagreement on this motion. I also stand here to support it. Both sides of the House have supported it and we observed that there is no disagreement. The trends which are presently nose-diving have been attributed to various factors and fortunately this time, the Minister for Health has been attentive and listening within the House; very fortunately!

There are five measures that I think that the Ministry of Health can benefit from the debate and these include the following:

i)	Measures to maintain the cold chain wherever the Ministry of Health has health infrastructure. As you know, health access is still low and, therefore, we are talking about those measures whereby the vaccines are maintained within the limited temperature. That is why you had some Members of Parliament talking about lack of fridges or measures to maintain the working fridges especially in island areas such as Buvuma, just like the honourable member from Buvuma talked about. Those are the areas that are lacking, including the hard-to-reach areas.
 
ii)	The re-engagement of leadership, and I think that everybody talked about it. We recently had a workshop in Parliament about the resurgence of HIV/AIDS and I think they coined a very good theme - “To Re-engage Leadership.” That is why they were talking about the Kabaka, Members of Parliament and so on. We cannot reinvent the wheel but we can use all the measures that had been used before, which did not necessarily take a big budget, to ensure that everybody participates in this. However, it must be organised by the ministry so that everybody takes it up.

iii) 	The maintenance of a high level of motivated human resource for health. This is something that we have been talking about but it has always been unfortunate that the ministry has been lamenting like everybody else, that the Ministry of Finance puts up the ceiling beyond which we cannot go. You then wonder that if we lament and the ministry also laments, who is going to provide a solution. I believe that this Parliament that makes laws has the right to ensure that some of these straitjacketed measures are broken to ensure that the priorities that affect our people are addressed especially with immunisation. 

	For our information, we should remind ourselves that most of the diseases that kill us and our people are largely preventable, and immunisation is one of the ways in which we can prevent this death. We can prevent these expenditures for burying people, attending burials, buying coffins, fuel and so on. When you aggregate all that expenditure, it can be put to good use. This Parliament should spearhead the breakage of that ceiling, which is straitjacketed by the Minister for Finance to ensure that all ministries comply regardless of whether they have needs for the population or not.

iv) 	Health financing, which I have just talked about. 

v) 	Lastly, monitoring and evaluation. Mr Speaker, why should we be debating this issue, for instance? We should not be debating issues that are quite obvious - that we are debating the immunisation of our children, which is an obvious thing, and we do not take this seriously! We spend a whole two and a-half-hours debating something which should be obvious to the country, to a government that cares for the people. This is where I have got a concern that this Government must wake up. Let us assist my counterpart on the other side, who is quite new in this ministry but at least she has been practicing medicine. The way in which Government straitjackets everything it does makes them unable to be flexible enough to raise the ceiling of health care – (Interjection) - I will take the information.

MR BARYAYANGA: I thank you, the honourable Shadow Minister, for giving way. I come from Kabale, which is one of the biggest districts in Uganda, if not the biggest in the present era today. First and foremost, Kabale Referral Hospital that holds Kisoro, Kabale, Ntungamo, Rukungiri plus Kanungu had its budget cut by half from Shs 1.8 billion to less than Shs 800 million. The construction of the women’s ward had to stop. 

When I went for monitoring, I met doctors and nurses who, first of all, are very few and cannot handle the population; secondly, they do not have housing; and thirdly, they do not want to come up and tell you the truth. Government went behind and sent people around to tell them that when people come to do the monitoring, they tell us that the drugs are there even when they are not there. 

One Wednesday, I went to these health centres to check whether the AIDS drugs were there for these patients and there was not even Septrin. They told me that they had been told not to tell us that these drugs were not there because it will become a shame for this Government. Sincerely, if they cannot bring these drugs to these health centres - I thank you.

DR BAYIGGA: As I conclude, I must say these vices are very common everywhere. If everybody spoke about how they find healthcare within their own constituencies, this is what you are going to find, and it will discourage the ministry. I suggest that the ministry must engage in monitoring and evaluation of programmes that were a success story. 

Somebody was talking about the success story of immunisation. It was a success story but why is it bursting in the hands of this Government? We must re-engage leadership and that must be coordinated by the ministry itself to ensure that everybody counts. We must count everybody in this. I thank you.

5.41
THE MINISTER FOR HEALTH (Dr Christine Ondoa): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Kindly allow the written responses to be distributed. 

I want to thank the honourable members for the contributions that they have raised concerning the immunisation programme in Uganda. Before I read the written response, there were areas that have been emphasised and I want to go over them.     

The first is on the area of human resource for health. It is true that among the challenges that the health sector faces today is the human resources for health. We have the vaccines, as it has been mentioned, but the people to administer the vaccines to the children are very few. 

We currently have the Government of Uganda supporting 100 percent of the historical vaccines like BCG, oral polio, DPT and tetanus. We are in the process of adding two more vaccines, that is, the one for the Human Papillomavirus (HPV) and the one for pneumococcal, funds from GAVI being available. 

It was also communicated here that the communities are also partly responsible for the declining trends, and as it has been debated, we need each and every one of us to participate in engaging the community and making them aware of the need to bring the children for vaccination since it is free for all the children of Uganda. 

The other point I want to emphasise is the unique settlements like islands, border places, and others where reaching the population may be difficult. We also have provisions for this. In our budget for revitalising immunisation and also health service delivery in this country, we have budgeted for these special settlements. For instance, we have budgeted for availability of boats and availability of other means of transport that could easily reach these populations. 
The other point I want to emphasise, which has already been mentioned by members, is the population explosion. If you realise, the budget has remained the same, if not decreased, yet the population has increased tremendously. So, it goes without saying that the quality of health service delivery therefore is compromised if it does not match the population increase. 
On the issue of the amendment of the Public Health Act, I have taken that up and we promise that we will come back with an answer soon. 
We are also glad to inform the House that we have mass measles immunisation campaigns this month beginning 26th to 28th. We have already sent communications right to the districts so that all stakeholders participate, so that we have our children, those under five and above five years of age, immunised. 
There was concern that in one of the districts even children who had had the measles vaccine were contracting the disease. This happens, but it is very rare. Sometimes what we do is when such a child has those symptoms of measles, we take specimen to investigate and confirm if it is a measles case because there are many diseases that mimic measles - what we call the viral exanthems. They present themselves like measles but you may find that they are caused by other viruses other than the measles virus. So when we investigate such cases, usually more than 99 percent are not the measles virus; they are the other viruses. 

The other issue I want to clarify before I read the statement is about the cold storage chain. I am happy to announce to the House that through the Japanese Government grant, we have procured 950 refrigerators and of these, about 600 use gas, 200 use solar and 150 of them are electrical. These will be distributed accordingly to places which have or may not have electricity. With these few clarifications, I want to read the written statement. 

The Ministry of Health is committed to protecting all children and women of reproductive age and high risk groups against vaccine preventable diseases. As evidenced by the National Health Development Plan, the National Health Policy and the Health Sector Strategic and Investment Plan, immunisation services were provided through the Uganda National Expanded Programme for Immunisation (UNEPI) that was introduced in 1983. The Government of Uganda funds 100 percent the procurement and distribution of the traditional vaccines including injection materials. These vaccines, as I mentioned earlier, include those for tuberculosis, polio, measles and tetanus at a cost of Shs 5 billion per year.

Further, the Government of Uganda has continued to co-finance the pentavalent vaccine – it is five vaccines in one - for diphtheria, pertussis, hepatitis B and Haemophilus influenzae type b at Shs 2 billion annually since it was introduced in 2002. So, hepatitis B is already in our pentavalent vaccines for all children under one year. 
The immunisation programme is well established in all the 112 districts of Uganda and offers services through attached services and outreach services to areas beyond 5kms of any health facility. The hard-to-reach areas are also provided with fridges at the health centre IIIs. 

The Status of Immunisation

The 2011 Uganda demographic survey showed that only 62 percent of children in Uganda are fully immunised. While 94 percent receive the BCG at birth and 93 percent receive DPT 1 at six weeks, only 71 percent receive DPT 3 at 14 weeks and 76 percent receive measles vaccine at nine months. As mentioned earlier by hon. Twa-Twa, a country that does not cover measles vaccine more than 95 percent is prone to measles outbreak. 

From the WHO/UNICEF estimates, Uganda is among the countries with the highest number of unimmunised children in the horn of Africa. The total accumulated number of the unimmunised children is estimated at more than 5,000 over the last three years. This high number of unimmunised children has resulted in a big population immunity gap thus exposing the country to vaccine preventable disease outbreaks like polio and the current measles outbreak. 

Why is there a decline in the performance? Actually, all the reasons were mentioned as we debated, but let me just read for purposes of emphasis. 

Inadequate primary health care funding is one of the reasons. This has been inadequate and irregular leading to irregular and no functional outreaches since all immunisation activities totally depend on the primary healthcare fund. For example, the primary health care allocations and disbursements to health centre IIs, IIIs and IVs have stagnated at Shs 100,000, Shs 350,000 and Shs 650,000 respectively over the years for all the primary healthcare activities including immunisation. 

It is however estimated that for each health facility to carry out the required four immunisation outreaches per month, it requires an estimated Shs 240,000 using a motorcycle and this excludes visits to schools within the catchment area for provision of tetanus toxoid. A health facility will need to conduct at least two additional school outreaches per month to enable health workers move to both primary and secondary schools within catchment areas to administer tetanus toxoid to school girls. This could come to a minimum requirement per health facility of Shs 360,000 for immunisation outreaches per month. 
Inadequate Funds for UNEPI Operational Activities
The overall budgetary reallocation to the health sector has decreased, and this had resulted into decreased allocations to the health sector programmes including UNEPI. It should also be noted that the logistical costs, for example, for fuel and gas, have continued to rise yet funding has stagnated.

Challenges to Legislation and Policies for Immunisation 

Immunisation in Uganda is dependent on the free will of parents and caretakers yet the unimmunised child remains a risk to the public especially the vulnerable children. There is no specific law addressing immunisation enforcement. There is no specific or stipulated penalty against parents or caretakers who do not take children for immunisation. There are also emerging religious groups and sects that restrain their followers from immunising children.

While the Ministry of Health shall continue to provide education to the public on the benefits of immunising a child and create demand for the available services, it is necessary to establish an enabling legislative framework for immunisation in the country. The current Government of Uganda policy on UPE and USE creates an opportunity to ensure that enrolment of children in schools becomes a mandatory requirement; we can do the same with immunisation.

Currently, my ministry is reviewing the policy on immunisation and shall ensure that pertinent emerging issues are adequately addressed.

Challenges to Ensuring Universal Access to Immunisation 

Immunisation is the most cost effective child survival intervention and for other vulnerable groups such as women in reproductive age. Besides prevention of vaccine preventable diseases, immunisation outreaches are used to deliver other critical child survival interventions such as vitamin A supplementation to under five-year-old children and de-worming tablets, which makes this more valuable.

My ministry, through UNEPI, makes monthly deliveries of vaccines, injectable materials and gas to all the districts. As a matter of fact, this has now been incorporated into the monthly National Medical Stores delivery of medicines and health supplies. That said, I would like to point out that there may be occasional pseudo stock-outs of vaccines at health facilities where districts and health sub districts lack sound vehicles for timely distribution of vaccines and other health supplies to lower level health facilities and to conduct preventive and emergency cold chain maintenance. In addition, health facilities lack motorcycles, fuel and allowances to operationalise the community and school outreaches. 

Challenges to Ensuring Increased Awareness 

I would like to also agree that there is inadequate awareness on the benefits of immunisation among communities. An identified fact is that over the years, there has not been sustainable advocacy and social mobilisation for routine immunisation. There is also no budget line to support communication and social mobilisation activities for routine immunisation, child days plus, social immunisation activities and surveillance at national and district levels.

Challenges to Increased and Sustainable Immunisation Financing 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to bring to your attention the fact that there are currently 57 GAVI eligible countries that can benefit from GAVI support for new and underused vaccines, immunisation services and health systems in poor countries. Uganda was beneficiary to this support.

The major strategies of GAVI are to: accelerate the uptake and use of underused and new vaccines; contribute to strengthening the capacity of integrated health systems to deliver immunisation; increase the predictability of global financing; improve the sustainability of national financing for immunization; and shape the vaccine market. The suspension of GAVI funds to Uganda in 2006 led to a compromise of the above and inadequate funds available for community outreach and mobilisation activities. That is partly the reason why since 2006 immunisation trends have been on the decline. This decline became prominent after the suspension of the GAVI funds, among whose function was payment of outreach for health workers’ allowances, parish and community moblisers. 

Despite the continued flow of the primary healthcare funds, this has been over constrained to fund any parish mobilisation allowances and other activities. The graph below shows the exact decline of immunisation coverage. I would like to apologise that it is not in colour, but when you get to the end of the graph you realise that the first line reads: BCG, DPT, Measles and Tetanus. You can see that measles that features third before 2006 was far above 80 percent, but shortly after GAVI suspended funding it is now way below eight percent.

Human Resource
 
Inadequate human resource for health, especially at lower level health facilities; this has been reported to be at less than 50 percent and in some districts even below that. This compromises service delivery more so for community outreaches. In a situation where a lower level facility has only one or two health workers, the community outreaches simply do not take place.

The health workforce is demoralised and lack adequate motivation for field activities such as routine outreaches. There are inadequate health workers’ skills for EPI especially for the new districts. Immunisation is left to the less qualified staff, which compromises the quality of services.

Logistics
 
Inadequate transport hampers operational activities at the district and lower levels. Districts and health centre IVs lack vehicles for distribution of supplies, collection of gas cylinders, routine and emergency cold chain maintenance activities.

Support supervision is inadequate and irregular due to lack of transport and fuel. Health centre IIIs and IVs lack motorcycles for community outreaches and other EPI activities respectively.

There have been episodes of lack of data collection tools such as child cards, tally sheets, child registers and monitoring charts, which lead to inadequate monitoring and reporting.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to inform you that there is hope for the future despite these challenges. Government, represented by the ministries of health and that of finance, is in the process of finalising a memorandum of understanding with GAVI. I am glad to inform you that GAVI is coming on board to support our immunisation programmes again. (Applause) I have been asked to summarise, and that is what I am going to do now.

In line with that, I am also glad to inform the House that currently Uganda is directly represented at the GAVI Board, following my appointment in January this year as a GAVI Board member. This helps me to directly lobby for Uganda and the other 16 countries under my constituency in GAVI. (Applause) This was in recognition of Uganda as a country but also of me as an individual for my contribution to immunisation in this country and in the neighbouring countries previously when I used to supervise immunisation coverage. The GAVI realised this and they thought I could be able to revitalise the immunisation programme in this country. 

Proposed Long Term Actions

These activities shall enable the country to bridge the existing population immunity gap as we continue to make efforts to strengthen routine immunisation, strengthen surveillance as well as strengthen advocacy and social mobilisation for immunisation. I will summarise the issues. They include: legislation, universal access to vaccines and immunisation services, increased awareness for immunisation, increased and sustainable immunisation financing.

Even if funding for immunisation activities is increased without increasing the human resource for health, improving routine and sustainable immunisation performance shall remain a slow uphill task. I thank you. (Applause)

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have sat in this House listening, almost painfully, and I have done this kind of listening for quite a number of years. I have heard this story many times and I have also listened to my sister, the honourable minister. She is also saying the same things we said. So, who has the solution to these problems? She is saying the workers are few, she is also saying the money is not there, and we all said the same things. So, who then in this case should give the solution to these problems?

Mr Speaker, I need to be helped because sometimes the debate in the House comes for something that just passes by and no action is taken. This statement of the minister raises more questions than it provides answers on the issues of immunisation. I therefore would like to ask you if it would not be prudent - I think the social services committee knows a lot more on these matters, on what has been promised for years and never acted upon, that now the minister is being made to repeat on the Floor. I think it is important, if you will guide us, to just pass this statement as it is to the social services committee. They can do some more work for this Parliament and report on real actions. 

Otherwise, it is possible that in the next two years, we will still move another motion on declining trends of immunisation, because I heard this in the last Parliament. We said the same things but nothing was acted upon. Only yesterday, the social services committee was told that they had cut the budget for the Ministry of Health. So, you are even going to see worse things than what the minister has presented. Unless Government wants to get serious and promise Uganda something better, this statement is not going to help us. 

Mr Speaker, if you could guide us on how to get solutions rather than repeat ourselves - I cry here, the minister cries and then we come next year and we all lament together. Where do we find answers to these problems?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in all fairness, I was also in this House, sitting in the backbench, for five years in the past. I have now had the benefit to observe sometimes on television and sometimes here and listen to these discussions and presentations from ministers. 

Allow me pass a value judgment that in my experience, this has been the most honest statement coming from a minister. (Applause) It is not defending anything but stating the problem as it is. I think what the minister has asked is that this Parliament should do something. Since the honourable Minister of Finance, who is the architect of these ceilings, is here, these are now matters that we need to discuss fairly. 

In all fairness, this is a very honest statement. It has put us in a better perspective of the issues. In fact, I even think the statement is richer than the discussions we have had on this particular matter of immunisation. I am therefore proposing that in the terms proposed in the motion, we adopt the motion and then we forward these other matters back to the social services committee so that they can do a more comprehensive surgery. 

The minister will appear there in person, the members concerned will be in the committee, the public will be called and the Minister of Finance will be there so that we see how to help Government get out of this trap – this ceiling. It is a trap set by the government and a trap that requires procedure. We can blame the Minister of Finance but my experience is that this ceiling is closely monitored by our partners, the World Bank and IMF. So, any changes of those have to be by their agreement. We need this Parliament to take this move to help the Government, help the Ministry of Finance negotiate properly because it is a concern that we need to deal with.

If I am allowed to guide, that would be my guidance since you have asked for it. (Applause) 

6.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and colleagues, the Budget Framework Paper was laid here on the Table on 10th last month and is now with Parliament. The Budget Act expects it to be sent to the President by 15th this month and the process is on. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are looking at both the short term and long term. If we just focus on the issues of now and tomorrow without looking at the long term, – That is why I am talking about these ceilings that are always there. The honourable minister has been shy because they are not allowed to comment on these World Bank matters because they can have a difficulty in negotiating, but for me I know and I can say this boldly. Some of these ceilings that they have set are unfair and they have no basis. They should be renegotiated so that we can deal with this thing properly. I say that without any fear of contradiction. I am fairly knowledgeable on this subject as well. Can we take a decision on this and then we tackle the guidance issues later?
 
MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I appreciate the guidance you are giving us but I think what is happening right now in terms of the budget ceiling for the Ministry of Health is more or less a local issue. This country is signatory to the Abuja Protocol. They committed themselves to 15 percent. Now they keep on reducing the Ministry of Health budget from 11 percent to seven percent and they are now coming to five percent. 

I think the Ministry of Finance had better help this country. Some of the things they come and ask supplementary funding for are not serious matters – (Interjections) - it is not serious in the sense that you have children dying. The minister talks about the pneumococcal vaccine; if you would like to immunise your child against pneumonia, you have to pay Shs 162,000 to a private health provider and yet if Ministry of Health raised only Shs 1 or 2 billion, probably those children could be saved.     

So, even before we go to the World Bank – we claim that we are very independent - Ministry of Finance should give us the money other than playing around and saying “the budget framework”. Who did the budget framework, honourable minister? You drafted the papers and brought them here. Give us the money we need. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I think where we are, not even anyone in the Ministry of Health would be happy with the status of the immunisation of our children. Even Ministry of Finance should be concerned. However, the issue is, in the circumstances, what can they do? I do not think anyone is rejoicing that the children are not being immunised and is going home very happy. The problem could be more than what their eyes can see. 

So, in relation to your proposition, Mr Speaker, I would think that since the Minister has raised a technical issue that on the 15th the papers should be submitted to the President, I would advise, other than re-engaging the entire social services committee to come out with a report - which the Minister has even already done on their behalf because the committees may not bring a better report than what the Minister has brought to the House. (Applause) Actually, her statement should be adopted as that of the whole House on behalf of the Committee on Social Services. 

Now, if that is the case, then I would suggest, Mr Speaker, that you cause a meeting of the chairpersons of the Budget Committee, Committee on Social Services, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Local Government, the Ministry of Health and the Parliamentary Commission to take place within Parliament two or three days from now with clear instructions to revise the ceiling. They can then go and have two or three days and meet up to the 15th. If you do not revise it, this Parliament will not approve your budget. (Applause) 

If we are to go to the social services committee, they will get overwhelmed because they have enough on their plate. So, go and revise the budget of the Ministry of Health, whether you are cutting from defence, State House, foreign affairs, that is for the chairperson for the Budget Committee to decide. Bring us the entire money the Ministry of Health has asked for because God will thank this Parliament more than anything else for preserving human life. 

So, I suggest, Mr Speaker, that you direct these five people to meet co-chaired by the chairpersons of the budget and social services committees, so that we do not throw the ball in the court of the Ministry of Finance. They will bring the same report again. I beg to submit. 

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The point of guidance that hon. Alice Alaso has raised says nothing but confirms that what the minister has brought is something that the committee and other Members of this Parliament have raised before. I would like to concur with hon. Odonga Otto that actually taking this statement to the social services committee would be taking the wrong route. Because you are talking about immunisation levels declining and the Minister at the same time says we are going to have measles this month but her concluding statement is that even if funding for immunisation –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did she say we are going to have measles this month? 

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Immunisation. (Laughter) Her concluding statement was that even if funding is found, without increasing the human resource for health, improving routine and sustainable immunisation performance shall remain a slow uphill task. There are procedures of addressing this by Parliament, including the budget exercise that we are engaged in now. However, each time we have failed to find a solution, including when we are talking about issues of teachers here, though we are very quick to come and raise the supplementary for State House. 

If you look at the Police budget now, in the last three financial years it has increased from Shs 158 billion to Shs 311 billion last year and now they have submitted a budget of Shs 600 billion because they want to buy more tear gas, not to save lives but actually – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have got the point. 

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: If you could allow me just one more minute. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you have sought guidance so let me guide. The reason I talked about this ceiling is because it is not set by the Ministry of Finance. The reason that you have State House coming here to seek supplementary is because they have unfunded priorities that have got to be funded in spite of the ceiling. So, they have to find a way of going above the ceiling; that is what they do. But that is not good; they are being forced by the ceiling to do this because there are no new activities that have arisen. 

If the Ministry of Health and everybody else could do this, there would be a complete mess of the budget system. That is why my proposal is that they re-negotiate this ceiling and find some money. That is what I wanted you to educate us on, hon. Minister, so that we can move as Parliament knowledgeable on this subject.  

MR FRED OMACH: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, we have transparently sent to this Parliament the Budget Framework Paper and when you look at the unfunded priorities, they are in excess of Shs 4 trillion. This year’s budget is at Shs 10.3 trillion, the next financial year’s budget is only moving to about Shs 10.6 trillion and the new resources that are coming are less than Shs 200 billion. So, there are the new resources that are coming through revenue collection and those where there are some gains and we are talking of about Shs 500 billion, which you are going to give out to the various sectors. 

The same Parliament, when we were appropriating the budget of this financial year, explained that we must give increased salaries to teachers. When you look at the increased salaries to teachers alone, it is already covering Shs 250 billion. If you include the enhancement of salaries to the scientists - the doctors and the nurses- it comes to about Shs 40 billion. Then when you look at the issues of power, which the same Parliament is talking about - We have to look holistically at what our priorities are. Look at the revenue side and the expenditure side. 

That is why Government through – (MR ODONGA OTTO: “Basajjabalaba”) (Laughter) – No! Government, through the Cabinet, sends this to Parliament. Parliament looks at it holistically and sends it back to the President for us to be able to prepare the budget for the new financial year. 

Yes, there are certain areas where our development partners come in. In this financial year’s budget we are only able to fund up to 70 percent. The balance of about 30 percent is coming from our development partners and when the development partners are coming in through the budget support, they must have some say. So, Mr Speaker, you are right to say that. 

All this information, as I have said, is with the Parliament and the Budget Committee is handling this. The Budget Act requires that by the 15th of May, this position sent by Parliament should be with the President and then the Constitution says that we should read the annual budget by the 15th of June. So, we are in the process. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.24
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank the Minister of Finance. Mr Speaker, you raised a very important point and the Minister of Finance does not seem to have appreciated it. As you are aware, I am the current chairperson of the Parliamentary network on the World Bank and the IMF. I and hon. Seninde have just returned from Washington, and the document about the meeting is available on our website. 

The World Bank and IMF said the Government of Uganda committed itself to the Paris Declaration, and, Mr Speaker, you know it. The Paris Declaration talks about country ownership and the President of the World Bank said we must be responsible for our successes and failures. The World Bank and IMF can no longer behave like the World Bank of the 80s and 70s. Now they have little power and we have the bricks. You know who the voices are, the Chinese. So the Minister of Finance should not mislead us. 

As I speak now, and before the Minister of Finance, the Governor Bank of Uganda and Secretary to the Treasury left for Washington, there was a meeting here with the World Bank and IMF. We have non performing support to Government of Uganda amounting to US$ 1.3 billion and the World Bank and IMF have given us two years to use all this money or other poor countries will take it.

There was another meeting in Washington and the chairperson of the finance committee, hon. Frank Tumwebaze, attended the meeting because I was in another meeting. It requires that we must review all the old loans that we got and put them in priority sectors. This was a provision that was agreed to between the Ministry of Finance, the World Bank and IMF.

The Minister of Finance called me aside and I had a one on one meeting with her. She said they want to identify what the urgent priorities are for the people of Uganda and then we re-direct the funding and Parliament will participate. I am not blaming hon. Omach because he was not in Washington. It was hon. Maria Kiwanuka, Mr Kassami, the Governor, hon. Tumwebaze and other members. So, hon. Omach may not be privy to this information but, Mr Speaker, the report about this meeting is on your desk. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it comes back to what I said earlier, and now I am going to propose that I put the question so that you can take a decision on the motion and then we see how to move from there with the decision that we will have taken. Is that okay? The motion has four prayers:
 
1. 	That the government identifies emerging health issues, conditions and therapeutic interventions that require new legislation and policies and develops new legislations as appropriate and in a timely manner.

2. 	That the government ensures universal access to vaccines and immunisations as a cost effective health intervention and key to achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).

3. 	That the government ensures that there is increased awareness of the immunisation benefits among the constituents by emphasising the value and importance of immunisation.

4. 	That the government increases the resources and sustainable immunisation financing in order to ensure a speedy and equitable introduction of life saving vaccines.

Those are the four prayers of this motion. I put the question – (Interjections) - Amendment? I thought you would take it like this and we move in the direction we had proposed earlier then you come with a more comprehensive thing. I put the question that this Parliament approves the motion by hon. Oleru Huda, MP Yumbe District.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you still find it appropriate, arising from the issues raised by the minister and the discussions that have taken place here, I think it is still important that this matter is looked at more closely by the responsible committee in consultation with whatever committee will be relevant in this discussion and then they come back to us and inform us. We still have a process where we are going to engage in these money discussions in the budget and this issue will still come up. By the time those issues come back, we should have well reasoned findings and recommendations on how we should move on this subject. Is that fair? Thank you very much, honourable members. The matter is therefore sent to the committee responsible for social services to handle.

Honourable members, the next item is a matter that was discussed and I was informed by the Speaker that the gaps that were remaining were in relation to a matter that had been raised on the signature of hon. Linda Timbigamba, that there had been a mistake on the signature. The Rt hon. Speaker wrote to the Clerk on 30 April 2012 on this subject of discrepancy in the contents of the report of the Committee on National Economy and the report of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. 

The Clerk wrote back to the Speaker after investigations and confirmed that on the issue of the signatures, the signature that appears under the name of hon. Linda Timbigamba is actually the signature of the hon. Grace Balyeku who is number 21 on the same list and the hon. Linda Timbigamba is number 22. So it was an inadvertent mistake that instead of signing on her place, she signed at the space below. So there should be no cause for alarm. There is no insincerity; it was blameless inadvertence as we call it in law. Therefore it does not now stand as a matter that would prohibit us from finalising this matter unless there are other matters that need to be clarified. 

I was also advised that this matter was ready for voting and decision. So can we -

MRS BETTY NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On that day, I stood in for hon. Ssemujju who had written a minority report and one of the issues he raised was the issue of the figures, which were not shared. In this Parliament, testimonies were given on how one of the documents containing the figures had been smuggled into the report without being discussed by the committee. It was upon that background that matters to do with the authenticity of this report were raised and it was at that moment in time that hon. Ssekitoleko also raised the issue of the signatures. The Hansard can bear me out on this one, Mr Speaker. 

One of the issues that were raised was that there was information that was smuggled into the report on the Floor of Parliament and that matter would have been resolved if the committee was reconvened. The guidance I am seeking is, now that the information available indicates that the committee members did not have an opportunity to meet again over that matter, would it be proper for this House to continue considering this report whereas that accusation still stands? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, was the issue of the figures the subject of the minority report?

MRS BAKIREKE: Mr Speaker, one of the issues raised by hon. Ssemujju was that full information was not availed to the committee at the time this matter was considered at the committee level. One of the members from that side concurred with him saying, “It is true that we never shared these figures.” The issue of the signatures came in as an addition.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from the committee chairperson.

6.35
THE VICE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Frederick Mbagadhi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I get to that issue, I take this opportunity to thank your office for the due diligence it did especially in establishing the authenticity of the signatures that raised dust on the Floor. 

Regarding the issue raised by hon. Nambooze, just as she is saying, the issue concerning the allocation of figures to the 14 municipalities was raised but I stood up and made a clarification on it. The issue was that the member who raised that concern, who happens to be a member of the committee, attended the meeting where we sat as a committee to consider and scrutinise the draft report that gave rise to the final report which I presented on this Floor. I remember that I told this House that during the scrutiny of the draft report, members insisted that the final report would only be presumed ready when we have the allocations. 

In the minutes that I laid on the Table, it is clear that the research officer - who is a parliamentary staff – told me that the same day we were debating the report communication had already been received to the effect that the allocations were coming, and indeed they came.

Mr Speaker, I remember we all agreed that since the final report would contain the allocations, each member would have a look at them before appending their signature. So I state categorically that the allocation figures that appear in the report were not smuggled in; they were looked at by all the members who signed the report. My appeal is that we erase the issue of smuggling in the figures from our minds. I wish the member who raised that issue was here to make some clarifications. 

The other issue that arose concerning those figures was that on page 13 of the report, there was a printing problem whereby the graph below had been superimposed on the table above. For that matter, members requested for a clearer copy and currently I have a clear copy which I request to lay on the Table. I had even asked for them to be supplied to the members. Thank you.

6.40
MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minority report was not prepared because I was against the request by Government seeking parliamentary approval but because of the way we were behaving. This afternoon, I told my committee vice chairperson that we only have to be neat, and I told him that later on I would write to the Speaker to complain. When I gave him the minority report – the rules do not allow distribution of reports of Parliament before they are read here but he distributed it to the Ministry of Lands. But I want to leave that and go to the issues he has raised. 

The reason we wanted these figures discussed and the decision taken in the committee was because we wanted more information about this loan. What eventually happened –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, you raised a point on the rules and I want to properly understand what you are saying. Are you suggesting that these rules say that approved and final reports of committees should never be distributed?

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: No, you cannot distribute that report to outsiders before presenting it to Parliament, and I brought it to the attention of my vice chairperson but he said the ministry needed to read it to come up with responses. However, the rules say that you first have to present the report to Parliament so that it becomes a report of Parliament then you can give it to whoever you want. However, I already said that will be an administrative matter. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, possibly I was using the old rules because my experience as a committee chairperson is that the report is deemed published when you submit a copy to the Clerk for reproduction. The rules allow that. How else are members going to receive copies? Or have those particular rules been changed? 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, some time back, we had a bit of problems here where members would get a report and before the decision is taken by the House – because committees work on behalf of the House. We had hon. Lukwago and another member who chaired the committee probe on KCC taxi parks who, after the members took a decision, picked a pen and wrote that, “Parliament has decided that the plots of land should now belong to the following…”. This really caused a crisis. 

Hon. Lukwago also got a report of Nakasero Market and took it to the market before even the House had taken a decision. Later, the House resolved that since committees work on its behalf, the House should first take a decision – In fact, the matter was even referred to the disciplinary committee and the Clerk can remind us about it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, when is a report of a committee distributed?

MR EKANYA: No, a decision of that report becomes valid when the House has – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I am talking about the text of the report. When is it distributed to members? Let me first understand this. Was it given to outsiders? Were these ministers or people who are not Members of Parliament?

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, rule 189(2) says, “No evidence or document received by a Committee shall be published or otherwise disclosed to any person other than a Member of Parliament until the report of the committee is presented to the House.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the rule I know. That is the rule I am talking about. Now if a minister is not a Member of Parliament – 

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: I am actually not talking about the minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: I have disclosed, but I did not want to go into the details of that because I did not want to embarrass my chairman. That is why I wanted that to be an administrative matter. 

I wanted to respond to the issues he is raising. The chairman of the committee says that people were just looking at the information we demanded as a committee when they were signing. So, what was the purpose of this information? In my minority report, one of the reasons I was saying this loan needed to be reconsidered by the committee was because this information was not forthcoming. When I spoke to the vice chairperson, he told me, “You can go ahead and write the minority report but the information came.” The information was not coming to individuals; we were demanding this information as a committee. 

My own understanding of the decision that was taken when hon. Nambooze represented me here was that we were just going to go away for one or two days, consider all the information that is available and if we need to change the report, we change it. If we do not need to change the report, then we come back and say, “We considered the information that emerged after writing the report and we have no problem; this is the report.” But when the chairman says that since the information was given to him and he was showing members, that it became information to the committee -  

6.46
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Mr Speaker, I would appreciate the concerns or procedural issues being raised by members but I would still think that by focussing on the substantial issues, we would not get exhausted and then abandon the substantial issues. 

I think the issue of signatures has been resolved. The issue of how reports are being distributed, hon. Ssemujju, has committed himself that it can be handled administratively. We should not forget he is crying foul so he is the plaintiff and he is free to take those administrative measures. 

I was in this Parliament when that report was being handled and we conclusively debated but there were three pending issues. One was this graph. When this graph came, it was looking funny. It was not looking like this, and I was the one who asked that we need to see how much money is going to each district. We stated that it was not a coincidence that the page which shows how much money was going to each district is the only page which was messed up. The rest were okay. Now we are seeing the graph. 

Mr Speaker, I represent my people and each one represents his people. Now if you look at this graph which was corrupted by a virus the other day, in the west we have four districts, in the east we have three districts, in the north we have three districts, in the central we have two districts. These are the same issues we have been complaining about for over 10 years. That is why we wanted a cleaner graph. 

I want to be told by the chairperson of the committee - I am not going to be excited that Gulu is getting a lot of money. Most of these people who moved to town ran away from the villages and they cannot now go back. They have decided to go and cope with life in town. So I am not going to be excited because Gulu is getting more money than others so then we pass it. I want to be told which criteria was being used so that certain regions are benefitting more than all the other regions. We have to be told. 

If Ntungamo is badly off, we should even remove the money from Gulu and take it to Ntungamo. We need a very clear and elaborate explanation because when all is said and done, I am still the MP of Aruu County; no one will change that. If I do not speak for my people, no one will do it. So, Mr Chairman, the caveat remaining on this report -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, when you are concluding these things you allow somebody to finish, even when you are raising a point of procedure, then you raise the procedure so that it is not disruptive. When it is general debate you can interject but now we are trying to conclude. We want harmony towards the end. So, let him finish then you raise the procedural issue. I will respond to it. Let him finish. He is about to finish because if you raise it now he still has to finish. Let him finish. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, we complained that travelling from here to Jinja now takes two hours. People were asking about Mukono; in a space of four years, Mukono will be part of Kampala because the city is growing very fast. We did not see Mukono. We complained that the money which you were giving to Mukono for workshops and for teaching people city life is not going to help Mukono because in four or five years, Mukono would have caught up with Kampala. 

So, I want the committee chairperson to convincingly explain to the House how he arrived at these figures and how you left out some districts that need the services more than others. A case in point is Mukono. That was the first issue. 

Hon. Ssemujju’s minority report raised two substantial concerns which this Parliament can address, even if it is not today. One is that we do not need to use 30 percent of all these funds in the cost of administration. In the report you presented to Parliament, the actual money going to make the roads and widen the streets in Gulu and Arua is about 60 percent. The other 38 percent is for workshops, seminars, project vehicles, the secretariat, computers, laptops, chairs and sofa sets. 

So we are saying, we already have a full ministry, a government department, do we really have to spend 40 percent of the borrowed money on buying a project vehicle, monitoring, evaluation and supervision? I think this is where as Members of Parliament we must put our foot down. The original report must be brought back. We must not be hurried. We have to trim that cost of administration and then save the money to accommodate more municipalities. You should tell this House, in figures, how much money of what we are borrowing is going to be used for what I explained. 

The last issue raised in hon. Ssemujju’s report is that the ministry has some redundant funds it has failed to utilise because most of the structures are not filled. There is a lot of power struggle. So, to give them this money yet they are still having problems with other loans we got earlier would be a disaster. 

Mr Speaker, if the House could help me to appreciate these three issues - the mode of distribution, the cost of administration vis-à-vis the actual money going to the districts, and the selection criteria and the capacity of the ministry to handle these huge funds - then we just have to pass this loan without even delaying another second. Thank you.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The debate on the allocation and what goes to -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you had risen on a point of procedure.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Yes that is the point I am raising. This is a matter that the committee should have discussed if this information was ever presented to the committee. The reason we wanted this information was to know which money that was going to Mukono or Gulu would be spent by the ministry through administration costs etcetera, but this information was not provided to the committee. It is information brought after the report had been written and the chairman was just showing people, “You see it is here, now sign.” 

I am only begging, as I raise that point of procedure because we do not want to appear like we are blocking this money. Our interest is that the issues which are being raised now should have been answered in the report and the justification given, but we were not given that benefit.

MR ARIDRU: Mr Speaker, the information I want to give is that I do not think it is right to compare like with unlike. The reference which was made to a previous loan, which did not go well, was a project which was managed from the Ministry of Finance. My committee discussed that issue extensively. It is the issue of regional offices, the vehicles and so on. The Ministry of Lands did not have any control over that project. The project was being managed from the Ministry of Finance and that is why it went, as he says, haywire. 

Our recommendation as a committee was that we give an opportunity to the ministry to manage these funds which are secured from outside. I believe that is what they are trying to do at this time. So, that concern which was raised in the minority report is not entirely correct because we are not comparing – (Interjection) - like with like.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let us not be disruptive, hon. Ssemujju. Let him finish; there is no order being violated here.

MR ARIDRU: That is the information. Yes, there was a project which was not managed well that we know of as the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, but the circumstances under which it did not go well are very clearly documented. As a matter of fact, as a committee we decided that we are going to summon the Ministry of Finance to come and explain why things went the way they did. I thought this loan which is being requested here is not going to be directly managed by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.  

The other additional information, which I want to give, is that - not to discuss the budget report which is coming up - we have a ministry which is under-funded to the extent that it cannot do most of the things we expect. A ministry of lands, housing and urban development in most countries is one of the most powerful ministries because they are the custodian of the most valuable assets any of us can own - land and property. But you are under-funding the same ministry. You are tying its hands; how do you expect it to perform? This is an issue I also raised in the Budget Committee today and it is going to come back on the Floor. 

I think we need to look at many of these issues. On this capacity building which the ministry is talking about, I know where they are coming from because they have come and complained to us as a committee on a number of occasions. We have a situation where there are 156 vacancies in the ministry. We asked them why and they said, “We are competing with the private sector; we cannot afford the salaries which are being offered by the private sector.” We said, “Why don’t you create project posts?” In other words, do not make it fall under the government’s public service structure but have it outside and fund it accordingly. How do you expect the ministry to function? That is the additional information I wanted this House to benefit from.  I thank you. 

6.57
MR SIMON PETER ALEPER (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Just that day when we had this debate, not only three issues were raised but there was also an issue which drew the attention of the Speaker and she asked one question in line with what hon. Odonga Otto has brought out. The question was, what population figures by then did the committee use to arrive at these allocations? That was one of the issues. 

The chairperson responded and I raised a question here that Moroto whose population they had put at 12,500 is not the right population, and the square kilometres they had indicated were five but as we talk, they are 21. I am getting more scared. These are two documents.

Mr Speaker, I am happy you have given us a chance to look at this so that we can conclude in a modest manner. The first indicative figures that were give, if you look at Moroto it was 345 but the one which is coming again after raising issues of what formula was used is now reading 239. Can we understand that?

Two, I appreciate what my colleague, Odonga Otto, brought out that he is not excited about the graph of Gulu going high but would be more interested in knowing the worst municipality which we may need to raise to the standard where the rest are, and he would be happy to allocate funds. You can imagine from this graph, you have Moroto, the Ntungamos probably may not be here, but what is the objective of this loan? That is now what I want to understand. 

Probably, I will be forced to appreciate the minority report because there are pertinent issues which have been raised that this committee is not helping us with. If this loan is to improve the infrastructure of the municipalities and you allocate 40 percent to a ministry which has been there! With all we have seen from the report, can we understand the objective of this loan? Is it to improve those who are worse off or is it only to enrich the ones which are at least fairer? Where are we in regard to this loan?

As we talk now, you may think Moroto’s population is small, but I made it clear from here that it is because the infrastructure is very poor. The Members of Parliament here cannot settle in Moroto because the facilities may not be very favourable to them. They cannot go to Moroto because the facilities are not friendly as they are in Kampala, Gulu or Jinja but I am not opposed to Jinja or Gulu getting these funds. This is for Ugandan municipalities. All these are municipalities in Uganda, but which formula is this whereby we cannot reconsider and look at the poorest? What formula is this which disadvantages the poorest? Can we understand? It appears this formula is from heaven that human beings cannot readjust. Let these issues be put clear before we say “aye” to this loan request. Thank you.

7.01
MR ROBERT SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think I would not speak because I am a member of the committee but what we were told in the committee is that hon. Odonga Otto’s question of what criteria was used to allocate different municipalities and not others is that for the first time, the lands ministry is getting a loan and they are getting a loan for the 14 original municipalities. That was the criteria used. So, as a committee we agreed that since we were beginning from nothing, let us begin from at least the first original 14 municipalities.

Secondly, when we visited the municipalities, the way we appreciate municipalities here is that we think municipalities are like Kampala City Council here. Municipalities have no systems at all. There are no systems. There are no employees. The few who are there just sit on those desks and wait for end of month. There are no planners, there are no systems, there are no computers. So we said for the first time, let us have at least 40 percent to uplift the standards and the employment levels of these municipalities. 

Thirdly, we all know that when you put up infrastructure, it will take a little while for the infrastructure to deteriorate if there are no maintenance systems in place. So, we appreciated that the maintenance systems which are going to be put in place are also part of the human resource which has been embedded in this loan. So, we appreciate that we are beginning from zero but we have a long way to go. Let us start with this little money, which we are going to get, and then proceed. 

The reason they give is that Moroto – particularly for this honourable member - is a small municipality as compared to Jinja, Mbarara and any other municipalities. These municipalities have more people and facilities. So we do not want to put up a white elephant somewhere. Much as they are going to grow, the project shall continue and they shall give them more money as they grow. Those are the reasons that were given.

Lastly, we all appreciate that these figures were not presented well. By the time everybody signed the report, it means they had time to look at these figures. Since we discussed this matter here, people had time to go and look at the figures again. If the infrastructure committee or committee on local governments was complaining, we would call them, but if it was a member of the committee, then the chairman or the vice chairman would sit down to explain these figures to them. They could even call in another person if somebody wanted a more critical look at these figures. 

So I request Parliament to pass this loan request and if need be, for more explanation of these figures and criterion somebody is free to go and caucus with the relevant committee or with the chairman. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, these interjection issues do not arise at this moment; we are trying to draw this issue to a close. Let the minister make the clarification he is making and then hon. Ibi will speak.

7.05
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, I beg members to take a look at page 12, where the allocation of the monies to the various projects is outlined. When I hear that the ministry is going to get 40 percent of the line of credit, I do not know where that comes from. On page 12, bullet seven, Project Financing, it is clearly outlined thus: “Municipal Structure Improvement - 86.7 percent” – (Interjections) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him finish then you will raise the order. We are trying to conclude this thing. He is raising figures here, so what order has been violated? You see, I am in charge of this procedure and nowhere has order been violated. So you raise your point of order.

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, the honourable minister is referring to page 12. When we were in this Parliament, he first produced a graph showing how much each municipality was getting but it had a problem because they had superimposed figures. They brought another graph – (Interjections) – Yes, on that same day. When you look at Jinja –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the minister is talking about page 12.

MR MWIRU: Yes, I am coming to that. When you go to Jinja, it had US$ 12,429,000. The one they have brought today has US$ 8,845,000. Is the honourable minister therefore in order to refer us to this page yet even the figures which accrue to the districts keep on changing depending on the different sheets they come up with?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is why I said I did not see any violation of order. The minister is rising on a point which was raised by hon. Otto on the percentage going to be given for administrative costs. He said 30 percent. I do not know why you are bringing the other one now. The minister is talking about what hon. Odonga Otto said, that only 60 percent will be used for the actual operations of the work. 

The honourable minister has risen to say that the percentage of how this money is going to be used is on page 12. It has nothing to do with those graphs and curves you are talking about on the other page. The clarification was very specific, and I was wondering what point of order you were raising. Now I have come to the conclusion that actually you were talking of a different thing and you are accordingly ruled out of order. Let the minister finish with his clarification. 

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, when members are considering this loan request, they should not hold a view that all the funds are going to go to administration, seminars and workshops. The breakdown on the way the loan is supposed to be utilised is clearly provided on page 12. This breakdown should help us to understand that what normally happens with most projects is not going to happen in this particular project. 

7.09
MRS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The House is so cold; we are almost shivering. 

The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development has come a long way. When I came to Parliament in 2006 and subsequently became a shadow minister, the Ministry of Lands had Shs 6 billion. We struggled and it moved to Shs 9 billion and then somehow, miraculously by 2008, it came to Shs 20 billion. So, it is upon this background that I urge members of this House to kindly pass its budget and this loan request. 

The budget for the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development as we stand is Shs 32 billion. Out of this Shs 32 billion, they have four ministers that are supposed to cater for urban planning amidst these hardships, there is lands itself and then housing. All of them have to share this money. That is on top of the various border disputes, international and territorial boundary disputes that have repeatedly come to this House. 

In the previous quarter, this ministry got zero release apart from the wages that were submitted to it. Remember this ministry already has other facilities. In 2007, when hon. Urban Tibamanya was Minister for Urban Planning, like his name, he did not have a car. He had to ground the services of the department of physical planning in order to be able to move, and it was a very old wagon car. I complained and tried to see that he is facilitated, but they were being chocked. 

So, if we are saying that 30 percent of this money is going to administration – Imagine last quarter they did not have any release at all, so how do you expect the little money to facilitate the activities of the ministry? The money is not there! Next financial year, this innocent ministry’s budget has been chopped by Shs 10 billion; it is coming back to Shs 22 billion. So if other departments and ministries are getting funds for operations through loans and other sources, why don’t we give the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development a chance, just for this once? (Applause)

I am aware that the money is not going to ministry of lands but it is part of the activities under the same docket. Municipalities fall under this and they have to be planned for. You are talking about physical planning; how will the Ministry of Local Government implement what Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development has not planned and put in place? 

You go to the various small trading centres; they are building up to the roads. That is because there is no planning all over the country. How do you expect the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to operate without any physical planning? It is upon this background that I honesty implore and urge members to pass this loan request. I thank you very much. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we bring this matter to a close. Can we conclude this matter by voting? – (Interjection) - Under what rule is “finally”? (Laughter) Yes, honourable, finally!

MR SSEKITOLEKO: I thank you so much. You know that I did raise the issue of discrepancy in signatures the other time and that is why it was incumbent on me to contribute now –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That matter was resolved if that is the matter you are raising.  

MR SSEKITOLEKO: For purposes of the Hansard – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. We have administratively resolved that one and you are not opening it again. Please sit down. 

MR IDDI ISABIRYE: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the question be put.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion, which is not subject to debate, is that the question be put. The way of dealing with reports that have minority reports is that you start by taking a vote on the minority report. That is the procedure. You finish with the minority report and then you come to the substantive report because if the minority report is approved, then the big report is amended to that effect. It is like an amendment to the main report. 

So, can I put the question that the proposals in the minority report – (Interjections) - Yes, procedure.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: To take a vote, this Parliament must have quorum which we do not have. Is it procedurally right to take a vote when we are not properly constituted?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the clerk ascertain numbers and if not, we suspend and ring the bell? It is now 7 O’clock and the number of members in the House is about 53 and there is no chance of raising 78 members to raise the sufficient quorum. So we are unable to take a decision on this matter and other matters that will require voting.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Well, hon. Betty Nambooze usually tickles me too much and one time you will see me standing up - [Ms Nambooze: “I will be very grateful.”]- (Laughter) - and I think you know what I mean. You forget that the shorter the monkey, the taller the tail. (Laughter)

I wanted to get guidance from you on whether when we come back tomorrow and there is quorum, there will be a debate or you will be putting the question and we answer that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have reached the voting stage and a motion has been moved that the question be put. We are unable to take a decision which we should have taken and the question should have been put without debate. We are unable to take that decision, and that is the substantive matter that has to be handled when we reconvene on this particular item on the agenda. 

We are allowing people to deal with committee issues tomorrow more seriously and so this House is adjourned to Thursday at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 7.19 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 10 May 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
